How Does Performance Feedback Affect Boundary
Spanning in Multinational Corporations? Insights
from Technology Scouts
Thomas Klueter and Felipe Monteiro
IESE Business School; INSEAD, Fontainebleau
ABSTRACT As much as prior research has shed light on the boundary-spanning processes of
global organizations and their (positive) impact on an MNC’s performance, whether, when
and how past performance ultimately shapes an MNC’s boundary-spanning activities remains
an open question in management research. To tackle these questions, we examine the
behaviour of technology scouts in global organizations who span organizational and national
boundaries to tap into novel knowledge and span internal boundaries to present this
knowledge to constituents inside the MNC. Drawing on the behavioural theory of the ﬁrm,
we propose that the intensity of organizational boundary spanning, the likelihood of spanning
national boundaries and the way technology scouts span internal boundaries to engage with
members inside the organization are sensitive to how the MNC has performed relative to its
aspirations. We support our theoretical expositions with insights gained from interviewing
senior industry professionals with direct experience in technology scouting in MNCs.
Keywords: global boundary-spanning process, managing knowledge boundaries, multina-
tional corporations, performance feedback, technology scouts
INTRODUCTION
The ability to tap into knowledge and technologies from outside an MNC’s boundary
has become a critical organizational activity to compete in environments characterized
by rapid technological change (Doz et al., 2001; Gupta and Govindarajan, 2000). The
focus of this paper is on the process by which managers in multinational corporations
(MNCs) span organizational and national boundaries to tap into external knowledge
and span internal boundaries to mobilize such knowledge within the organization (Mon-
teiro, 2015; Monteiro and Birkinshaw, 2017). While this process holds substantial
opportunities, it also poses immense challenges. MNCs have to overcome initial
Address for reprints: Thomas Klueter, IESE Business School, Avinguda de Pearson, 21, Barcelona 08034,
Spain (TMKlueter@iese.edu).
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies
Journal of Management Studies 54:4 June 2017
doi: 10.1111/joms.12252

resistance based on ‘not invented here’ attitudes and prevent their ‘corporate immune
system’ from rejecting the knowledge they are trying to bring into the organization (Bir-
kinshaw and Ridderstråle, 1999; Carlile, 2002; Katz and Allen, 1982; Meyer et al.,
2011). Moreover, knowledge in rapidly changing environments is characterized by high
novelty, which makes managing knowledge across boundaries extremely challenging
(Carlile, 2004; Carlile and Rebentisch, 2003; Schotter et al., 2017).
In responding to these challenges, MNCs in a variety of industries have begun to
establish dedicated boundary-spanning units, often referred to as technology scouting
units, with the mandate to tap into novel external knowledge from other ﬁrms around
the globe and to present such external opportunities to other parts of the MNC (Birkin-
shaw and Hood, 2000; Gassmann and Gaso, 2004; Monteiro, 2015). We argue that
technology scouts, i.e., the typical title of those working in technology scouting units, are
representative of generic boundary spanners in MNCs that are found at a myriad of
boundaries between organizational functions, business units, or subsidiaries and the
MNC’s headquarters (Carlile, 2002, 2004; Katz and Tushman, 1981; Mudambi and
Swift, 2009; Schotter and Beamish, 2011). However, technology scouts are unique in
that they are not involved in other day-to-day operations – that is, spanning organiza-
tional and national boundaries to seek out external knowledge and spanning internal
boundaries to make knowledge available within the organization ‘is the only thing they
do’ (Monteiro and Birkinshaw, 2017).[1] Hence, theorizing about the behaviour of tech-
nology scouts can provide unique insights into our broad understanding of boundary
spanners in global organizations.
It has long been argued that tapping into knowledge from outside the organization
(i.e., spanning organizational boundaries) and from foreign locations (i.e., spanning
national boundaries) is associated with signiﬁcant beneﬁts in the form of innovation and
ﬁnancial performance. Spanning organizational boundaries, for example, allows the
addition of distinct new knowledge to an MNC’s knowledge pool and, by adding such
global knowledge, an MNC is able to innovate more effectively than its domestic rivals
(e.g., Asakawa et al., 2014; Doz et al., 2001; Tushman and Katz, 1980; Tushman and
Scanlan, 1981). Prior research has also emphasized the general beneﬁts of spanning
boundaries inside MNCs, leading to superior product development (Carlile, 2002,
2004), knowledge management between scientists and managers (Mudambi and Swift,
2009; Tushman, 1977), and initiatives between subsidiaries and their headquarters
(Schotter and Beamish, 2011). In a similar vein, prior work has shown that beneﬁts
brought by technology scouts stem from both their ability to access new knowledge and
their mediating role between the MNC’s external environment and relevant actors (e.g.,
business managers or R&D units) inside the organization (Monteiro, 2015; Monteiro
and Birkinshaw, 2017). Yet, as much as recent research has started to shed light on the
boundary-spanning processes performed by technology scouts and their (positive) impact
on the MNC’s performance, whether and how the prior performance of an MNC
affects boundary spanning activities of technology scouts remains an open question in
international management research.
To tackle these questions, we draw upon the behavioural theory of the ﬁrm (BTF)
and propose that the boundary-spanning behaviours of technology scouts are sensitive
to how the MNC has performed relative to its aspirations – that is, the expected levels of
484
T. Klueter and L. F. Monteiro
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

performance the organization seeks to achieve (Cyert and March, 1963). In particular,
we suggest that whether a given MNC faces ‘harsh times’ i.e., when the MNC has per-
formed below its aspirations, or ‘slack times’ i.e., when the MNC has performed above
its aspirations (Greve, 2003b; Levinthal and March, 1981, p. 308) profoundly shapes
technology scouts’ boundary spanning behaviours.
Central to our theoretical arguments are three key boundary-spanning activities that
technology scouts perform and how they are shaped by harsh and slack times: (1) span-
ning organizational boundaries to engage with the external environment and generate
new opportunities (Dollinger, 1984; Santos and Eisenhardt, 2005), (2) spanning national
boundaries to reach for ‘best in the world’ knowledge in foreign locations (Almeida
et al., 2002; Cantwell, 1989), and (3) spanning internal boundaries to connect and
engage with relevant business and R&D units to mobilize external knowledge within the
MNC (Birkinshaw et al., 2017; Carlile, 2002; Meyer et al., 2011; Monteiro and Birkin-
shaw, 2017).[2] In particular, we examine how comparisons between aspiration vs. real-
ized performance inﬂuence technology scouts’ boundary-spanning intensity (i.e., the
overall effort technology scouts expend crossing organizational boundaries), and when
and how technology scouts’ span national boundaries. Further, we analyse how harsh
and slack times differently shape the way in which technology scouts span internal boun-
daries within the MNC to present external solutions to their internal constituents (e.g.,
business units) and how they go about managing knowledge across internal boundaries
in general. We complement our theoretical expositions with examples and insights
gained from interviewing senior industry professionals with direct experience in technol-
ogy scouting in MNCs.
Our paper provides several novel insights into how performance feedback may shape
boundary spanning in global organizations. First, we offer a behavioural explanation of
technology scouts’ venturing beyond ﬁrms’ boundaries to tap into external knowledge.
While previous studies have focused on the knowledge creation potential of boundary
spanners (e.g., Carlile, 2002; Doz and Wilson, 2012; Doz et al., 2001; Monteiro and
Birkinshaw, 2017), we propose that performance above or below aspirations is an
important trigger for boundary spanning in the ﬁrst place. We suggest that, in both
harsh and slack times, technology scouts intensify their efforts in spanning organizational
boundaries, but for very different reasons, whereas being close to the aspiration point is
likely to lead to inertial behaviour.
Second, we reveal that considering whether a focal MNC is in harsh or slack times
provides important behavioural cues as to when technology scouts cross national boun-
daries to tap into external knowledge and when they combine local activities (in their
home countries) with national boundary spanning. We suggest that, in harsh times, to
improve performance, technology scouts make costly efforts to span national boundaries
but in a directed way and at the expense of other boundary-spanning activities. Con-
versely, in slack times, boundary-spanning activities will be less directed and more open,
which allows technology scouts to combine the spanning of national boundaries with
their ongoing activities in their home locations.
We identify a similar pattern when examining how technology scouts span internal
boundaries. In harsh times, boundary spanners take into account compensatory trade-
offs between external opportunities and internal R&D activities and hence are more
485
Performance Feedback and Boundary Spanning in MNCs
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

likely to present solutions to their internal constituents as substitutes for internal R&D
activities. Conversely, in slack times, resources are readily available, allowing technology
scouts to make linkages between internal R&D and external opportunities and to pres-
ent the complementary nature of external solutions for the organization. Prior studies
have emphasized that ambidextrous behaviour – e.g., combining local and foreign
knowledge or internal and external knowledge – may lead to higher performance and
that the availability of resources is a key moderator for the ambidexterity/performance
relationship (Phene et al., 2006; Raisch et al., 2009, p. 395; Rothaermel and Alexandre,
2009). However, our study suggests that performance feedback can be an important
antecedent to ambidextrous behaviour in boundary spanning in the ﬁrst place.
Finally, our study presents a more granular picture about the way technology scouts
ultimately manage knowledge across internal boundaries under different conditions.
While in harsh times, technology scouts are more likely to emphasize the simple ‘trans-
fer’ or ‘channelling’ of external knowledge towards internal constituents (such as R&D
or business units), we propose that in slack times, the emphasis will be more on the
‘translation’ and ‘transformation’ of external knowledge to establish common interests
with internal constituents. Prior studies have described those different types of
boundary-spanning processes in MNCs and characterized the translation and transfor-
mation as value-adding activities by boundary spanners that lead to superior outcomes
in product development, knowledge management, and knowledge sourcing (Carlile,
2002, 2004; Monteiro and Birkinshaw, 2017; Mudambi and Swift, 2009). Our study
contributes to this stream of research by revealing another contingency – that of being
in harsh or slack times – that is likely to affect the way technology scouts manage knowl-
edge across internal boundaries of MNCs.
THEORY
Spanning Organizational, National and Internal Boundaries in MNCs
The idea that organizational members span boundaries to gain access to external knowl-
edge is not new. In fact, the stream of literature on how social systems access and process
information from the environment goes back to the open-system perspective in organi-
zation theory (March and Simon, 1958; Thompson, 1967). To sustain themselves,
organizations have to obtain information from their task environment, but this effort is
expensive and time-consuming. Over the past three decades, the boundary-spanning lit-
erature in MNCs has diverged into different streams examining distinct levels of analy-
ses. Some studies focused on individuals in R&D departments and how they gather,
understand, and transfer external information so that an internal team or unit can use it
(Tushman, 1977; Tushman and Katz, 1980), while others examined boundary spanning
in teams, focusing on the different ways teams interact with other parts of the organiza-
tion and with the outside world (Ancona and Caldwell, 1992).
Building on these perspectives, we focus on (1) how managers in multinational corpo-
rations cross organizational and national boundaries to tap into external knowledge,
and (2) how they span internal boundaries to present the external opportunities they
have identiﬁed to their internal constituents and, ultimately, bring external knowledge
486
T. Klueter and L. F. Monteiro
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

into the organization (Monteiro and Birkinshaw, 2017). At the heart of this process lies
the notion of different types of boundaries (Aldrich and Herker, 1977). Organizational
boundaries represent the demarcation between an organization and its environment
(Santos and Eisenhardt, 2005), and spanning such boundaries allows access to knowl-
edge that differs from what an organization already knows (Rosenkopf and Nerkar,
2001). While such novel knowledge holds substantial opportunities for organizations,
crossing organizational boundaries is far from trivial as it requires overcoming ‘not
invented here’ attitudes from within the organization (Katz and Allen, 1982). National
boundaries are important, as seeking external knowledge from foreign locations (in
countries outside the MNC’s home country, e.g., a Brazilian MNC seeking knowledge
from a company in Japan) allows access to ‘best in the world knowledge’ that often can-
not be found in the MNC’s home location (Doz et al., 2001; Gittelman, 2007). At the
same time, spanning national boundaries is costly since knowledge tends to be localized,
embedded in practice, and invested in by its originators (Almeida et al., 2002; Carlile,
2002; Meyer et al., 2011).
A ﬁnal set of boundaries lies within the organization. Once identiﬁed, external (and
potentially foreign) knowledge needs to be integrated and used by organizational mem-
bers (e.g., by a R&D unit in product development or a business unit in sales), which
requires ‘selling’ the knowledge to internal business or R&D units (Monteiro and Birkin-
shaw, 2017). This can be challenging as parts of the MNC may resist novel external
knowledge because it does not ﬁt their prevailing knowledge pool or may reject such
knowledge owing to fears of cannibalizing existing competencies or revenue streams
(Birkinshaw and Ridderstråle, 1999; Mudambi and Swift, 2014).
The opportunities and challenges stemming from boundary spanning are particularly
relevant in knowledge-intensive environments, where technological opportunities
emerge rapidly; existing competencies quickly become obsolete; and intense rivalry and
competition among industry participants prevail (D’Aveni et al., 2010). In such environ-
ments, for example, telecommunications and pharmaceuticals, spanning organizational
and national boundaries to obtain novel knowledge is considered pivotal to an organiza-
tion’s competitive advantage (Banker et al., 2013; Bierly et al., 2009; Chesbrough et al.,
2006). At the same time, managing knowledge across boundaries in those environments
is extremely challenging as the underlying knowledge is characterized by novelty (e.g.,
rapid technological advancements or changing customer requirements), strong differen-
ces between the MNC and the potential source of knowledge (e.g., due to specialization
or size effects) and dependencies (i.e., the MNC relies to some extent on external actors
to ultimately make productive use of the external knowledge) (Carlile, 2004; Carlile and
Rebentisch, 2003). Solving all these challenges is of utmost importance for today’s
MNCs (Schotter et al., 2017).
Technology Scouts in Global Organizations
A possible solution is specialization by assigning speciﬁc individuals or teams as bound-
ary spanners who ‘gather and understand external information and subsequently trans-
late this information into terms that are meaningful and useful to local colleagues’ inside
the organization (Tushman and Katz, 1980, p. 1073). In recent decades, some MNCs
487
Performance Feedback and Boundary Spanning in MNCs
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

have begun to more systematically organize their boundary-spanning activities by creat-
ing foreign subsidiaries, or dedicated units, often referred to as scouting units, with a
speciﬁc boundary-spanning mandate (Birkinshaw, 1996; Birkinshaw and Hood, 2000;
Gassmann and Gaso, 2004). Such boundary spanners, henceforth technology scouts,
are now found in many industries, including telecommunications (e.g., British Telecom),
pharmaceuticals (e.g., Merck and Co., Bayer), and electronics (e.g., Siemens).
It is important to note that technology scouts span organizational and national boun-
daries to tap into external knowledge as well as internal boundaries to present such
opportunities to other parts of the MNC (e.g., Doz et al., 2001; Patel and Vega, 1999;
Von Zedtwitz and Gassmann, 2002). They are also more than just brokers, i.e., actors
in organizations positioned between structurally separated and unconnected entities
(Burt, 1992). Burt sees brokers operating with a ‘tertius gaudens’ orientation, in which a
broker can create value through superior access to information and greater opportuni-
ties to exercise control. Conversely, we concur with Monteiro and Birkinshaw (2017)
and consider technology scouts to have a ‘tertius iungens’ orientation, ‘a strategic,
behavioral orientation toward connecting people in one’s social network by either intro-
ducing disconnected individuals or facilitating new coordination between connected
individuals’ (Obstfeld, 2005, p. 102). Hence, they are boundary spanners as they go well
beyond their structural position and connect, introduce and coordinate previously
unconnected parties for mutual beneﬁts (Fleming and Waguespack, 2007).[3]
We believe technology scouts are an important representation of generic boundary
spanners in MNCs that are known to be situated at the intersection of different types of
boundaries, including R&D teams and their external environment (Katz and Allen,
1982), scientists and business managers (Mudambi and Swift, 2009), engineering and
manufacturing (Carlile, 2002, 2004), or subsidiaries and the headquarters (Schotter and
Beamish, 2011). Indeed, Monteiro and Birkinshaw (2017) have characterized technol-
ogy scouts as an ‘extreme example’ of boundary spanners mediating between the orga-
nization and its external environment as well as spanning boundaries within the
organization. This is because, unlike other boundary spanners in the organization, tech-
nology scouts do not have other day-to-day operating roles they need to execute and
boundary spanning is what they do for the organization.[4] By analogy, technology
scouts could be to boundary spanning what Saxenian’s (2007) ‘Global Argonauts’ repre-
sent to international entrepreneurship – a very ‘pure’ and visible form of an important
but often difﬁcult to observe phenomenon. Theorizing about the behaviour of technol-
ogy scouts therefore broadens our understanding of boundary spanning in global
organizations.
Boundary Spanning and Performance
Studies have shown that MNCs that span boundaries to access external knowledge inno-
vate more effectively than their domestic rivals and in general have advantages over
industry peers (e.g., Asakawa et al., 2014; Dollinger, 1984; Doz et al., 2001; Monteiro,
2015). This is because adding novel pockets of knowledge to an organization is directly
associated with a ﬁrm’s innovative and ﬁnancial performance (e.g., Hagedoorn and
488
T. Klueter and L. F. Monteiro
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

Schakenraad, 1994; Kale et al., 2002; Laursen and Salter, 2006; Leiponen and Helfat,
2009).
In a similar vein, research focusing on the role of boundary spanners has shown that
spanning external boundaries is related to innovation and performance beneﬁts (Tush-
man and Katz, 1980; Tushman, 1977). Studying more systematically the boundary-
spanning processes undertaken by technology scouts has also revealed distinct beneﬁts of
spanning internal boundaries to connect external knowledge to R&D or business units
to make external knowledge available inside the MNC (Monteiro and Birkinshaw,
2017). This follows the idea that boundary spanners can better manage tensions
between separated entities or groups, hence leading to superior outcomes and improved
performance (Carlile, 2002, 2004; Mudambi and Swift, 2009; Schotter and Beamish,
2011; Tippman et al., 2017).
Yet, while research has made notable progress in linking boundary spanning to inno-
vative and ﬁnancial performance outcomes, we know much less about the recursive rela-
tionship, that is, whether and how the prior performance of an organization ultimately
shapes the boundary-spanning behaviours of technology scouts.
A Performance Feedback Perspective on Boundary Spanning
by Technology Scouts
A well-established stream of literature built on the behavioural theory of the ﬁrm (BTF)
examines how performance feedback affects an organization’s strategic decision-making
(Cyert and March, 1963; March and Simon, 1958). We extend this literature by suggest-
ing that performance feedback may signiﬁcantly affect boundary-spanning activities by
technology scouts.
The BTF characterizes ﬁrms as goal-directed systems that use simple operating proce-
dures and heuristics to adapt their behaviour. Organizational goals are important, as
they are considered relevant by resource-allocating managers and lead to the formation
of aspirations, i.e., expected levels of performance that organizations aspire to
achieve.[5] Managers compare their ﬁrm’s aspirations with actual performance out-
comes, leading to favourable (performance outcomes above aspirations) or unfavourable
(performance outcomes below aspirations) comparisons (Cyert and March, 1963; Levin-
thal and March, 1981).[6]
In the majority of performance feedback studies, the crux of the argument is that by
comparing aspirations with actual performance, managers ﬁnd themselves in situations
of either harsh times (performance outcomes below the aspiration point) or slack times
(performance outcomes above the aspiration point) (Levinthal and March, 1981, p. 308)
and being in either harsh or slack times shapes the decision-making of resource-
allocating managers (Greve, 2003b). Supporting this idea, prior research has shown that
the aspiration point functions as a ‘master switch’ that inﬂuences a variety of strategic
behaviours and choices related to innovation, including organizational risk taking (Bro-
miley, 1991), R&D spending (Chen and Miller, 2007), capital investments, new product
development (Greve, 2003a), acquisitions (Iyer and Miller, 2008), and organizational
change (Greve, 1998). Interestingly, however, studies have given much less attention to
examining how performance-aspiration comparisons are likely to affect the activities of
489
Performance Feedback and Boundary Spanning in MNCs
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

boundary spanners such as technology scouts. In other words, most studies have focused
on the performance outcomes of spanning boundaries and performance as a result of
boundary spanners’ actions (e.g., Asakawa et al., 2014; Doz et al., 2001; Monteiro,
2015). However, we believe that studying the inverse relationship – how performance
may act as an input to technology scouts’ behaviour – can generate new insights into
how the boundary-spanning process unfolds in global organizations.
We focus on how performance feedback shapes three critical activities by technology
scouts in MNCs.[7] First, managers may face important decisions on how much empha-
sis they should place on crossing organizational boundaries in the ﬁrst place, and organi-
zational boundary-spanning intensity characterizes the overall efforts by technology
scouts to seek out external knowledge (Dollinger, 1984). Second, technology scouts can
engage with local actors or span national boundaries to tap into ‘best in the world’
knowledge in foreign locations (Doz et al., 2001; Gittelman, 2007). Finally, we examine
how technology scouts manage knowledge across internal boundaries and engage with
internal business or R&D units to mobilize external knowledge for the organization
(Meyer et al., 2011; Monteiro and Birkinshaw, 2017).
For each activity, we provide examples and illustrations which we derived by inter-
viewing senior industry professionals from different industries (such as telecommunica-
tions, medical devices and pharmaceuticals) and with direct experiences in global
boundary spanning and technology scouting. Speciﬁcally, between 2011–15, we con-
ducted 15 in-depth interviews with managers in European and North American MNCs
(including Bayer, Johnson & Johnson, Merck & Co, and Novo Nordisk) on the MNCs’
sites, at technology conferences such as the Wharton Mack Institute’s Technology Con-
ference or via phone. The majority of the interviewees had titles directly associated with
technology scouting or were the managers of a technology scouting (or business develop-
ment) unit. Some interviewees were senior managers of internal R&D and business
units, which represented the ‘customers’ of technology scouts’ boundary-spanning
efforts. Finally, we also interviewed top management executives responsible for the over-
all externally oriented activities in their respective multinational organizations to obtain
a more strategic picture of the roles technology scouts play in global organizations.[8]
Spanning Organizational Boundaries in Harsh and Slack Times
An important element of boundary spanning by technology scouts is its intensity, that is,
the overall effort exerted by boundary spanners to cross boundaries (Dollinger, 1984).
Here we focus on the intensity with which technology scouts cross organizational boun-
daries that potentially hold substantial opportunities due to the access to new knowl-
edge, but that is not trivial, as ‘not invented here’ attitudes may result in the
entrenchment of organizations (Katz and Allen, 1982; Rosenkopf and Nerkar, 2001;
Teece, 1996). Hence, when spanning organizational boundaries, technology scouts’ ﬁrst
challenge may arise from persistent negative attitudes toward ideas external to their
organizations, which may prevent MNCs from becoming more open and from seeking
out external ideas in the ﬁrst place. An executive responsible for worldwide scouting and
licensing at a large pharmaceutical ﬁrm described the challenge as follows: ‘It is clearly
important to identify high value external opportunities that will allow us to grow. [. . .] But the question
490
T. Klueter and L. F. Monteiro
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

we face is how much should we emphasize our externally oriented activities. . .? A major problem we
have is that these activities are not yet on a level playing ﬁeld with our other, more, traditional ways of
doing research and development. . . This is an ongoing problem that has to be worked through . . . We
are not sufﬁciently open to external ideas’.
Drawing on the BTF, we suggest that the intensity (i.e., the overall effort made) with
which technology scouts span organizational boundaries is sensitive to whether the
MNC is facing harsh or slack times.
In harsh times. Models of performance feedback predict that an organization is more
likely to take action when it fails to reach its aspirations (e.g., Greve, 2003b; Levinthal
and March, 1981). In harsh times, managers face short-term pressures to improve their
performance because they are held accountable for prior decision making (Cyert and
March, 1963). Unable to conceal below-aspiration performance from internal and
external stakeholders, managers are pressed to ﬁnd a solution. However, such solutions
may not be readily available within an organization. We argue that spanning organiza-
tional boundaries may allow MNCs to access ‘ready-to-use’ solutions that, in some cases,
would require substantial time to develop internally (Hagedoorn, 1993). This time
investment is particularly relevant in knowledge-intensive environments, where solutions
to solve below-aspiration performance tend to be needed immediately. Hence, in harsh
times, technology scouts are likely to intensify the spanning of organizational boundaries
to connect to solutions that remedy the organization’s problems. This approach is con-
sistent with ﬁndings of research in international business showing that knowledge ﬂows
in MNCs can be explained by demand-driven, problem-motivated processes (Monteiro
et al., 2008).
A senior manager responsible for technology scouting at Merck provided an illustra-
tion of this phenomenon. He recalled that in 2004, the withdrawal of a pain-killer drug
led to substantial legal provisions, which had dramatically decreased ﬁnancial perform-
ance (an absolute decrease of $700 million in net income, about a 12 per cent decline
compared to 2003).[9] The manager emphasized how being in harsh times exacerbated
the need to span organizational boundaries: ‘The company was at a real tipping point. . . To
compensate for the decline, we had to get better at leveraging the external environment. . . To me, the alter-
natives were stark. Either we were successful or Merck would have to downsize. The changes that we
needed were to prop up 30–40 per cent more of the entire pipeline with technologies [sourced from] outside
Merck. (Example 1)
In the following years, technology scouts at Merck crossed organizational boundaries
more aggressively. One technology scout remembered that ‘Merck during that year [2004]
faced a situation that was not business as usual. . . There was an overall understanding that we needed a
quick ﬁx’. He recalled that, at the time, the technology scouting organization expanded
substantially to ‘connect to and acquire external research. . . We were told to participate in conferences
and get out [of Merck’s R&D facilities] to identify promising projects for short-term revenue gener-
ation. . .’ (Example 2)
As that example also illustrates, harsh times require the clear articulation and codiﬁ-
cation of an underlying problem (Zollo and Winter, 2002). In Merck’s case, codiﬁcation
was important to establishing new routines and standard operation procedures in the
ﬁrm’s boundary-spanning activities. Hence, when performance is below aspirations,
externally oriented activities are more likely to be formalized, for example, by
491
Performance Feedback and Boundary Spanning in MNCs
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

establishing a dedicated technology scouting unit. Indeed, prior work has suggested that
boundary-spanning roles become formalized when managers realize and codify crucial
environmental contingencies (Aldrich and Herker, 1977), as is more likely to happen in
harsh times. Overall, we posit that the wider the gap between an MNC’s performance
and its aspirations, the more likely it is that MNC will incept a technology scouting unit
with the mandate of spanning organizational boundaries and the more likely technology
scouts intensify spanning organizational boundaries.[10] We propose:
Proposition 1a: The further an MNC’s performance is below its aspirations, the more
intense technology scouts’ efforts will be to span organizational boundaries.
Proposition 1b: The further an MNC’s performance is below its aspirations, the more
likely the MNC will formalize or establish a dedicated boundary-spanning unit.
In slack times. At ﬁrst glance, performing above aspirations might seem to have no direct
effect on whether technology scouts span organizational boundaries because they do not
face immediate performance pressures and may be content with the status quo. How-
ever, most MNCs operate in knowledge-intensive industries, i.e., environments in which
competitive advantages based on old resource positions are continuously challenged and
advantages, even of leading high-performing ﬁrms, are considered temporary (D’Aveni
et al., 2010; Winter, 2003).
To maintain their position in such knowledge-intensive environments, managers need
to continuously generate innovative moves, even if they have persistently out-performed
their aspirations (Kirzner, 1973). Given that, in such environments, innovations tend to
emerge beyond ﬁrm boundaries (Chesbrough et al., 2006), an important way to keep
ahead is to systematically seek new knowledge through technology scouts. Spanning
organizational boundaries through technology scouts, hence, can become a moving tar-
get, as all ﬁrms continue to make innovation-related investments to avoid falling behind
in the future – an outcome that has been described as the ‘Red Queen’ effect (Banker
et al., 2013). We expect that such behaviour will more likely transpire in slack times for
the following reasons.
First, technology scouts in slack times do not have immediate problems to solve and
are under less scrutiny by external stakeholders to ﬁnd urgent solutions. This may allow
them to focus on ‘next problems’, allowing technology scouts to adopt a more opportun-
istic or proactive behaviour (Cyert and March, 1963; Monteiro and Birkinshaw, 2017).
This explanation is consistent with the idea that managers are more likely to promote
entrepreneurial opportunities in their organizations if they are satisﬁed with their cur-
rent performance situation (De Clercq et al., 2011; Simsek et al., 2007). Hence, in slack
times, technology scouts are most likely more able to span organizational boundaries to
tap into external knowledge.
As an example, a senior executive manager responsible for external business develop-
ment for Johnson & Johnson emphasized the need to opportunistically span organiza-
tional boundaries in slack times: ‘No matter what we do within our in-house R&D, the rest of the
world is always doing more’. He also cited the need ‘to keep connecting with those start-ups even if
we are doing very well. . . In 2011, the medical device unit had clearly outperformed the market over a
492
T. Klueter and L. F. Monteiro
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

longer time span. . . Still, even when we were doing well . . . there was an increasing appreciation that
99.9 per cent of the science is beyond our labs. . . During this time, we were asked to examine what was
available [externally] in an exhaustive way. There was a general fear to not miss anything really impor-
tant’ (Example 3a).
Second, such proactive or opportunistic boundary spanning by technology scouts
may be catalysed by the presence of slack, that is, excess liquid resources or operational
resources beyond those required in the short term (Singh, 1986). In general, ‘success
tends to breed slack’ (Cyert and March, 1963, p. 189), suggesting that slack tends to be
present when an organization performs above aspirations (Pitelis, 2007). Excess resour-
ces are fungible (Levinthal and Wu, 2010) and thus can easily be channelled toward
boundary spanners.[11] A technology scout responsible for sourcing external technolo-
gies for a global pharmaceutical leader in the diabetes market highlighted how the pres-
ence of slack helped to intensify spanning organizational boundaries. ‘We are very happy
with the recent diabetes products we put on the market and we remain very, very successful. . . We are
now in a mode where things are less tight and we engage in larger efforts to learn what is out there. . . I
love that this unit [diabetes] never rests, which makes my work so exciting. Ultimately, it allows me to
generate much more opportunities’ (Example 3b).
Finally, outsiders may perceive organizations in slack times as being more successful,
which makes them more attractive to potential partners to begin with (Ahuja, 2000).
Being exposed to a large variety of opportunities may guide ﬁrms to more systematically
organize technology scouts and formalize their activities (e.g., in the form of a dedicated
unit). For example, an executive manager of Johnson & Johnson’s corporate develop-
ment program noted: ‘We realized that we needed a more systematic way to deal with external
opportunities but also opportunities approaching us and we began to substantially increase budgets for
such initiatives’ (Example 4).
Since MNCs in slack times will be motivated to maintain their competitive advantage
and provide boundary spanners with adequate resources to seek out external knowledge,
global boundary-spanning activities can intensify when performance exceeds aspirations.
In a similar vein, Pitelis (2007) argued that in environments where inter-ﬁrm competi-
tion is high, slack resources may be used to stay ahead of rivals. We thus propose:
Proposition 1c: The further an MNC’s performance is above its aspirations, the more
intense technology scouts’ efforts will be to span organizational boundaries.
Proposition 1d: The further an MNC’s performance is above its aspirations, the more
likely the MNC will formalize or establish a dedicated boundary-spanning unit.
Close to the aspiration point. Taken together, the above propositions reveal two interesting
facets of how performance feedback affects the intensity with which technology scouts
are likely to span organizational boundaries. First, the further MNCs are above or
below aspiration levels, the more intense the technology scouts’ organizational
boundary-spanning efforts, but for very different reasons and with qualitatively different
triggers (to solve a problem in harsh times, to ﬁnd new opportunities in slack times). Sec-
ond, in MNCs that are close to their aspiration levels, technology scouts are more likely
remain inert and less likely to intensify their organizational boundary-spanning efforts.
493
Performance Feedback and Boundary Spanning in MNCs
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

In such MNCs, technology scouts have neither the pressure (as those in harsh times) nor
the slack resources (as those in slack times) to intensify those activities. More formally,
we propose:
Proposition 1e: When an MNC performs close to its aspiration point, technology
scouts less likely intensify efforts to span organizational boundaries.
Proposition 1f: An MNC performing close to its aspiration level is less likely to for-
malize or establish a dedicated boundary-spanning unit.
Spanning National Boundaries in Harsh and Slack Times
While, in the previous section, we focused on the intensity of the efforts made by bound-
ary spanners in crossing organizational boundaries, here we focus on another type of
boundary spanning: how harsh and slack times are likely to affect whether and how
technology scouts span national boundaries to connect and engage with foreign ﬁrms.
An important challenge for boundary spanners lies in the preference of organizations
for local knowledge (Belderbos et al., 2013; Nobel and Birkinshaw, 1998).[12] Tapping
into such knowledge can be easier and more cost-effective because being close to the
knowledge source facilitates understanding and integrating the knowledge, particularly
when such knowledge is tacit and embedded in a local context (Galunic and Rodan,
1998; Tallman and Chacar, 2011). Conversely, spanning national boundaries (i.e., tap-
ping into knowledge from ﬁrms in different countries) entails substantial costs as it
requires crossing into unfamiliar local contexts (Castellani et al., 2013; Kranenburg
et al., 2014). A technology scout in a US-based pharmaceutical ﬁrm explained the chal-
lenges of spanning national boundaries as follows: ‘I think it is fair to say we still have a very
American-centric view of the world and that makes it harder for me. . . Sometimes I am not sure if there
is a real interest and commitment towards these regions [Australia, Asia]. . . One reason is that 70 per
cent of biotech industry is in the US and that’s the way it is. . . Things are not as concentrated in Asia
and Australia and this requires more “digging” from my side. . . Often, the approaches in my regions are
the ones that have not been explored by us anyway’.
The quote reveals that, while challenging, spanning national boundaries may hold
substantial value as it allows organizations to access novel elements of knowledge and
‘best in the world’ knowledge, which may not be available in the MNC’s home country
(Doz et al., 2001; Gittelman, 2007). We next examine how being in harsh or slack times
affect if and how technology scouts span national boundaries.[13]
In harsh times. Understanding that, in harsh times, MNCs are motivated by existing
(and short-term) problems suggests that the starting point for boundary spanning by
technology scouts will typically be in the MNC’s home country, where it is embedded
and into which it can tap quickly with little extra cost (Belderbos et al., 2013; Cyert and
March, 1963). A pharmaceutical technology scout highlighted that, in harsh times, he is
unlikely to cross national boundaries: ‘solutions sought [in harsh times] often tend to be not far
from the locations where we were active before. This is easier for me as I can collect the information rap-
idly and just deliver what they want (Example 5).
494
T. Klueter and L. F. Monteiro
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

However, as performance falls further below aspirations, boundary spanners may be
pressured to consider knowledge that is only available in foreign locations (Gittelman,
2007; Hannigan et al., 2015), which requires spanning national boundaries. It is well-
established that, in harsh situations, decision makers may seek solutions from which they
expect to disproportionally beneﬁt, leading them to make riskier choices (Das and Teng,
2001). Hence, when performance falls further below aspirations, we expect technology
scouts to span national boundaries to tap into novel and ‘best in the world’ foreign
knowledge, which is risky but that can also have a substantial upside. As an example, fol-
lowing near-bankruptcy in the late 1970s, the Big 3 automakers reached out explicitly to
Germany, far from their home location as Germany was considered one of the global
hotbeds in the automotive industry at the time (Hannigan et al., 2015).
Two caveats apply to the idea that technology scouts are more likely to span national
boundaries if the performance-aspiration gap has become too wide. First, in harsh times,
resources to support technology scouts are likely scarcer. During those periods, manag-
ers expend considerable effort attending to pressures from internal and external stake-
holders, which constrains resources (Abrahamson and Park, 1994). At the same time,
substantial efforts by technology scouts are needed to span national boundaries and, in
most cases, boundary spanners need to be present (e.g., having face-to-face contact) to
comprehend opportunities emerging in foreign locations (Storper and Venables, 2004).
Knowledge in foreign countries is also characterized by particularly strong differences
between the MNC and the potential foreign source of knowledge (due to strong speciali-
zation and localization) and dependence (i.e., the foreign knowledge source is embedded
in a local context and the MNC needs to rely extensively on the knowledge source to
transfer and use that knowledge within the MNC), exacerbating the costs of managing
knowledge across national boundaries for technology scouts (Carlile and Rebentisch,
2003; Inkpen and Beamish, 1997). It is hence likely that technology scouts need to make
compensatory trade-offs in their boundary- spanning efforts and balance staying inside
national boundaries or spanning national boundaries. The result is that, in harsh times,
spanning national boundaries may come at the expense of other activities by technology
scouts, which is the reason we expect national boundary spanning to be punctuated
and, in many cases, occur only as a one-off activity.
Second, even if technology scouts span national boundaries, such activities are likely
to remain directed and constrained by the organization’s existing problems. This limita-
tion suggests that, in harsh times, boundary spanners most likely seek out predeﬁned
‘needs’ and have a clear understanding of where to look for relevant knowledge to rem-
edy the performance-aspiration gap (Monteiro, 2015). As a result, the scope of spanning
national boundaries will be limited since the range of possible locations and solutions is
predeﬁned. A technology scout from a German MNC emphasized the directed nature
of distant boundary-spanning activities in harsh times: ‘The only good thing in those circum-
stances [harsh times] is that I get very clear instructions from my business heads where to look [in
China]. . . They [the business unit contacts] will quickly tell me what they want and not want (Exam-
ple 6).
Overall, we expect that performance falling far below aspirations can lead to punctu-
ated national boundary spanning by technology scouts. We propose:
495
Performance Feedback and Boundary Spanning in MNCs
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

Proposition 2a: The further MNCs perform below aspirations, the more likely it is
that technology scouts will span national boundaries in a punctuated way.
Proposition 2b: In harsh times, technology scouts have a predeﬁned and narrow man-
date to span national boundaries.
In slack times. Positive performance feedback induces repeated behaviour (Cyert and
March, 1963), which would suggests that, in slack times, boundary spanners are likely to
remain conﬁned within their national borders. However, similar to our argument about
organizational boundary spanning in slack times, there is reason to believe that slack
times may also allow technology scouts to span national boundaries and tap into
knowledge in foreign countries.
We identiﬁed that managers in slack times do not have immediate problems to solve
and can focus on ‘next problems’, which encourages experimentation (Nohria and
Gulati, 1996; Sidhu et al., 2004). Hence, technology scouts in slack times are free from
the constraints of solving urgent operational problems and can experiment with span-
ning national boundaries by going to countries in which the MNC has no operating
activities (Doz et al., 2001). In a similar vein, researchers have suggested that decision
makers with longer planning horizons (i.e., absent urgent problems) may engage in risk-
seeking behaviour, indicating that technology scouts in slack times may span more ‘risky’
(i.e., national) boundaries (Das and Teng, 2001).
Spanning national boundaries is also facilitated by the presence of excess resources in
slack times. These resources are particularly important given the costs of being physi-
cally present in a foreign country and the underlying properties of knowledge (novelty,
difference and dependence), which make the management of knowledge at such boun-
daries extremely challenging (Carlile, 2004; Carlile and Rebentisch, 2003). It stands to
reason that, with the availability of excess resources to support such costly activities in
slack times, technology scouts are more likely to experiment and span national
boundaries.
Supporting these ideas, a global R&D manager (similar to a technology scout) at a
German MNC explained that, during slack times, spanning national boundaries was
easier: ‘My business unit has really outperformed the last years, so we have greater freedom to explore
different geographies. . . As an example, they allowed me to pursue quite a few exploratory programs with
university professors all over the world, including China, as they are convinced that there are many yet to
be discovered targets and, in general, therapeutic improvements. . . [I]n the last few years, the unit was
particularly willing to tap into the “unknown” with me (Example 7).
In contrast to harsh times, however, we do not expect national boundary spanning to
be punctuated and to come at the expense of technology scouts’ activities within their
home locations. Instead, in slack times, boundary spanners can more likely combine
their activities within and across national boundaries to tap into external knowledge.
Moreover, the lack of an underlying problem suggests that, in slack times, technology
scouts are much more open to spanning boundaries all around the globe. This view
expands on the ambidexterity perspective, which highlights that organizations enjoy
performance beneﬁts when combining local and foreign knowledge and that slack
resources are an important moderator for the ambidexterity-performance relationship
496
T. Klueter and L. F. Monteiro
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

(Raisch et al., 2009). Our arguments reveal that the reverse relationship may also hold;
slack times more likely foster ambidextrous behaviour (by boundary spanners) in the ﬁrst
place. We propose:
Proposition 2d: The further MNCs perform above aspirations, the more likely it is
that technology scouts will span national boundaries.
Proposition 2e: In slack times, technology scouts have broad and open mandates to
span national boundaries.
Spanning Internal Boundaries in Harsh and Slack Times
So far, we have focused on the externally oriented activities of boundary spanners. How-
ever, connecting to external organizations, possibly in foreign locations, is just one part
of the boundary-spanning process undertaken by technology scouts. The other equally
important part is how they manage internal boundaries by presenting the opportunities
they have externally identiﬁed to internal R&D units, business units or the top manage-
ment and how this process is shaped by whether the MNC is in harsh or slack times.
Boundary spanners must not only seek out external knowledge but also sell and inte-
grate it into the organization (Monteiro, 2015). This persuasive effort can be challenging
since internal R&D competes with boundary spanners for organizational resources. and
often MNCs resist the external solutions that boundary spanners present (Birkinshaw
and Ridderstråle, 1999; Raisch et al., 2009). Hence, a major task for technology scouts
lies in spanning internal boundaries and convincing organizational members and groups
(such as a business or R&D unit) to apply and integrate external knowledge (Birkinshaw
et al., 2017; Meyer et al., 2011; Monteiro and Birkinshaw, 2017; Mudambi, 2011). One
senior executive responsible for the technology scouting activities in an MNC explained
this challenge: ‘One of the challenges we face is that our scouts can travel around the world and spend
endless time digging into new external opportunities, but if franchises [the business units] are then not
aligned with this approach, it may be an inefﬁcient process overall. . . In some cases, they [the business
units] still give preferences to internal projects over the external opportunities we present. . . This can be
frustrating because you can get people inside our R&D organization who are very dogmatic’.
Research has emphasized that, in general, external knowledge can be a substitute for
or complement to internal R&D activities (Pisano, 1990; Veugelers, 1997). Hence,
when spanning internal boundaries to internal constituents, technology scouts may
either emphasize external knowledge as a substitute for or complement to internal R&D
efforts. However, in exploring this tension, previous research has not yet probed
whether MNCs are in harsh or slack times. Next, we discuss how harsh and slack times
ultimately shape how technology scouts manage knowledge across internal boundaries.
In harsh times. Global boundary spanning to tap into new knowledge is generally a
costly process requiring signiﬁcant ﬁnancial, technological, organizational, and manage-
rial resources (Castellani et al., 2013; Levinthal and March, 1981). For boundary span-
ners, this process will entail identifying possible technological solutions around the
globe, translating and disseminating the search results within the MNC, and ultimately
internalizing the externally sourced technologies (Monteiro, 2015).
497
Performance Feedback and Boundary Spanning in MNCs
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

Given the previously outlined resource constraints in harsh times and that R&D
budgets tend to remain stable (e.g., as a ﬁxed percentage of revenue), managers would
need to make compensatory trade-offs in allocating resources between R&D and the
activities by technology scouts. We therefore expect that, in harsh times, technology
scouts emphasize external knowledge as a possible alternative and substitute for internal
R&D when they span internal boundaries to present identiﬁed knowledge to R&D units,
business units or managers.
In harsh times, organizations are also characterized by conﬂict because they have
failed to achieve the performance to which they aspired, leading to tension among the
MNC’s coalitions vying for scarce resources (Cyert and March, 1963). While, in princi-
ple, organizations try to avoid conﬂict (Pitelis, 2007), once it is present, boundary span-
ners may deliberately depart from existing internal ways of solving problems and seek
alternative solutions. In such cases, technology scouts may intentionally utilize this state
of tension and present external solutions as substitute for internal initiatives. A director
of licensing and acquisitions and technology scout at a pharmaceutical MNC high-
lighted how, during harsh times, her boundary-spanning efforts emphasized how exter-
nal solutions can be substitutes for internal R&D activities. ‘Based on [. . .] performance
outcomes, we cut programs on a daily basis and they are very sensitive to changes in their KPIs (key per-
formance indicators). It is also true that some units, as a result of underperformance, had substantial lay-
offs, so they are in dire need of external opportunities, which meant more work for me. In many cases, we
measured the FTE [full time employee] rate and compared it against our internal one. As you can imag-
ine, this is not a great conversation [with the internal R&D units] as it usually ends up calculating sci-
entists’ costs from our internal R&D operations versus potential external partners (Example 8)’.
Overall, we suggest that, in MNCs performing below aspirations, technology scouts
spanning internal boundaries will present external solutions as a substitute for internal
R&D. More formally, we propose:
Proposition 3a: In harsh times, when spanning internal boundaries, technology scouts
are more likely to present external knowledge as a substitute for internal R&D
activities.
The above arguments indicate that harsh times may also inﬂuence the way in which
technology scouts engage with other units inside their organizations. Research has dis-
tinguished various ways by which boundary spanners mediate between the external
environment and the internal organization, which range from mere communciation,
channeling, and transfer of knowledge to translating and transforming external knowl-
edge for internal constituents (Carlile, 2002, 2004; Monteiro and Birkinshaw, 2017).
Transferring or channeling knowledge is grounded in information processing and com-
munication of facts. Conversely, translating and transforming knowledge requires tech-
nology scouts to substantially engage with their internal consitutents and create
common interests to have external knowledge mobilized internally (Carlile, 2004; Mon-
teiro and Birkinshaw, 2017).
We identiﬁed that, in harsh times, technology scouts are more likely to present exter-
nal solutions as substitutes for internal initiatives, so one would expect that boundary
spanners would focus on transferring ‘ready-to-use’ external knowledge into the
498
T. Klueter and L. F. Monteiro
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

organization but without engaging in more value-added (but costly and time-consum-
ing) boundary-spanning processes such as translating or transforming. As the technology
scout revealed in Example 8, in harsh times, she focused on transferring external infor-
mation and communicating facts to the organization’s internal R&D constitutents.
Indeed, such behaviour ﬁts the transferring and channeling type of boundary spanning
(Carlile, 2004; Monteiro and Birkinshaw, 2017). We suggest that, when taking into
account prior performance, harsh times (i.e., performnace below aspirations) will lead
technology scouts to span internal boundaries predominantly through the channeling
and transferring of external knowledge towards their internal constituents. More for-
mally, we propose:
Proposition 3b: In harsh times, when spanning internal boundaries, technology scouts
are more likely to emphasize the transfer and channelling of external knowledge
into the MNC.
In slack times. In contrast to harsh times, in slack times, technology scouts are less likely to
be driven by substitution pressures. In slack times, MNCs enjoy excess managerial and
ﬁnancial resources that they have accumulated but have not yet consumed or incorpo-
rated into organizational processes (Cyert and March, 1963). If managers follow stand-
ard operating procedures in allocating resources to R&D (e.g., as a percentage of
revenue), performance above aspirations may allow ﬁrms to allocate some resources to
global boundary-spanning initiatives while still maintaining their level of investment in
internal R&D. Hence, technology scouts in slack times are under less pressure to make
trade-offs between internal R&D and external knowledge and have more time to sell
external innovative ideas within the organization (Mudambi and Swift, 2009). More-
over, in slack times, boundary spanners will ﬁnd it easier to draw on the attention of
managers who have no immediate problem to solve. Having more managerial attention
available increases the probability that boundary spanners can champion external activ-
ities as a complement to internal R&D within the organization, and look at global exter-
nal technologies in a more complementary way (Crossan and Apaydin, 2010; Dutton
et al., 2001).
In addition, in slack times, there is likely less conﬂict between coalitions within the
MNC (Cyert and March, 1963). Given that organizations tend to eschew conﬂict,
boundary spanners will avoid presenting external opportunities as a substitute for inter-
nal R&D initiatives to their internal constituents. Instead, it becomes more likely that
the technology scouts make a conscious effort to underscore the complementarity nature
between what they have found and internal R&D initiatives. This reduces tensions
which could emerge from novel external knowledge being brought into the organization
(Mudambi and Swift, 2009). A manager responsible for external R&D units (compara-
ble to technology scouts) at a German MNC revealed this behaviour during slack times.
‘I still prefer the mode when things are going well as we have greater freedom to learn what is out there.
The good thing is that they are interested in how what I ﬁnd ultimately will help their [internal] R&D
initiatives and help the [business] unit grow. . . I showcase to them [the R&D unit managers] how
what I ﬁnd actually helps them achieve their goals (Example 9)’.
499
Performance Feedback and Boundary Spanning in MNCs
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

The example demonstrates that, in slack times, technology scouts may emphasize the
potential complementary beneﬁts of their activities for the internal R&D units. This
once again reﬂects the ambidexterity perspective, which suggests that organizations
enjoy performance beneﬁts when combining both internal and external R&D (Rothaer-
mel and Alexandre, 2009). Our arguments posit that the reverse relationship may also
hold; slack times are more likely to foster ambidextrous behaviour by allowing technol-
ogy scouts to explore complementarities of internal R&D and external opportunities.
We propose:
Proposition 3c: In slack times, when spanning internal boundaries, technology scouts
are more likely to present external knowledge as a complement to internal R&D
activities.
The availability of slack also increases the likelihood that technology scouts can empha-
size more value-added boundary-spanning activities, such as the translation and trans-
formation of external knowledge to more effectively integrate it into the organization
(Monteiro and Birkinshaw, 2017). The translation of knowledge requires some manipu-
lation by scouts so that it can be better understood inside the MNC (Carlile, 2004;
Tushman and Scanlan, 1981). In particular, transforming knowledge requires technol-
ogy scouts to recognize novel dependencies between external knowledge and internal
R&D activities and deﬁne common interests with the internal units (Carlile, 2002; Mon-
teiro and Birkinshaw, 2017). Both translation and transformation by technology scouts
are costly, and hence we expect such behaviour to more likely transpire in slack times. A
technology scout at Merck discussed his interactions with one of the successful business
units and revealed that working with that unit required substantial listening and trans-
forming knowledge for the internal R&D organization: ‘. . . one of the most critical things
with them is making sure that there is concurrence between what I am looking for and what they [the
business unit] need. That’s where it starts. Interestingly, the successful franchises are the ones more open
to such conversations. In such cases, I try to discuss the usefulness of the external technologies with the
unit and try hard to reconcile what I found with the franchise’s areas of interests and needs (Example
10)’.
Hence, slack times profoundly shape the way technology scouts interact with their
internal counterparts and how they manage knowledge across boundaries. While
prior studies have shown that boundary spanners who effectively combine boundary
spanning and managing constituents and tensions within organizations lead to superior
outcomes (Carlile, 2004; Mudambi and Swift, 2009), we suggest that performance
above aspirations may allow technology scouts to engage in these value-added activities
(such as mitigating tensions between internal and external activities) in the ﬁrst place.
We propose:
Proposition 3d: In slack times, when spanning internal boundaries, technology scouts
are more likely to emphasize the translation and transformation of external knowl-
edge for the MNC.
500
T. Klueter and L. F. Monteiro
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

CONCLUSION
Scholars have emphasized that spanning organizational and national boundaries to
access external knowledge has increased considerably in recent decades (Bierly et al.,
2009; Monteiro and Birkinshaw, 2017; Rothaermel and Alexandre, 2009). An impor-
tant role in accessing external knowledge has been ascribed to boundary spanners, who
mediate between the MNC’s external environment and relevant actors (e.g., R&D units)
inside the organization (Tushman and Katz, 1980). Many MNCs have formed dedi-
cated units (e.g., technology scouts), not only to systematically span organizational and
national boundaries to tap into external knowledge but also to span internal boundaries
to make external knowledge available within the organization (Gassmann and Gaso,
2004; Monteiro, 2015) and researchers have also highlighted that such boundary-
spanning processes are associated with a number of important performance beneﬁts
(Doz et al., 2001; Tushman and Katz, 1980). Surprisingly, however, much less scholarly
attention has focused on the reverse relationship – that is, how a ﬁrm’s prior perform-
ance affects boundary-spanning activities and, in particular, the activities of technology
scouts.
To address this question, we have situated technology scouts in either harsh times
(ﬁrm performance below aspirations) or slack times (performance above aspirations) and
have presented several propositions related to how boundary-spanning activities are
likely to unfold under those circumstances. In particular, we have focused on an emer-
gent stream of research examining what boundary spanners in MNCs, particularly tech-
nology scouts, actually do (e.g., Gassmann and Gaso, 2004; Monteiro, 2015; Monteiro
and Birkinshaw, 2017). Table I summarizes our predictions of how harsh and slack
times ultimately affect whether, when and how technology scouts span organizational,
national and internal boundaries.
Our theoretical model makes several contributions to the literature. First, our frame-
work provides a behavioural explanation for the triggering mechanisms for different
types of boundary-spanning processes in an MNC and suggests that both harsh and
slack times may give rise to the inception of a boundary-spanning unit in the ﬁrst place.
The study highlights that while the link between boundary spanning and performance
has been established by prior literature, how performance ultimately shapes boundary-
spanning activities in global organizations is an equally important area of inquiry.
We propose that, in both harsh and slack times, technology scouts increase the inten-
sity of crossing organizational boundaries, but for very different reasons. While in harsh
times, they are motivated by a problem to seek external knowledge, in slack times, they
may opportunistically consider ‘next problems’. This distinction has implications for a
third category of MNCs: those located around the aspiration point with neither the pres-
sure nor the short-term slack resources to cross organizational boundaries. Figure 1 pro-
vides a graphical representation of how the intensity of organizational boundary
spanning by technology scouts may be shaped by performance aspiration comparisons.
Second, we suggest that harsh and slack times impose important conditions on how
technology scouts balance their boundary-spanning activities, in particular, when they
span national boundaries to tap into foreign knowledge. We expect that in harsh times,
problem-oriented motives may encourage spanning national boundaries, but limited
501
Performance Feedback and Boundary Spanning in MNCs
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

resources in harsh times lead to trade-offs for technology scouts to span national boun-
daries and maintain their activities inside their home location. As a result, spanning
national boundaries in harsh times will be more likely one-off and more directed. Con-
versely, in slack times, technology scouts have a more open mandate to engage in
national boundary spanning without having to make compensatory trade-offs. This per-
spective adds fresh insights to the ambidexterity debate by considering performance as
an important input (not output) of spanning boundaries in an ambidextrous way (Raisch
et al., 2009).
Table I. Summary of propositions of how harsh and slack times shape technology scouts’ boundary-
spanning behaviour
Boundary Spanned
Activity
Harsh times
Slack times
Organiza-tional
Technology scouts span
organizational
boundaries to tap
into external sources of
knowledge.
Technology scouts inten-
sify boundary spanning
the more performance
falls below MNC’s aspira-
tion. (P1a) (Example 1)
Increase in likelihood of
boundary-spanning unit
being formalized and
incepted (P1b)
(Example 2)
Technology scouts inten-
sify boundary spanning
intensity the more per-
formance rises above
MNC’s aspiration.
(P1c) (Example 3a, b)
Increase in likelihood of
boundary-spanning unit
being formalized and
incepted (P1d) (Exam-
ple 4)
Close to Aspiration Point: Lower boundary-spanning
intensity by technology scouts (P1e, P1f)
National
Technology scouts span
national boundaries
to reach ‘best in the
world’ knowledge in
foreign locations.
Technology scouts engage
in punctuated national
boundary spanning
(P2a) (Example 5,6)
Technology scouts have
a predeﬁned and nar-
row scope to span
national boundaries.
(P2b) (Example 6)
Technology scouts more
likely span national
boundaries (in addition
to activities at home).
(P2c) (Example 7)
Technology scouts have
broad and open man-
dates to span national
boundaries (P2d)
(Example 7)
Internal
Technology scouts span
internal boundaries
to R&D and business
units to present and
mobilize external
opportunities within the
organization.
Technology scouts more
likely present external
knowledge as a substi-
tute for internal R&D
activities. (P3a) (Exam-
ple 8) Technology
scouts emphasize the
transfer and channeling
of knowledge into the
MNCs. (P3b) (Example
8)
Technology scouts more
likely present external
knowledge as a comple-
ment for internal R&D
activities. (P3c) (Exam-
ple 9) Technology
scouts emphasize the
translation and trans-
forming of knowledge
for use within the
MNCs. (P3d) (Example
10)
502
T. Klueter and L. F. Monteiro
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

Third, we have revealed important behavioural clues as to how technology scouts
span internal boundaries to connect and engage with their internal constituents in harsh
and slack times. We identiﬁed that, when spanning internal boundaries in harsh times,
technology scouts are more likely to present external solutions as substitutes to internal
R&D, while in slack times, technology scouts are more likely to showcase external solu-
tions as complements to internal R&D. In a related vein, we identiﬁed that, due to their
limited resources, technology scouts in harsh times are likely to emphasize the channel-
ling and transferring of external knowledge into the organization, while we expect them
in slack times to focus on the translation and transformation of external knowledge for
their internal constituents (Monteiro and Birkinshaw, 2017). This extends prior work
that suggested that value-adding, boundary-spanning activities such as transformation
allow for establishing common interests and managing tensions across boundaries,
which can ultimately improve an organization’s competitive advantage, in particular
when knowledge at the boundaries is characterized by high novelty (Carlile, 2004;
Mudambi and Swift, 2009; Tippman et al., 2017). We reveal that such value-adding
behaviour by technology scouts may, in fact, be affected by performance feedback and
is more likely to emerge in slack times.
Finally, the study expands prior work related to the behavioural theory of the ﬁrm.
While researchers have long considered harsh and slack times as important contingen-
cies for broad activities such as R&D spending (Chen and Miller, 2007; Greve, 2003a),
our paper focuses on a particular type of organizational activity (boundary spanning)
and provides an in-depth look at the behaviour of speciﬁc actors (technology scouts)
when spanning organizational, national and internal boundaries. This focus allows us to
move away from the organizational level typically used in behavioural studies and get
closer to how harsh and slack times affect the actual behaviour of individuals within
MNCs. Hence, the paper connects the behavioural theory of the ﬁrm to the growing
Figure 1. Global boundary spanning by technology scouts induced by harsh and slack times. [Colour
ﬁgure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]
503
Performance Feedback and Boundary Spanning in MNCs
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

literature on boundary spanners in MNCs (such as technology scouts or corporate exec-
utives) and the activities they perform (e.g., Birkinshaw et al., 2017; Monteiro and Bir-
kinshaw, 2017).
Our theoretical model, applying performance feedback as an input to boundary-
spanning activities, could be extended in several ways. First, throughout the paper, we
have made the assumption that technology scouts deal with knowledge with some ele-
ments of novelty, i.e., knowledge that represents ‘something new and different’ for the
organization or ‘departs signiﬁcantly from existing product architecture’ (Carlile and
Rebentisch, 2003, p. 1184). However, recent research (Monteiro, 2015) has shown that
sometimes an MNC goes around the globe only to end up paying attention to technolo-
gies that are very close to its existing knowledge base. In this paper, we have not differ-
entiated opportunities with respect to their extent of novelty and how this might affect
boundary-spanning behaviour by technology scouts in harsh and slack times. Rather,
our focus is on how different environmental conditions (i.e., being in harsh or slack
times) determine different boundary-spanning behaviours. Our ﬁndings open new
research avenues, for instance, by combining the propositions we developed here with
Carlile’s (2004) framework for managing of knowledge across boundaries in the context
of product innovations, which distinguishes three key boundaries with increasing com-
plexity (syntactic, semantic and pragmatic) and three key processes by boundary span-
ners (transfer, translation and transformation). More deeply examining the type of
external opportunities, possibly at different levels of novelty, and further connecting this
literature with that on the behavior and processes performed by technology scouts
(Monteiro and Birkinshaw, 2017) may be a promising path for further research.
Second, we have separately discussed three distinct activities of technology scouts
related to organizational, national, and internal boundaries. However, technology
scouts often engage in these activities simultaneously, and opportunities and challenges
from the process stem from technology scouts embeddedness in both an external (e.g.,
their activities with ﬁrms outside the organization) and internal contexts (e.g., the activ-
ities by which they engage with actors inside the organization) (Meyer et al., 2011; Mon-
teiro and Birkinshaw, 2017). While our paper makes several suggestions as to how harsh
and slack times affect technology scouts’ attempts to balance boundary-spanning activ-
ities (e.g., compensatory trade-offs stemming from spanning national boundaries in
harsh times), future research could more systematically examine how technology scouts
concomitantly engage in all the outlined activities in harsh and slack times. To that end,
it may become necessary to once more consider that boundary spanning is not necessar-
ily a differentiated and deﬁned function but may require several actors in different
boundary-spanning roles (Friedman and Podolny, 1992). For instance, some technology
scouts may focus on the generation of external opportunities, while others focus on
mobilizing such opportunities within the organization. Examining these processes in
more detail may also allow a more systematic investigation of how, for example, the
intensity of internal boundary spanning unfolds or how technology scouts engage with
external constituents (potential knowledge sources) in harsh and slack times, which we
did not uncover in the paper. We believe the way in which a division of labour in
boundary spanning is effectively set up in global organizations and how the setup is
shaped by harsh and slack times are questions for future research.
504
T. Klueter and L. F. Monteiro
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

Finally, we have emphasized global boundary spanning as a way to tap into external
and foreign knowledge. However, gaining access to such knowledge often requires reci-
procity, i.e., revealing knowledge to potential external partners (Monteiro et al., 2008;
Monteiro and Birkinshaw, 2017). While we have characterized technology scouts in gen-
eral as knowledge-seeking, one could easily imagine them also transmitting knowledge
to their external constituents (e.g., to help them prepare for submitting knowledge to the
MNC, or sharing information in general). We would conjecture that, over time, technol-
ogy scouts trying to access external knowledge without revealing their MNC’s knowl-
edge would compromise trust between parties, and therefore, the MNC’s boundary-
spanning efforts will become increasingly difﬁcult (Monteiro et al., in press). It would be
interesting to expand our study’s activities by technology scouts to include how they
interact with their external environment (e.g., emphasizing secrecy vs. being open when
engaging with external partners) and how this behaviour may be shaped by harsh and
slack times.
Overall, we believe that global boundary spanning has become an increasingly
important activity for MNCs in many industries. Our study illustrates the behaviour of
boundary spanners engaged in this process in the form of technology scouts. We reveal
that harsh and slack times may be important triggers for whether, when and how tech-
nology scouts ultimately span boundaries. We hope this paper will inspire more research
relating to the micro-level behaviour of decision makers and technology scouts in MNCs
and how their activities may be triggered by macro-organizational factors such as harsh
and slack times. We believe that behavioural arguments, in particular, theories of per-
formance feedback, may offer fertile ground for future research to make such
connections.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Matthew Bidwell, Julian Birkinshaw, Olivier Chatain, Rahul Kapoor, Riita Katila, Dan Levinthal,
Evan Rawley, Lori Rosenkopf and Christopher Zott, the reviewers, the Special Issue editors and participants
at the paper development workshop at Ivey Business School for their comments and suggestions on earlier
versions of this manuscript. Funding for this project was provided by the Mack Institute for Innovation
Management at the Wharton School.
NOTES
[1] We make the important assumption that technology scouts deal with knowledge with some elements of
novelty, i.e., knowledge that represents ‘something new and different’ for the organization or ‘departs
signiﬁcantly from existing product architecture’ (Carlile and Rebentisch, 2003, p. 1184). Carlile’s
(2004) framework for managing knowledge across boundaries when innovation is desired suggests that
novelty leads to increasing complexity of knowledge boundaries (e.g., due to the specialization of actors
in technological areas or their mutual dependence on each other to ultimately make use of the knowl-
edge). Such highly complex knowledge boundaries are exactly the type of boundaries we expect tech-
nology scouts to span. In our conclusion, we suggest future areas of research that could explicitly
differentiate degrees of novelty of external opportunities and boundary spanning by technology scouts.
[2] For the purpose of clarity, our paper separately examines these three distinct activities by technology
scouts. However, we acknowledge that technology scouts engage in all of these activities concomitantly,
and that opportunities and challenges from the process stem from technology scouts being simultane-
ously embedded in external, foreign and corporate contexts (Meyer et al., 2011; Monteiro and Birkin-
shaw, 2017). We address this in the discussion section.
505
Performance Feedback and Boundary Spanning in MNCs
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

[3] Fleming and Waguespack (2007) noted that ‘although the measures of boundary spanning and broker-
age correlate empirically, the concepts remain theoretically distinct’.
[4] We acknowledge that this is an extreme representation of boundary spanners. Indeed, researchers have
explained that boundary spanning is not necessarily a differentiated function and boundary-spanning
roles may be performed by different actors (Friedman and Podolny, 1992). In a similar vein, technology
scouts may perform differentiated tasks, including the generation of opportunities and mobilizing such
opportunities within the organization. We expand on these ideas in the discussion section.
[5] For the purpose of our paper, managers can be on the level of the top management team or at the busi-
ness unit level. Importantly, these managers directly assign mandates to boundary-spanning units such
as technology scouts.
[6] Our arguments are based on ﬁnancial performance dimensions (e.g., return on assets or net income),
which follows Cyert’s and March’s original idea to consider metrics that directly affect decision-makers.
However, Cyert and March also considered non-ﬁnancial performance dimensions, including produc-
tion and inventory, and market share goals. It is also likely that managers take into consideration inno-
vative performance – that is, its innovative output and how it compares to industry peers. While we
believe our theoretical framework applies to non-ﬁnancial performance measures, we leave such an
exploration for future research.
[7] We acknowledge that there are other non-behavioural explanations which are likely to affect an MNC’s
global boundary-spanning activities (e.g., prior experience) While we are cognizant of the importance
of those alternative explanations, our goal is to reveal the unique importance of performance feedback
to global boundary-spanning activities and technology scouts speciﬁcally.
[8] Each interview lasted on average 45 minutes. In prior work, we also documented a detailed description
of the technology-scouting process and some of its fundamental tensions in a multinational organization
(Klueter and Monteiro, 2014).
[9] BTF research has long indicated that absolute performance and adverse events (e.g., project with-
drawals, railway accidents, or space-launch accidents) may substantially alter an organization’s behav-
iour (Madsen and Desai, 2010). We expect very high and very low absolute performance to be
incorporated into the aspirations of organizational decision makers so that our theoretical framework
also largely applies in such events.
[10] We are excluding extreme cases of poor performance. Firms performing very poorly (i.e., verging on
bankruptcy) behave differently, as managers shift their attention to survival, which leads these ﬁrms to
search less (Chen and Miller, 2007).
[11] While, from this perspective, slack times enable ﬁrms to engage in and intensify global boundary-
spanning activities, we cannot make claims that such behaviour ultimately leads to innovation. Research
has emphasized that the direct relationship of slack to innovation outcomes remains subject to debate
(Nohria and Gulati, 1996; Pitelis, 2007).
[12] The aforementioned studies revealed that the overwhelming proportion of R&D activity is within the
MNC’s home countries (up to 90 per cent). We hence formulate our propositions based on crossing
national boundaries, i.e., tapping into knowledge beyond the ﬁrm’s home country. However, we
acknowledge that MNCs have subsidiaries located around the globe and we believe our theorizing
could be extended and applied to spanning national boundaries to locations in which the MNCs are less
active.
[13] Once we understand that MNCs make choices to deliberately span national boundaries to tap into for-
eign knowledge, similar arguments can apply when considering different forms of knowledge proximity
(e.g., geographical or technological). We expand on such alternatives and the necessity of incorporating
alternative boundaries into our arguments in the discussion section. For the purposes of this paper, how-
ever, we limit ourselves to spanning national boundaries.
REFERENCES
Abrahamson, E. and Park, C. (1994). ‘Concealment of negative organizational outcomes: An agency
theory perspective’. Academy of Management Journal, 37, 1302–34.
Ahuja, G. (2000). ‘The duality of collaboration: Inducements and opportunities in the formation of inter-
ﬁrm linkages’. Strategic Management Journal, 21, 317–43.
Aldrich, H. and Herker, D. (1977). ‘Boundary spanning roles and organization structure’. Academy of
Management Review, 2, 217–30.
506
T. Klueter and L. F. Monteiro
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

Almeida, P., Song, J. and Grant, R. M. (2002). ‘Are ﬁrms superior to alliances and markets? An empiri-
cal test of cross-border knowledge building’. Organization Science, 13, 147–61.
Ancona, D. and Caldwell, D. (1992). ‘Bridging the boundary: External activity and performance in
organizational teams’. Administrative Science Quarterly, 37, 634–65.
Asakawa, K., Song, J. and Kim, S. J. (2014). ‘Open innovation in multinational corporations’. In Ches-
brough, H., Vanhaverbeke, W. and West, J. (Eds), New Frontiers in Open Innovation. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 157–68.
Banker, R., Cao, Z., Menon, N. M. and Mudambi, R. (2013). ‘The Red Queen in action: The longitu-
dinal effects of capital investments in the mobile telecommunications sector’. Industrial and Corporate
Change, 22, 1195–228.
Belderbos, R., Leten, B. and Suzuki, S. (2013). ‘How global is R&D? Firm-level determinants of home-
country bias in R&D’. Journal of International Business Studies, 44, 765–86.
Bierly, P. E., Damanpour, F. and Santoro, M. D. (2009). ‘The application of external knowledge:
Organizational conditions for exploration and exploitation’. Journal of Management Studies, 46, 481–
509.
Birkinshaw, J. (1996). ‘How multinational subsidiary mandates are gained and lost’. Journal of International
Business Studies, 27, 467–95.
Birkinshaw, J., Ambos, T. and Bouquet, C. (2017). ‘Boundary spanning activities of corporate HQ exec-
utives: Insights from a longitudinal study’. Journal of Management Studies, 54, 422–54.
Birkinshaw, J. and Hood, N. (2000). ‘Characteristics of foreign subsidiaries in industry clusters’. Journal of
International Business Studies, 31, 141–54.
Birkinshaw, J. and Ridderstråle, J. (1999). ‘Fighting the corporate immune system: A process study of
subsidiary initiatives in multinational corporations’. International Business Review, 8, 149–80.
Bromiley, P. (1991). ‘Testing a causal model of corporate risk taking and performance’. Academy of Man-
agement Journal, 34, 37–59.
Burt, R. S. (1992). Structural Holes: The Social Structure of Competition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Cantwell, J. (1989). Technological Innovation and Multinational Corporations. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Carlile, P. R. (2002). ‘A pragmatic view of knowledge and boundaries: Boundary objects in new product
development’. Organization Science, 13, 442–55.
Carlile, P. R. (2004). ‘Transferring, translating, and transforming: An integrative framework for manag-
ing knowledge across boundaries’. Organization Science, 15, 555–68.
Carlile, P. R. and Rebentisch, E. S. (2003). ‘Into the black box: The knowledge transformation cycle’.
Management Science, 49, 1180–95.
Castellani, D., Jimenez, A. and Zanfei, A. (2013). ‘How remote are R&D labs? Distance factors and
international innovative activities’. Journal of International Business Studies, 44, 649–75.
Chen, W. and Miller, K. (2007). ‘Situational and institutional determinants of ﬁrms R&D search inten-
sity’. Strategic Management Journal, 28, 369–81.
Chesbrough, H., Vanhaverbeke, W. and West, J. (2006). Open Innovation: Researching a New Paradigm. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Crossan, M. M. and Apaydin, M. (2010). ‘A multi-dimensional framework of organizational innovation:
A systematic review of the literature’. Journal of Management Studies, 47, 1154–91.
Cyert, R. and March, J. (1963). A Behavioral Theory of the Firm. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall Inc.
D’Aveni, R. A., Dagnino, G. B. and Smith, K. G. (2010). ‘The age of temporary advantage’. Strategic
Management Journal, 31, 1371–85.
Das, T. and Teng, B. S. (2001). ‘Strategic risk behaviour and its temporalities: Between risk propensity
and decision context’. Journal of Management Studies, 38, 515–34.
De Clercq, D., Casta~ner, X. and Belausteguigoitia, I. (2011). ‘Entrepreneurial initiative selling within
organizations: Towards a more comprehensive motivational framework’. Journal of Management Stud-
ies, 48, 1269–90.
Dollinger, M. J. (1984). ‘Environmental boundary spanning and information processing effects on organi-
zational performance’. Academy of Management Journal, 27, 351–68.
Doz, Y., Santos, J. and Williamson, P. (2001). From Global to Metanational: How Companies Win in the Knowl-
edge Economy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Doz, Y. L. and Wilson, K. (2012). Managing Global Innovation: Frameworks for Integrating Capabilities Around the
World. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business Press.
Dutton, J. E., Ashford, S., O’Neill, R. M. and Lawrence, K. A. (2001). ‘Moves that matter: Issue selling
and organizational change’. Academy of Management Journal, 44, 716–36.
507
Performance Feedback and Boundary Spanning in MNCs
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

Fleming, L. and Waguespack, D. M. (2007). ‘Brokerage, boundary spanning, and leadership in open
innovation communities’. Organization Science, 18, 165–80.
Friedman, R. A. and Podolny, J. (1992). ‘Differentiation of boundary spanning roles: Labor negotiations
and implications for role conﬂict’. Administrative Science Quarterly, 37, 28–47.
Galunic, D. C. and Rodan, S. A. (1998). ‘Resource recombinations in the ﬁrm: Knowledge structures
and the potential for Schumpeterian innovation’. Strategic Management Journal, 19, 1193–201.
Gassmann, O. and Gaso, B. (2004). ‘Insourcing creativity with listening posts in decentralized ﬁrms’. Cre-
ativity and Innovation Management, 13, 3–14.
Gittelman, M. (2007). ‘Does geography matter for science-based ﬁrms? Epistemic communities and the
geography of research and patenting in biotechnology’. Organization Science, 18, 724–41.
Greve, H. (1998). ‘Performance, aspirations, and risky organizational change’. Administrative Science Quar-
terly, 43, 58–86.
Greve, H. (2003a). ‘A behavioral theory of R&D expenditures and innovations: Evidence from shipbuild-
ing’. Academy of Management Journal, 46, 685–702.
Greve, H. (2003b). Organizational Learning from Performance Feedback: A Behavioral Perspective on Innovation and
Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gupta, A. K. and Govindarajan, V. (2000). ‘Knowledge ﬂows within multinational corporations’. Strategic
Management Journal, 21, 473–96.
Hagedoorn, J. (1993). ‘Understanding the rationale of strategic technology partnering: Interorganiza-
tional modes of cooperation and sectoral differences’. Strategic Management Journal, 14, 371–85.
Hagedoorn, J. and Schakenraad, J. (1994). ‘The effect of strategic technology alliances on company per-
formance’. Strategic Management Journal, 15, 291–309.
Hannigan, T. J., Cano-Kollmann, M. and Mudambi, R. (2015). ‘Thriving innovation amidst manufac-
turing decline: The Detroit auto cluster and the resilience of local knowledge production’. Industrial
and Corporate Change, 24, 613–34.
Inkpen, A. C. and Beamish, P. W. (1997). ‘Knowledge, bargaining power, and the instability of interna-
tional joint ventures’. Academy of Management Review, 22, 177–202.
Iyer, D. and Miller, K. (2008). ‘Performance feedback, slack, and the timing of acquisitions’. Academy of
Management Journal, 51, 808–22.
Kale, P., Dyer, J. H. and Singh, H. (2002). ‘Alliance capability, stock market response, and long-term
alliance success: The role of the alliance function’. Strategic Management Journal, 23, 747–67.
Katz, R. and Allen, T. J. (1982). ‘Investigating the not invented here (NIH) syndrome: A look at the per-
formance, tenure, and communication patterns of 50 R&D project groups’. R & D Management, 12,
7–19.
Katz, R. and Tushman, M. L. (1981). ‘An investigation into the managerial role and career paths of
gate keepers and project supervisors in a major R & D facility’. R & D Management, 11, 103–10.
Kirzner, I. M. (1973). Competition and Entrepreneurship. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Klueter, T. and Monteiro, F. (2014). ‘Building the Virtual Lab: Global Licensing at Merck’. Insead: Case
Number 07/2014-5692
Kranenburg, H., Hagedoorn, J. and Lorenz-Orlean, S. (2014). ‘Distance costs and the degree of inter-
partner involvement in international relational-based technology alliances’. Global Strategy Journal, 4,
280–91.
Laursen, K. and Salter, A. (2006). ‘Open for innovation: The role of openness in explaining innovation
performance among UK manufacturing ﬁrms’. Strategic Management Journal, 27, 131–50.
Leiponen, A. and Helfat, C. (2009). ‘Innovation objectives, knowledge sources, and the beneﬁts of
breadth’. Strategic Management Journal, 31, 224–36.
Levinthal, D. and March, J. (1981). ‘A model of adaptive organizational search’. Journal of Economic Behav-
ior and Organization, 2, 307–33.
Levinthal, D. and Wu, B. (2010). ‘Opportunity costs and non-scale free capabilities: Proﬁt maximization,
corporate scope, and proﬁt margins’. Strategic Management Journal, 31, 780–801.
Madsen, P. M. and Desai, V. (2010). ‘Failing to learn? The effects of failure and success on organiza-
tional learning in the global orbital launch vehicle industry’. Academy of Management Journal, 53, 451–
76.
March, J. and Simon, H. (1958). Organizations. New York: Wiley.
Meyer, K. E., Mudambi, R. and Narula, R. (2011). ‘Multinational enterprises and local contexts: The
opportunities and challenges of multiple embeddedness’. Journal of Management Studies, 48, 235–52.
Monteiro, F., Mol, M. and Birkinshaw, J. (in press). ‘Ready to be open? Explaining the ﬁrm level bar-
riers to beneﬁting from openness to external knowledge’. Long Range Planning, in press.
508
T. Klueter and L. F. Monteiro
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

Monteiro, L., Arvidsson, N. and Birkinshaw, J. (2008). ‘Knowledge ﬂows within multinational corpora-
tions: Explaining subsidiary isolation and its performance implications’. Organization Science, 19, 90–
107.
Monteiro, L. F. (2015). ‘Selective attention and the initiation of the global knowledge-sourcing process in
multinational corporations’. Journal of International Business Studies, 46, 505–27.
Monteiro, L. F. and Birkinshaw, J. (2017). ‘The external knowledge sourcing process in multinational
corporations’. Strategic Management Journal, 38, 342–62.
Mudambi, R. (2011). ‘Hierarchy, coordination, and innovation in the multinational enterprise’. Global
Strategy Journal, 1, 317–23.
Mudambi, R. and Swift, T. (2009). ‘Professional guilds, tension and knowledge management’. Research
Policy, 38, 736–45.
Mudambi, R. and Swift, T. (2014). ‘Knowing when to leap: Transitioning between exploitative and
explorative R&D’. Strategic Management Journal, 35, 126–45.
Nobel, R. and Birkinshaw, J. (1998). ‘Innovation in multinational corporations: Control and communica-
tion patterns in international R & D operations’. Strategic Management Journal, 19, 479–96.
Nohria, N. and Gulati, R. (1996). ‘Is slack good or bad for innovation?’. Academy of Management Journal,
39, 1245–64.
Obstfeld, D. (2005). ‘Social networks, the Tertius lungens and orientation involvement in innovation’.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 50, 100–30.
Patel, P. and Vega, M. (1999). ‘Patterns of internationalization of corporate technology: Location vs.
home country advantages’. Research Policy, 28, 145–55.
Phene, A., Fladmoe-Lindquist, K. and Marsh, L. (2006). ‘Breakthrough innovations in the U.S. biotech-
nology industry: The effects of technological space and geographic origin’. Strategic Management Jour-
nal, 27, 369–88.
Pisano, G. P. (1990). ‘The R&D boundaries of the ﬁrm: An empirical analysis’. Administrative Science Quar-
terly, 35, 153–76.
Pitelis, C. (2007). ‘A behavioral resource-based view of the ﬁrm: The synergy of Cyert and March (1963)
and Penrose (1959)’. Organization Science, 18, 478–90.
Raisch, S., Birkinshaw, J., Probst, G. and Tushman, M. L. (2009). ‘Organizational ambidexterity: Bal-
ancing exploitation and exploration for sustained performance’. Organization Science, 20, 685–95.
Rosenkopf, L. and Nerkar, A. (2001). ‘Beyond local search: Boundary-spanning, exploration, and impact
in the optical disk industry’. Strategic Management Journal, 22, 287–306.
Rothaermel, F. T. and Alexandre, M. T. (2009). ‘Ambidexterity in technology sourcing: The moderating
role of absorptive capacity’. Organization Science, 20, 759–80.
Santos, F. M. and Eisenhardt, K. M. (2005). ‘Organizational boundaries and theories of organization’.
Organization Science, 16, 491–508.
Saxenian, A. (2007). The New Argonauts: Regional Advantage in a Global Economy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Schotter, A. and Beamish, P. W. (2011). ‘Performance effects of MNC headquarters–subsidiary conﬂict
and the role of boundary spanners: The case of headquarter initiative rejection’. Journal of Interna-
tional Management, 17, 243–59.
Schotter, A., Mudambi, R., Doz, Y. and Gaur, A. (2017). ‘Boundary spanning in global organizations’.
Journal of Management Studies, 54, 403–21.
Sidhu, J. S., Volberda, H. W. and Commandeur, H. R. (2004). ‘Exploring exploration orientation and
its determinants: Some empirical evidence’. Journal of Management Studies, 41, 913–32.
Simsek, Z., Veiga, J. F. and Lubatkin, M. H. (2007). ‘The impact of managerial environmental percep-
tions on corporate entrepreneurship: Towards understanding discretionary slack’s pivotal role’. Jour-
nal of Management Studies, 44, 1398–424.
Singh, J. (1986). ‘Performance, slack, and risk taking in organizational decision making’. Academy of Man-
agement Journal, 29, 562–85.
Storper, M. and Venables, A. J. (2004). ‘Buzz: face-to-face contact and the urban economy’. Journal of
Economic Geography, 4, 351–70.
Tallman, S. and Chacar, A. S. (2011). ‘Knowledge accumulation and dissemination in MNEs: a
practice-based framework’. Journal of Management Studies, 48, 278–304.
Teece, D. J. (1996). ‘Firm organization, industrial structure, and technological innovation’. Journal of Eco-
nomic Behavior and Organization, 31, 193–224.
Thompson, J. D. (1967). Organizations in Action: Social Science Bases of Administrative Theory. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
509
Performance Feedback and Boundary Spanning in MNCs
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

Tippman, E., Scott, P. and Parker, A. (2017). ‘Boundary capabilities in MNCs: Knowledge transforma-
tion for creative solution development’. Journal of Management Studies, 54, 455–82.
Tushman, M. and Katz, R. (1980). ‘External communication and project performance: An investigation
into the role of gatekeepers’. Management Science, 26, 1071–85.
Tushman, M. L. (1977). ‘Special boundary roles in the innovation process’. Administrative Science Quarterly,
22, 587–605.
Tushman, M. L. and Scanlan, T. J. (1981). ‘Boundary spanning individuals: Their role in information
transfer and their antecedents’. Academy of Management Journal, 24, 289–305.
Veugelers, R. (1997). ‘Internal R & D expenditures and external technology sourcing’. Research Policy, 26,
303–15.
Von Zedtwitz, M. and Gassmann, O. (2002). ‘Market versus technology drive in R&D internationaliza-
tion: Four different patterns of managing research and development’. Research Policy, 31, 569–88.
Winter, S. G. (2003). ‘Understanding dynamic capabilities’. Strategic Management Journal, 24, 991–5.
Zollo, M. and Winter, S. G. (2002). ‘Deliberate learning and the evolution of dynamic capabilities’. Orga-
nization Science, 13, 339–51.
510
T. Klueter and L. F. Monteiro
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies
