Ethnic and Racial Studies
ISSN: 0141-9870 (Print) 1466-4356 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rers20
Integration and intersectionality: boundaries
and belonging “from above” and “from below”.
Introduction to the special issue
Sarah Scuzzarello & Laura Moroşanu
To cite this article: Sarah Scuzzarello & Laura Moroşanu (2023) Integration and
intersectionality: boundaries and belonging “from above” and “from below”.
Introduction to the special issue, Ethnic and Racial Studies, 46:14, 2991-3013, DOI:
10.1080/01419870.2023.2182649
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/01419870.2023.2182649
Published online: 10 Mar 2023.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 10759
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 29 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rers20

INTRODUCTION
Integration and intersectionality: boundaries and
belonging “from above” and “from below”.
Introduction to the special issue
Sarah Scuzzarello
a and Laura Moroşanu
b
aDepartment of Geography and SCMR, University of Sussex, Brighton, UK; bDepartment of
Sociology and Criminology, University of Sussex, Brighton, UK
ABSTRACT
This
introduction
bridges
the
often-separated
bodies
of
research
on
institutional boundary work in the policy ﬁeld of “integration” and on
migrant minorities’ responses to these boundaries. We engage with the
contributions to this Special Issue and demonstrate the relevance of an
intersectional analysis in studies on state “integration” policies and the
boundaries they draw between communities and on migrant minorities’
strategies to navigate and respond to them. Through engaging with issues of
“integration”, boundary-making, and intersectionality, we show how the
Special Issue contributes to debates on “integration” and boundary work by
presenting analyses of which subjectivities are accepted in “integration”
policies’ reproduction of an (imagined) national community and how
conditions of national membership do not apply equally to all individuals of
migrant origins, nor to all social spaces. We advocate for research that is
attentive
to
the
relevant
socio-political
context,
and
where
possible,
responsive to self-identiﬁed needs of the aﬀected communities.
ARTICLE HISTORY Received 12 January 2023; Accepted 9 February 2023
KEYWORDS Intersectionality; integration; boundary work; belonging; migrant categories; Europe
Introduction
The last 20 years or so, several politicians in Western Europe and North
America have called for the increased incorporation of migrant groups into
the “majority” society. Stemming from a political dissatisfaction with multicul-
turalism (however deﬁned), leading public ﬁgures, such as the former German
Chancellor
Angela
Merkel, have
declared multiculturalism
“dead”
or
somehow malfunctioning and therefore called for increased eﬀorts on the
part of minorities to embrace “shared common values and behaviours –
such as respect for the rule of law, democracy, equality and tolerance”
© 2023 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
CONTACT Sarah Scuzzarello
s.scuzzarello@sussex.ac.uk
ETHNIC AND RACIAL STUDIES
2023, VOL. 46, NO. 14, 2991–3013
https://doi.org/10.1080/01419870.2023.2182649

(Casey 2016, 8). Politicians and policymakers are now calling on some com-
munities to move away from alleged self-segregation and encourage their
“integration” in order to, in the words of the Review into Integration commis-
sioned by the British government in 2015, “[reduce] anxiety and prejudice,
but also [enable] people to get on better in employment and social mobility”
(Casey 2016, 8). Similar justiﬁcations for increased “integration” have been
put forward in, among others, Finland, Germany, and the Netherlands, as
the papers in this collection illustrate. They have the eﬀect of producing a
“politics of belonging” (Yuval-Davis 2011) that pitches migrants from
speciﬁc communities against an allegedly homogenous “majority” society,
drawing social, legal and symbolic boundaries between groups living in the
same nation-state. “Integration” policies and discourses do not aﬀect all
migrant communities equally, however. Research has demonstrated that
speciﬁc groups, largely Muslims, and black and brown individuals, are rep-
resented as not belonging to Western societies and therefore have increas-
ingly become the targets of “integration” (e.g. Kofman 2023; Korteweg
2017). At the same time, individuals belonging to these groups are not uni-
formly perceived by the state. High-skilled migrants and international stu-
dents, for example, have typically enjoyed more favourable treatment,
compared to lower-skilled workers, being seen as qualifying for belonging,
although this does not guarantee protection from everyday prejudice and
racism as demonstrated by Yurdakul and Altay (2022) and Hao and Leung
(2023) in this issue.
Reﬂecting individuals’ complex statuses, the articles in this Special Issue
engage with critical debates on migrant “integration” (e.g. Dahinden 2016;
Grzymala-Kazlowska and Phillimore 2018; Favell 2019) by bringing together
discussions around boundary-drawing “from above” and “from below”. The
Special Issue makes two speciﬁc contributions to this body of research.
First, the most critical perspectives on migrant “integration” and categoriz-
ation focus on state discourses and policies, to the detriment of understand-
ing the lived experiences of those who bear the material and symbolic
implications of this boundary work from above. Migrants’ responses and
strategies to cope with various formal and informal barriers to participation
in society have been the subject of a largely separate literature, which exam-
ines integration in various domains of activity, places, and migration circum-
stances (e.g. Grzymala-Kazlowska and Phillimore 2018), and increasingly, in
relation with transnational practices (Erdal 2020). This Special Issue aims to
address this problem and pay equal heed to how those at the receiving
end engage with dominant categories and integration narratives and how
they navigate the speciﬁc opportunities and constraints these create in every-
day contexts, locally or transnationally.
The second contribution of this collection involves consistently applying
an intersectional lens to the analysis of both (1) state “integration” policies
2992
S. SCUZZARELLO AND L. MOROŞANU

and the boundaries they draw between communities and (2) migrant and
racialized minorities’ strategies to navigate and respond to them. Much
research that studies how groups of migrant origins are constructed and
aﬀected by “integration” policies does not emphasize suﬃciently the diﬀer-
ential impacts of these policies on individuals depending on their intersec-
tional social locations. In other words, they tend to prioritize one
dimension in their analysis of the implications of integration policies on
groups, be it gender (e.g. Ballarino and Panichella 2018), generation (e.g.
Chimienti et al. 2019), or national origin (e.g. Hammond 2013), without rigor-
ously accounting for the rich heterogeneity that characterizes any such
group. Drawing on intersectionality-oriented migration research (e.g. Korte-
weg and Triadaﬁlopoulos 2013; Bastia 2014; Bonjour and Duyvendak 2018;
Fischer, Achermann, and Dahinden 2020), we argue that an intersectional
lens gives researchers the opportunity to better understand which subjectiv-
ities are accepted in integration policies’ reproduction of an (imagined)
national community and how conditions of national membership do not
apply equally to all individuals of migrant origins, nor to all social spaces.
The Special Issue’s articles illustrate how social and legal boundaries (re)pro-
duced “from above” in migration and “integration” policies and discourses
create notions of belonging that diﬀer in their relative inclusiveness depend-
ing on intersectional constructions of people’s subjectivity along the lines of
gender, class, religion, ethnicity, and related categories. Furthermore, an
intersectional lens enables research presented in this collection to highlight
the diﬀerential approaches adopted by migrant and racialized minority
groups to engage with and navigate “from below” the social boundaries
reproduced by state policies and discourses. To challenge homogenizing
accounts of minority groups, the articles detail individuals’ diﬀerential
resources to negotiate boundaries between majority and minority residents
depending on their intersectional social locations. In sum, this Special Issue
analyses: ﬁrst, how state “integration” policies and discourses “from above”
create and maintain boundaries between a “majority society” and migrants
and racialized minorities; and second, how migrants and minorities navigate
and strategize around these boundaries in their everyday encounters, con-
testing, reproducing and/or generating new boundaries “from below”.
This introductory article aims to bridge the often-separated bodies of
research on institutional boundary work in the policy ﬁeld of “integration”,
and on migrant minorities’ responses to these boundaries. In the following
sections, we position the Special Issue in broader debates around migrant
“integration” and boundary work with reference to the contributions
included in this volume. We ﬁrst focus on the boundary work done in
migration policies that creates ﬁctitious categories of belonging to the recipi-
ent society and thus establishes institutional narratives about who can be eli-
gible for belonging and who can be legitimately excluded. We then clarify
ETHNIC AND RACIAL STUDIES
2993

how this boundary work, which creates categories of more and less desirable
migrants, has implications for migrants’ expected “integration” by identifying
who the legitimate target of “integration” is. We argue that an intersectional
lens is needed to fully understand these categories’ implications for right allo-
cation and social desirability. While institutional boundary work justiﬁes nar-
ratives and practices delineating a community and reifying its morality,
migrants and racialized minorities who are cast as undesirable to that com-
munity are not passive objects of boundary work. Thus, in the latter part of
the article, we present how migrants navigate the speciﬁc opportunities
and constraints dominant migrant categories and integration narratives
create in everyday contexts, locally or transnationally. Focusing on both indi-
vidual-level factors and on the “context of reception” (Portes and Rumbaut
2006) in the society of settlement, we illustrate how state narratives and leg-
islative and administrative acts that foster and legitimize migrant categories
(i.e. state’s boundary work) aﬀect individuals’ responses in diﬀerent ways,
depending on their intersectional social locations. Speciﬁcally, we highlight
how individuals, who are ascribed belonging to a group because of insti-
tutional boundary work, are unequally able to navigate, strategize, and poss-
ibly contest and renegotiate these boundaries, and reveal how state
boundary work may generate boundary work “from below”.
“Integration” policies as boundary work “from above”
In the past decades, Western European societies have witnessed demo-
graphic changes brought about by immigration.1 As of 2021, 5.3 per cent
of the EU population was born outside the Union (Eurostat 2022) and most
EU countries have both new and long-standing communities of migrant
origins, well into the third generation. This demographic reality has elicited
policy responses that often go under the banner of “integration” and range
from pragmatic measures to facilitate migrants’ participation in the settle-
ment society to programmes stressing the need for migrants to assimilate
into what is assumed to be a single majority culture (Phillimore 2012). The
latter approaches have been objects to well-deserved criticism. Authors
such as Favell (2019), Schinkel (2017), and Dahinden (2016), among others,
have questioned the analytical value of concepts such as “immigrant inte-
gration”, reminding us that diﬀerences are constitutive of the social fabric
of societies. Favell (2019, 2) puts this well, as a question of “integration of
whom into what?”, thereby unpicking a core assumption of “integration” per-
spectives, i.e. that there is an existing entity (a society, bounded by a nation-
state) into which migrant and minority groups integrate.
The articles in this collection largely sympathize with these critiques and
challenge the assumed existence of a singular, homogeneous “majority” of
which “alien” communities are expected to become part. Notwithstanding
2994
S. SCUZZARELLO AND L. MOROŞANU

the important normative critiques mentioned above, “integration” policies
continue to play a central role in deﬁning how migrants and their descen-
dants settle and adapt to the new country of residence. Given the persistence
of this approach in the social world, but in line with critical research on “inte-
gration”, the articles in this Special Issue take “integration” discourses and
policies as units of analysis and move away from the focus of integration out-
comes. In diﬀerent ways, the contributions instead examine how these
discourses and policies are expressions of boundary-making and boundary-
deﬁning processes which outline pathways to membership in speciﬁc
communities and reﬂect diﬀerent political projects of belonging (see Yuval-
Davis 2011). In this sense, “integration” policies are seen as forms of
“organised politics”, i.e. public rhetoric, legislative, and administrative acts
that politicians and state oﬃcials employ to foster and legitimize social categ-
orization (Jenkins 1994). By this, we mean that public narratives, policies, and
laws on “integration” carry speciﬁc deﬁnitions of the problem of “integration”
and of its constituency group. They frame a speciﬁc representation of the
relationship between the state and minorities that is authoritative and seen
as legitimate in the public domain because it comes from institutions. Orga-
nized politics are therefore part of a spectrum of formal sites and processes
where the boundaries of a political community are deﬁned “from above”:
where it begins and ends, who populates it, which of their concerns are to
be included and which are to be excluded. They are tangible reﬂections of
speciﬁc understandings of how a society works or should work, how citizens
and the state relate to each other, and what is valued in a society (Scuzzarello
2010). As such, state actors engaging in public rhetoric and policy- and law-
making, take part in boundary work, i.e. the process of creating hegemonic
narratives that diﬀerentiate a collective from others by drawing on an ima-
gined sense of shared belonging within their subgroup, while at the same
time silencing intra-group diﬀerences (Jenkins 1996; see also Lamont 2000).
Boundary work “from above” and migrant categories
Boundary work “from above” is a key organizing mechanism in “constructing,
maintaining and controlling social and political order” (Yuval-Davis, Wemyss,
and Cassidy 2019, 5). Through migration policies, states can marginalize
migrants and racialized minorities by producing categories which deﬁne
the boundaries between those who belong to the nation and those who
do not: citizens and aliens; more or less “deserving” migrants. As shown by
recent research in migration studies (e.g. Robertson 2019; Crawley and Skle-
paris 2018; Collyer and de Haas 2012), policies and public narratives about
migration more generally produce rigid social categories that construct
and constitute migrant groups as low/high skilled, voluntary/involuntary,
documented/undocumented, outsiders/insiders, consistently ignoring that
ETHNIC AND RACIAL STUDIES
2995

mobile individuals move into and out of categories over time. Categories
reinforce narratives positioning some migrants as highly desirable and less
problematic to “integrate” compared to others and create a hierarchy of
desirability and acceptability among migrants (McDowell 2009). Such charac-
terizations of desirable/undesirable diﬀerences are based on static, a-histori-
cal, and homogenous understandings of culture and cultural diﬀerences and
on assumptions that all members of a cultural group are equally committed
to that culture. They silence intra-group contestations and negotiations by
women, young, and others who do not conform to dominant and publicly
accepted notions of a group’s identity and culture (Anthias 2013).
Categories are also important in terms of the allocation of rights and
material resources and ultimately, shape migrants’ and minorities’ opportu-
nities and life chances in the society of residence because they create hierar-
chies of belonging that justify the marginalization of certain groups (see e.g.
Scuzzarello and Carlson 2019; Korteweg 2017; Kofman, Saharso, and Vacchelli
2015; Korteweg and Triadaﬁlopoulos 2013). Depending on how migrant
groups are deﬁned, they will be endowed with diﬀerent rights and degrees
of membership (Moret, Andrikopoulos, and Dahinden 2021) and some will
be seen as legitimate targets of speciﬁc “integration” policies. Thus, individ-
uals entering a country on a skilled visa often face diﬀerent, if any, “inte-
gration” requirements as the category of “skilled migrant” is taken to
indicate one’s alleged ability to become part of the recipient society. In the
UK, because of the English language and employment requirements for
obtaining a visa, skilled migrants have already “achieved” aspects of inte-
gration, deﬁned by the 2018 Integrated Communities Strategy Green Paper
as the ability to “learn to speak and understand our language and values
and seek opportunities to mix and become part of our communities” (HM
Government 2018, 11). In the Netherlands, we see a similar pattern. Up
until January 2022, non-EU high-skilled migrants to the Netherlands were
exempt from civic integration and language exams (inburgeringsexamen)
and have no “integration duties”. Migrants falling under other categories,
such as marriage migrants, are subject to ﬁnes if they fail to complete the
integration exams within three years. In other national contexts, marriage
migrants (predominantly female) quickly become subjects of state’s scrutiny
as the marriage’s legitimacy and quality are questioned upon entry and
migrants’ reproductive labour is monitored, as discussed in this Issue by
Kofman’s analysis of family migration policies (2023). As potential bearers
of children who might not necessarily be given the “proper” national
upbringing (Block 2021), migrant spouses become the target of “integration”
policies aiming at fostering “good” and “appropriate” motherhood and break-
ing up presumed segregation (Haapajärvi 2022). In the Finnish context, the
example of the Kaampila neighbourhood house presented by Haapajärvi’s
article in this Issue (2022) is a case in point. The “integration” policy of
2996
S. SCUZZARELLO AND L. MOROŞANU

which the neighbourhood houses are part, target out-of-work, economically
deprived migrant women and construct these women as not “integrated”
because they are not in employment. To ameliorate this, houses such as
the one in Kaampila become sites where “integration” can be taught
through “belonging work” – practising speciﬁc (and uniform) ways of home-
making and mothering. These examples illustrate how migrant categories
indicate the relative potential of migrants’ belonging and need of “inte-
gration” depending on which intersectional social positionings are con-
sidered desirable (e.g. class and nationality). Those who fall outside
“desirable” migrant categories, such as out of employment migrant
women, are positioned at the margins of the recipient society and are evalu-
ated based on their potential to adopt liberal-democratic norms and practices
and, in most European contexts, participate in the labour market.
Intersectionality and migrant categories
The creation of rigid social categories derives from the diﬃculties that
migration and “integration” policies have with addressing the intersectional
constructs aﬀecting migrants’ and ethnic minorities’ opportunities to settle
and belong. Simply put, “intersectionality” is a theoretical and analytic
approach with an explicit feminist and anti-racist epistemology that sees sub-
jectivities and social hierarchies to be constructed at the intersection of mul-
tiple, interconnected diﬀerences, including gender, class, race, ethnicity, and
religion (Crenshaw 1991; Yuval-Davis 2006). It further highlights how the
interplay between intersectional social locations is aﬀected by the spatial
and temporal power geometries within which an individual is located
(Bastia et al. 2022). As an analytic lens, intersectionality allows us to
examine people’s articulation of subjectivity in relation to the way that
state institutions translate and deﬁne that subjectivity in a speciﬁc ﬁeld of
policymaking (Korteweg and Triadaﬁlopoulos 2013). Further, it enables
researchers to identify hierarchies constructed in social and institutional prac-
tices and to reveal the role that state policy norms, discourses, and practices
play in perpetuating or counteracting inequalities, as argued by Cleton and
Meier in their contribution to this Special Issue on the analytical relevance
of intersectionality in migration governance research (2023). An intersec-
tional analysis highlights how state and other institutional actors engage in
boundary work that cannot be analyzed as the production of simple dichoto-
mies. Migrants’ acceptability, desirability, and potential belonging to the reci-
pient society are constructed at the intersections of gender, race, class,
perceived cultural, and religious proximity, alongside being informed by neo-
liberal market logics. For instance, high-skilled migrants, while often not for-
mally subjects of “integration” requirements, can in some social spaces still
face prejudice and discrimination that aﬀect negatively their pursuits to
ETHNIC AND RACIAL STUDIES
2997

belong to the new country and their ambitions for a “good life” (Waldinger
2017). As illustrated by Yurdakul and Altay (2022), middle- and upper-
middle-class mothers of Turkish background and their children encounter
everyday stigma and discrimination in Germany, despite their human and
ﬁnancial capital. Their ethnicity and faith position them as “Turks” and
“Muslim women” and in the lower ranks of German society.
State discourses and migrant categories, as highlighted by Kofman
(2023) and Cleton and Meier (2023), often single out particular migrants
and racialized minorities as following “backwards” and patriarchal under-
standings of gender roles and family relations, illustrating the complex
intersections of gender, race, and religion. Gender relations and sexuality
are crucial for deﬁning the boundaries between national societies and
migrants and their descendants because women, who parent the next gen-
eration, are seen as key to the successful integration of entire communities
(Korteweg and Triadaﬁlopoulos 2013; Korteweg 2017). In this context, “inte-
gration”
policies
disproportionately
depict
some
religious
groups
–
especially Muslims – as having gender relations that are problematic in
liberal societies, whilst constructing Westerners as democratic and feminist
(see e.g. Fischer and Dahinden 2017; Kofman, Saharso, and Vacchelli 2015).
Drawing on stereotypical assumptions about Islamic gender identities as
ﬁxed and at odds with Western values, politicians and policymakers in
Europe and North America depict Muslim women and their daughters as
potential victims of gendered oppressions by the hands of their male rela-
tives. “Integration” policies and narratives therefore aim to pull them out of
their alleged social isolation and address their “inability” to become part of
the wider community (see e.g. Korteweg and Triadaﬁlopoulos 2013). Arab
or Muslim men instead, as discussed in Huizinga’s article (2022), are stig-
matized as dangerous Others, pitched against Western society, and
objects of “integration” standards (i.e. learning the language and entering
employment) that they cannot live up to because of poor-quality language
courses and structural marginalization. Similarly, “integration” policies
devised to “save” migrant women, fail to embed gender inequalities
against women in a wider context of ethnic discrimination, inequality,
and segregation, and miss on the temporal and spatial variability of
inequality in combination with speciﬁc intra-group relations and practices
(Cederberg 2013). Furthermore, these policies rely on essentialist under-
standings of culture and disregard the multiple ways in which people of
migrant heritage negotiate and reframe their collective identity. Insti-
tutions’ lack of understanding of intersectional dynamics and inequalities
metaphorically puts individuals of migrant origins in racialized and gen-
dered straightjackets that position them as outsiders expected to settle
and “integrate”. As poignantly argued by Korteweg (2017), this misses,
ﬁrst, that not all mobile people are settling, and many are in fact
2998
S. SCUZZARELLO AND L. MOROŞANU

moving through. Second, it disregards intra-group diﬀerences along the
lines of generation, class, or gender (among others) in modalities and
opportunities to engage with a hegemonic group while also concealing
the similarities between members of migrant communities and those of
a hegemonic group. This illustrates the importance of an intersectional
lens because “these homogenizations on the immigrant side of the bound-
ary drawn by integration discourses prevent the analysis of diﬀerences
within the groups as well as the similarities between groups thus
created” (Korteweg 2017, 434).
To conclude, existing analyses of state discourses and policies oﬀer
useful insight into boundary work “from above” and their material and
symbolic implications. Furthermore, an intersectional analysis of migration
and “integration” policies throws into stark relief how boundary drawing
“from above” diﬀerentially impacts individuals depending on their intersec-
tional social positions that shape and organize resource distribution, power
relations, and norms. Therefore this state-led process arguably impacts on
the life chances of migrants and racialized individuals. What is often side-
lined from discussion, however, is the voices of those who bear the weight
of boundary work “from above” (but see Fischer 2020). In the following, we
discuss how people of migrant heritage navigate and strategize around
boundaries drawn “from above”, emphasizing their diﬀerential ability to
do so depending on their intersecting social locations.
Individual responses and boundary work “from below’
We argue that the analysis of migrants’ and minorities’ perspectives and strat-
egies in response to dominant discourses and governmental policies is as
important as the study of state’s boundary work, and they cannot be fully
understood in isolation from each other. Examining individuals’ responses,
and how these are compounded by their intersectional social locations,
complements the view “from above” by showing how existing discourses
and categories matter “on the ground” (Cranston 2017) but also how new cat-
egories and hierarchies emerge “from below”. The contributions to the
Special Issue thus convincingly show how individuals are not simply recipi-
ents but also producers of categorization and protagonists of boundary
work. Their reactions to “integration” directives and pressures, the simplistic
and stigmatizing representations these often perpetuate, and the marginali-
zation or rejection they entrench may lead to the reinforcement of existing
discourses, as well as to new forms of categorization and exclusion “from
below”. Following Lamont and Mizrachi (2012), we thus see the analysis of
migrants’ and minorities’ everyday responses and practices as indispensable
for fully understanding how group boundaries are challenged, maintained,
drawn or redrawn.
ETHNIC AND RACIAL STUDIES
2999

Factors shaping migrants’ and minorities’ responses
Migrants’ and minorities’ responses to integration policies, discourses and
categorization vary widely, depending on a series of factors. Without
aiming to be exhaustive, the articles in this Special Issue point to two main
aspects that combine to produce diﬀerent responses at the micro-level:
(1) individuals’ legal and social locations, which problematizes approaches
that foreground one speciﬁc characteristic, favouring an intersectional lens
and (2) the wider horizon of incorporation, which includes what is tradition-
ally known as the “context of reception” (Portes and Rumbaut 2006) but
extends beyond this locally and transnationally, to encompass the complex
social and material worlds individuals of migrant background inhabit,
which orient their everyday lives, choices, and aspirations in signiﬁcant ways.
To start with individual-level factors, the previous sections have already
highlighted how individuals of migrant background are diﬀerently situated
in terms of gender, sexuality, generation, socio-economic or legal status,
amongst others. The advent of “super-diversity” approaches (Vertovec
2007) has made it increasingly diﬃcult to ignore the variety of experiences,
statuses, and fractures these factors generate within migrant or minority
populations. Despite often treating and stigmatizing them collectively as
members of particular ethnic or religious “groups”, dominant discourses
and policies clearly aﬀect individuals in vastly diﬀerent ways. They are also
countered with diﬀerent tools and resources, some of them mobilized to
draw distinctions between migrants themselves and other in-group or min-
ority members of diﬀerent gender, generation, and/or religious aﬃliation.
An intersectional approach is therefore crucial not only for examining top-
down “integration” perspectives but also their everyday implications and
bottom-up responses to them.
The empirical literature oﬀers excellent examples of these complex entan-
glements and processes “from below”, which are best understood through an
intersectional approach. Women of migrant background in professional occu-
pations, for instance, are known to mobilize diﬀerent assets to ﬁght discrimi-
nation and claim inclusion, compared to their counterparts with precarious
legal and socio-economic status. This is evident in the strategies they
develop for social advancement, the identities they express, the spaces
they inhabit, or the leisure activities they pursue. As Yurdakul and Altay
(2022) discuss in the case of Germany, high-skilled women of Turkish back-
ground move into professional circles, express “international” outlooks, and
invest in private education to protect their children from discrimination
and help them to build successful careers. By contrast, the literature on undo-
cumented and socio-economically precarious migrants and refugees draws
attention to the limited spaces and options these have to make themselves
at home. Focusing on Latina migrants in Los Angeles, Hondagneu-Sotelo
3000
S. SCUZZARELLO AND L. MOROŞANU

(2017) highlights how gender intersects with legal and economic precarious-
ness to restrict women’s leisure options and orient them towards community
gardens, some of the few places where they can ﬁnd respite from their every-
day predicaments, surrounding themselves with familiar plants, people, and
activities that help (re)create a sense of “home”. In the Dutch context, Huizin-
ga’s article in this Issue (2022) reveals refugees’ struggles to claim inclusion,
and the role of speciﬁc public sites and spaces, which allow men this time
to meet fellow migrants and revive familiar gendered socialization practices
but also interact with native peers. These sites include community hubs, such
as migrant enterprises and religious organizations, as well as central town
square landmarks, which enable refugees to signal their presence and
develop a wider range of connections. Faced with negative representations
as “threatening Others”, some, however, avoid spaces where other migrants
congregate in their eﬀorts to minimize their visibility and prevent discrimina-
tory experiences, blend in, and/or diﬀuse forms of social control coming from
in-group members (see Saharso et al. 2023). Adopting an intersectional lens
in examining micro-level responses to state discourses and categorization is
thus essential to prevent the simplistic and homogenizing representations of
migrant and minority groups that prevail in boundary-making and inte-
gration approaches (Fischer, Achermann, and Dahinden 2020).
In addition to individuals’ characteristics, responses to dominant cat-
egories and integration discourses vary depending on one’s horizon of incor-
poration. The “context of reception” in the society of settlement, crucially
deﬁned, according to Portes and Rumbaut (2006), by government policies,
institutional conditions, and societal reception, aﬀects migrants unequally,
prompting diﬀerent reactions. Confronted with harsh policies and the
threat of deportation, undocumented migrants, for example, have been
forced to develop unique strategies to navigate urban spaces, social relation-
ships, labour and housing markets in ways that minimize encounters with
authorities and safeguards their residence abroad (Menjívar and Abrego
2012; Bloch and McKay 2016). At the opposite end, favourable policies,
such as post-study visas for international students, allow those who meet
their criteria to extend their stay and access the job market, as Hao and
Leung (2023) show in their research on Chinese graduates in the Netherlands.
The context of reception, however, does not operate in isolation from the
context of departure. How migrants strategize and balance their options
stretches geographically, as scholars of transnationalism have long empha-
sized. A telling example, documented in this Special Issue, is favourable atti-
tudes, laws, and policies in sphere of gender and sexuality, which may
constitute a powerful incentive for LGBTQ + migrants to make steps to “inte-
grate” abroad, despite concomitant diﬃculties to access employment, if they
anticipate pressures, restrictions, and homophobic treatment on return to
their homeland (Hao and Leung 2023). For other migrants, return may
ETHNIC AND RACIAL STUDIES
3001

remain a back-up option to valorize skills and qualiﬁcations obtained abroad,
if their career plans fail to materialize there (Lulle, Moroşanu, and King 2022),
and some do make this step and take newly acquired skills “back
home” (Hagan and Wassink 2016), reaﬃrming the importance of placing
responses to “integration” discourses and challenges in a transnational
perspective.
Furthermore, whilst migrants’ lives are importantly shaped by nation-wide
laws, policies, and discourses, they unfold in particular localities, with their
speciﬁc institutional, social, and material environment (Boccagni and Hon-
dagneu-Sotelo 2021). Migrants and their families thus also confront
diﬀerent integration challenges or opportunities depending on their
speciﬁc place of residence and the people that inhabit them. In recent
years, research has looked optimistically towards those who settle in super-
diverse areas and engage in more ﬂuid and temporary mobilities, questioning
the relevance of traditional “integration” frameworks (Grzymala-Kazlowska
and Phillimore 2018). However, although super-diversity is widespread and
well documented (Grzymala-Kazlowska and Phillimore 2018; Vertovec 2007;
Wessendorf 2014), not all migrants live in super-diverse places. In the
Dutch context, Huizinga’s analysis (2022) shows how Syrian male refugees
confront a considerably more homogeneous and hostile environment in
Northern Netherlands, which increases their visibility and limits their sense
of inclusion. Furthermore, even those who settle in super-diverse places are
not entirely spared the challenges and pressures of “integration”. Whilst
their cities and neighbourhoods may bring signiﬁcant comfort and protec-
tions, “exposure [to the mainstream], even its intrusion’ remain inevitable
(Alba and Duyvendak 2019, 111). As Alba and Duyvendak (2019, 111)
remind us, dominant values and ways of life permeate even the most
diverse places through key institutions such as schools, which may be very
mixed demographically and embrace diversity but remain strongly oriented
by the history, language, and culture of the majority group. The sense of
ease experienced in super-diverse neighbourhoods may also cease when
one steps out and confronts public institutions, services, and spaces that
appear ethnically unmarked but often reﬂect the “needs and lifestyles of
the ethnocultural mainstream” (Boccagni and Hondagneu-Sotelo 2021, 22;
see also Haapajärvi 2022). Interactions in these contexts can therefore
trigger feelings of “diﬀerence”, exclusion, and at times inferiority amongst
migrants and their descendants. Whilst some learn to avoid these spaces
and seek recognition elsewhere, such as internationally-oriented circles
(Yurdakul and Altay 2022), others, driven by their ambitions for a “good
life” (Waldinger 2017) or home-making pursuits (Boccagni and Hondagneu-
Sotelo 2021), make steps to access them. This can involve diﬀerent strategies,
from “resignifying” these spaces with familiar objects, music, and social prac-
tices from one’s homeland to using them as “bridges” to the native
3002
S. SCUZZARELLO AND L. MOROŞANU

population (Huizinga 2022) and learning the skills, attitudes, and behaviours
typically “rewarded” there (Waldinger 2017).
Whilst the notion of “integration” has been rightly criticized from mul-
tiple perspectives (e.g. Dahinden 2016; Favell 2019), the discussion above
cautions against readily dismissing the power of “integration” forces and
discourses that circulate in receiving societies and aﬀect migrants and
their descendants, the related exclusion and stigmatization these often
experience from various majority-oriented spaces and resources, and the
strategies some develop to overcome the material and symbolic barriers
these pose and create a sense of “home”. The papers in this Special Issue
provide a strong reminder that “integration”, although ambiguous and pro-
blematic in numerous ways, is not an entirely obsolete concept. By empha-
sizing its spatial and symbolic coordinates, they echo recent developments
in this ﬁeld, which look beyond the traditional domains and objective indi-
cators of “integration” (e.g. the labour market or education) to highlight its
subjective and experiential dimensions (Boccagni and Hondagneu-Sotelo
2021). They also extend these by drawing attention to how aspects of iden-
tity often downplayed, such as class, gender, and sexuality, feature in
migrants’ struggles to gain acceptance and make themselves at home,
sometimes in combination but not necessarily in agreement. A telling
example is female and LGBTQ + migrants, whose experiences of greater
inclusion and equality from the viewpoint of gender and sexuality norms,
relative to home societies, tip the balance in favour of staying abroad,
despite labour market disadvantage, racialization, and potential downgrad-
ing in social status, as Hao and Leung (2023) aptly demonstrate here.
To summarize, migrants and minorities respond diﬀerently to integration
discourses and categorization “from above”, depending on both individual
and contextual factors. Their complex identities and lives that unfold in
speciﬁc places but often stretch transnationally require an intersectional
transnational approach, sensitive to multiple categories of diﬀerence in con-
junction with the peculiarities of the localities to which migrants are
connected.
Practical and discursive responses to categorization and visions of
integration
The actual responses migrants develop to embrace, contest, or modify
speciﬁc visions of integration and forms of categorization come in many
forms. Our Special Issue aims to oﬀer a rounded understanding of migrants’
and minorities’ reactions, by considering both direct engagement with domi-
nant categories and discourses, and more indirect responses, manifested in
people’s everyday strategies to pursue their aspirations and build digniﬁed
lives within the opportunities and constraints these create.
ETHNIC AND RACIAL STUDIES
3003

To start with the latter, existing studies have documented how migrants
and minorities develop a variety of practical ways to navigate exclusion,
and “make themselves at home” in a particular place, which can range
from pursuing ambitious careers and desired lifestyle to more modest
goals, such as developing a “sense of stability and predictability” (Boccagni
and Hondagneu-Sotelo 2021, 3). Some of these materialize in pragmatic strat-
egies to “assimilate”, such as changing one’s name to avoid stigmatization in
the labour market (Bursell 2012) or applying for citizenship to secure one’s
status and access certain privileges reserved for nationals (e.g. lower univer-
sity tuition fees, Godin and Sigona 2022). Other examples of practical strat-
egies can be seen in the case of migrants with precarious legal status, who
become versed in navigating urban environments or social relationships in
ways that avoid encounters with authorities or disclosure of their identity,
which could make them vulnerable to detention, deportation, and possible
separation from family (Menjívar and Abrego 2012; Bloch and McKay 2016).
Negative representations and hostile policies can also alter individuals’ every-
day itinerary and social practices, when certain spaces or activities increase
vulnerability to racism and stigmatization. This is particularly salient for
those who are visibly diﬀerent, as Huizinga’s (2022) research on Syrian refu-
gees reveals, reinforcing the need for an intersectional lens in understanding
practical responses to stigmatization and exclusion. Menjívar (2022, 1)
emphasizes precisely this point, noting that “legal status is simply life alter-
ing”, especially when it “intersects with other aspects of inequality, such as
race, and ‘racialized legal status’ impacts certain groups more than others,
thus amplifying inequalities across immigrant groups”.
Whilst pragmatic responses are common amongst migrants’ and min-
orities’ strategies to deal with state discourses and policies, individuals
often go beyond or combine them with more complex processes of asserting
their status and worth, home-making, and belonging. Seen from this perspec-
tive, naturalization does not simply mean more rights and access to material
resources; it might also be a strategy to (re)claim a sense of belonging to the
“dominant” group, as Godin and Sigona (2022) show in the case of EU
nationals in post-Brexit UK. Likewise, migrant parents’ investment in private
international education may help fend oﬀdiscrimination and boost their chil-
dren’s chances to “succeed” in a competitive labour market but also form part
of one’s strategies to signal their worth and internationally-oriented mindset
(Yurdakul and Altay 2022). Town squares or community gardens may oﬀer
important leisure and socialization spaces for undocumented migrants and
refugees, whose circumstances (be they material resources, legal status,
and gender norms) constrain their access elsewhere (Huizinga 2022; Hondag-
neu-Sotelo 2017). Yet, they are also transformed through migrants’ activities,
who meet fellow migrants there, play familiar music, grow and cook various
foods from “home”, becoming a marker of migrants’ presence, and their
3004
S. SCUZZARELLO AND L. MOROŞANU

continued eﬀorts to create a sense of home and belonging (Huizinga 2022;
Haapajärvi 2022; Hondagneu-Sotelo 2017). The wider literature also docu-
ments how some take further steps, speaking publicly against the injustices
they experience, and mobilizing to demand inclusiveness in the place they
call “home”. This is, for instance, the case with undocumented Latino youth
in the United States, more inclined to engage in public action, compared
to their parents’ generation, who often fear and avoid such exposure due
to the sanctions it might attract (Abrego 2011). Therefore, as Huizinga’s
research (2022) also shows, if some precarious migrants and refugees
adapt their day-to-day routines and itinerary to minimize encounters with
everyday racism and immigration authorities, others may target precisely
those places with high exposure in various ways, as part of their strategies
to signal their presence and belonging to the receiving society more gener-
ally. By analyzing such nuances and diverging approaches, our Special Issue
does not simply document migrants’ and minorities’ strategies to claim
inclusion but also draws attention to their considerable variation within
and across speciﬁc groups or categories deﬁned by ethnicity, age, gender,
legal, or socio-economic status, challenging the often homogenizing
representations that circulate in political and press discourse.
Alongside practical strategies, migrants and minorities resort to discursive
tools to respond to dominant discourses and forms of categorizations, which
may involve diﬀerent kinds of boundary work not only locally, towards
people “here”, but also transnationally, towards people “there”. Boundary
work “from above” may thus generate boundary work “from below”. When
confronted with negative appraisals and assimilationist pressures, some indi-
viduals reinforce existing boundaries, whereas others contest or redraw them
in their eﬀorts to redeem their status and assert their belonging, sometimes
with negative implications on other marginalized groups or categories (Mor-
oşanu and Fox 2013). Whereas boundary-making strategies “from below” are
often viewed as concerning minority-majority relations, the articles in this
Issue demonstrate that boundary work occurs in multiple directions, includ-
ing other minority populations. Minority members’ responses to stigma may
therefore involve “stigmatisation of others down and up the social hierarchy”
(Witte 2018), leading to the reinforcement or reconﬁguration, rather than dis-
mantling of symbolic boundaries (Moroşanu and Fox 2013). This collection
provides ample evidence of such tactics, and also goes further by theorizing
the “horizontal hostilities” (Huizinga 2022) which may result thereof and
adding an intersectional angle to them.
In the German context, for example, Yurdakul and Altay (2022) show how
middle- and upper-middle class mothers of Turkish origins mobilize cultural
and economic resources to assert broader identities and distance themselves
from stereotypical images of “Turks”. By deﬁning themselves as “inter-
national” in outlooks, they do not reject their Turkish background but draw
ETHNIC AND RACIAL STUDIES
3005

clear intra-group boundaries, strongly dissociating themselves from “unedu-
cated” and “unintegrated” Turks, seen to remain anchored in ethnic commu-
nities and traditional monocultural practices, implicitly classed as inferior.
Furthermore, they seek to fend oﬀdiscrimination by setting themselves
apart from non-Turkish migrants or refugees of “Middle Eastern” or Arab
origin. In doing so, they draw boundaries between “good Turks” and “bad
Arabs” in ways that illustrate the complex intersections of class, ethnicity,
and religion. In a similar vein, Huizinga’s paper (2022) highlights how
gender intersects with age and religion in Syrian male refugees’ attempts
to blame the negative portrayals they confront in the Netherlands on the
culture of “old religious men”. The intersection of gender, religion, and gen-
eration is also evident in Saharso et al.’s (2023) study in this Special Issue of
pre-marital sex attitudes among young Dutch of migrant origin. Challenging
homogenizing representations of migrant and minority groups, the authors
show how some young people from religious communities where premarital
sex is traditionally not allowed navigate norms around sexual behaviour in
ways that enable them to have love relationships while also respecting
their parents and faith, whereas others, who are not strongly embedded in
their ethnic communities, defy the virginity imperative. Hao and Leung
(2023) further demonstrate how boundary work can stretch transnationally,
when Chinese graduates in the Netherlands align themselves with the
native Dutch, seen to share more progressive attitudes towards gender and
sexuality, compared to the patriarchal and heterosexual norms prevailing
amongst co-nationals at “home”.
Whilst working to redress migrants’ tarnished identities and elevate their
social status, these discursive strategies reinforce or redraw symbolic bound-
aries towards other marginalized populations, distinguishing explicitly or
implicitly between “good” and “bad” migrants, “backward” or “progressive”
views and behaviours (also Moroşanu and Fox 2013; Ryan 2010) within and
across one’s group in ways that do not neatly follow the ethnic group lines
often drawn from above. The “horizontal hostilities” that may emerge in
the process vary considerably, illustrating the malleable nature of boundaries,
depending on the intersection of factors relevant in speciﬁc contexts (age,
ethnicity, religion, class, gender, and/or sexuality).
Not all migrants are in a position to counter negative categorization and
representations, however. The power of stigmatizing discourses is evident
in cases where individuals internalize and reproduce wider representations
of their group, aggravating their damaging consequences on themselves
and
others.
Alongside
harsh
legislation,
criminalizing
narratives,
for
example, have been shown to instil profound feelings of inferiority in some
migrants, who come to see themselves as not entitled to any rights (Menjívar
and Abrego 2012). As Menjívar and Abrego forcefully argue in the case of
undocumented
migrants,
these
“become
participants
in
their
own
3006
S. SCUZZARELLO AND L. MOROŞANU

devaluation and accept this social order as normal and the consequences in
their lives as expected” (2012, 1408). Even when migrants are less vulnerable,
negative press and political discourses can result in attitudes of acceptance
and resignation on the part of those aﬀected, which suggests the reputation
was “deserved” and makes one participant in their nation’s denigration (e.g.
Moroşanu and Fox 2013). These troubling outcomes exemplify the symbolic
violence perpetrated by media and state discourses and policies (Menjívar
and Abrego 2012), and caution that, although migrants and minorities
have demonstrated remarkable resilience and resourcefulness in dealing
with negative categorization and integration demands, these are not avail-
able to all.
To conclude, documenting migrants’ and minorities’ discursive strategies
in response to state policies and narratives provides a window into how
boundary work “from above” produces boundary work “from below”,
amongst its myriad eﬀects. Stigmatizing discourses or integration pressures
may be internalized and reproduced by those aﬀected, but also challenged,
and sometimes redirected towards other disadvantaged groups, as the
papers in this Special Issue well demonstrate. Where present, individuals’ dis-
tancing strategies do not simply reﬂect the group lines crudely drawn from
above. The rhetorical devices individuals employ in the process partly reassert
the salience of ethnicity, religion (and related categories of diﬀerence) in
boundary drawing, yet they rarely stop there, illustrating the multiple
factors that combine to deﬁne one’s identity and sense of worth (Wimmer
2013). An intersectional approach is thus crucial for examining both macro-
and micro-level processes of categorization and boundary formation.
Conclusions
Critical analyses of migrant integration tend to focus on categorization and
boundary work “from above”, i.e. how institutional actors, such as states, pol-
icymakers, media, or international bodies, sort people on the move into
migrants vs. refugees, high- vs low-skilled, legal vs illegal, drawing boundaries
between desirable and less desirable migrants; yet categorization and bound-
ary drawing also happens informally, with important implications on people’s
identity and status. This introduction has argued for the need to understand
boundary-making processes developed by both state institutions through
policies and discourses (i.e. “from above’) and people of migrant origins
(i.e. “from below’) in tandem. Reﬂecting on the ﬁndings of the articles
included in this Special Issue, we have shown, ﬁrst, how boundary-drawing
intrinsic to “integration” practices and discourses produces categories of
belonging, which diﬀerentially impacts individuals of migrant backgrounds
depending on the intersection of their social locations of gender, class, eth-
nicity, faith and so forth. Second, we have also presented how individuals
ETHNIC AND RACIAL STUDIES
3007

respond to dominant “integration” discourses and policies, often engaging in
their own boundary work. Reﬂecting the analytical lens of the contributions
to this Special Issue, we have advocated for and demonstrated the use of
adopting an intersectional perspective to the analysis of boundaries and
belonging in the context of migrant “integration” policies and practices,
and of how migrants navigate and respond to them. Intersectionality, we
show, is crucial in understanding how social locations work together and
interact to produce migrant categories that bestow people with diﬀerential
rights and that socially construct them as more or less desirable for the
“majority” society and therefore more or less able to “integrate”. These cat-
egories, which contribute to the boundaries that symbolically include and
deﬁne some people as desirable, while excluding others, and aﬀect access
and distribution of resources (Lamont 2000), impact on migrants’ and min-
orities’ material realities and distinct social experiences as they navigate a
new social context and strive towards a sustainable and satisfactory life.
Reading the boundary work done from “above” and “below” through an
intersectional lens provides important insights into the challenging con-
ditions for membership that state policies generate for migrants and ethnic
minorities, on one side, and migrants’ and ethnic minorities’ eﬀorts to chal-
lenge and get round the constraints of state deﬁnitions, on the other.
Taken together, an intersectional approach problematizes the essentializing
representations of migrants and ethnic minorities in state “integration” pol-
icies, which are increasingly unsuitable for societies that are factually super-
diverse, and whose migrant and minority members often present intersecting
motivations and allegiances in their aspirations to achieve upward social
mobility.
The intersectional approach to boundaries and belonging opens up new
research avenues, which emerge from the research presented in this
Special Issue. First, future analysis should extend an intersectional perspective
to how “majority” locals respond to and interact with migrants and minorities.
To analyze institutional boundary work only from the perspective of migrants
and minorities misses out the manifold societal ramiﬁcations of (super)diver-
sity for societies of settlement. How and to what degree have the “majority’s”
social relations, values, and customs changed, and how have these aﬀected
attitudes to migrant minorities amongst diﬀerently-positioned majority
members? In what circumstances are there similarities in behaviour, values,
and norms between those who are labelled “migrant”, and in particular the
second- and third-generation, and their “majority” peers? Second, our inter-
sectional approach to integration calls for greater attention to how migrants
and racialized minorities balance diﬀerent aspects of identity and forms of
“diﬀerence” in their “integration” journeys. To what degree are they able to
navigate and strategically draw on their intersecting social locations as
they strive towards a sustainable “good” life, however deﬁned? In what
3008
S. SCUZZARELLO AND L. MOROŞANU

ways are they able to mitigate the diﬀerent forms of discrimination and rejec-
tion they experience, and what is sacriﬁced in the process? How do diﬀerent
social spaces, local and transnational, matter in their expression of social iden-
tities and in their life-chances to overcome blocked opportunities to social
advancement and establishment of a “good” and “successful” life? We
hope the papers included in this Special Issue provide a solid starting point
for more systematic inquiries into these pressing questions and contribute
to further a research agenda in migration studies true to the original feminist
and anti-racist politics of intersectionality. To this end, and to avoid watering
down the transformative aims of intersectionality, we contend that intersec-
tionality should not be applied as a catch-all, generic concept to address
inequalities (see Bastia et al. 2022). Rather, and in line with the approach
adopted in the contributions to this Special Issue, an intersectional analysis
of “integration” and boundary work should be attentive to the relevant cul-
tural, political, economic, societal, and/or situational context, and where poss-
ible, responsive to the self-identiﬁed needs of the aﬀected communities.
Note
1. There is much variation concerning when Western European countries became
important destination points. Former colonial powers such as France and the
United Kingdom witnessed earlier migration waves than southern European
countries like Italy or Greece.
Acknowledgements
Most articles in this collection were ﬁrst presented at the 2020 IMISCOE annual con-
ference at panels organized under the remit of the Standing Committee Gender
and Sexuality in Migration Research (GenSeM). GenSeM has also facilitated other scho-
lars to join this project and we are grateful for the support given by this network.
Disclosure statement
No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the authors.
ORCID
Sarah Scuzzarello
http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1281-8742
Laura Moroşanu
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-1526-1866
References
Abrego, Leisy J. 2011. “Legal Consciousness of Undocumented Latinos: Fear and
Stigma as Barriers to Claims-Making for First- and 1.5-Generation Immigrants.”
Law & Society Review 45 (2): 337–370. doi:10.1111/j.1540-5893.2011.00435.x.
ETHNIC AND RACIAL STUDIES
3009

Alba, Richard, and Jan W. Duyvendak. 2019. “What About the Mainstream?
Assimilation in Super-Diverse Times.” Ethnic and Racial Studies 42 (1): 105–124.
doi:10.1080/01419870.2017.1406127.
Anthias, Floya. 2013. “Moving Beyond the Janus Face of Integration and Diversity
Discourses: Towards an Intersectional Framing.” The Sociological Review 61:
323–343. doi:10.1111/1467-954X.12001.
Ballarino, Gabriele, and Nazareno Panichella. 2018. “The Occupational Integration of
Migrant Women in Western European Labour Markets.” Acta Sociologica 61 (2):
126–142. doi:10.1177/0001699317723441.
Bastia, Tanja. 2014. “Intersectionality, Migration and Development.” Progress in
Development Studies 14 (3): 237–248. doi:10.1177/1464993414521330.
Bastia, Tanja, Kavita Datta, Katja Hujo, Nicola Piper, and Matthew Walsham. 2022.
“Reﬂections on Intersectionality: A Journey Through the Worlds of Migration Research,
Policy and Advocacy.” Gender, Place & Culture. doi:10.1080/0966369X.2022.2126826.
Bloch, Alice, and Sonia McKay. 2016. Living on the Margins: Undocumented Migrants in
a Global City. Bristol: Bristol University Press.
Block, Laura. 2021. “‘(Im-)Proper’ Members with ‘(im-)Proper’ Families? – Framing
Spousal Migration Policies in Germany.” Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies
47 (2): 379–396. doi:10.1080/1369183X.2019.1625132.
Boccagni, Paolo, and Pierrette Hondagneu-Sotelo. 2021. “Integration and the Struggle to
Turn Space Into ‘Our’ Place: Homemaking as a Way Beyond the Stalemate of
Assimilationism vs Transnationalism.” International Migration. doi:10.1111/imig.12846.
Bonjour, Saskia, and Jan Duyvendak. 2018. “The ’Migrant with Poor Prospects’:
Racialized Intersections of Class and Culture in Dutch Civic Integration Debates.”
Ethnic and Racial Studies 41 (5): 882–900. doi:10.1080/01419870.2017.1339897.
Bursell, Moa. 2012. “Name Change and Destigmatization among Middle Eastern
Immigrants in Sweden.” Ethnic and Racial Studies 35 (3): 471–487. doi:10.1080/
01419870.2011.589522.
Casey, Louise. 2016. The Casey Review. A Review Into Opportunity and Integration.
Executive Summary. London: Department for Communities and Local Government.
Cederberg, Maja. 2013. “Gender, Inequality and Integration Swedish Policies on
Migrant Incorporation and the Position of Migrant Women.” In Gender, Migration
and Categorisation Making Distinctions Between Migrants in Western Countries,
1945-2010, edited by Marlou Schrover, and Deirdre M. Moloney, 193–214.
Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Chimienti, Milena, Alice Bloch, Laurence Ossipow, and Catherine Wihtol de Wenden.
2019. “Second Generation from Refugee Backgrounds in Europe.” Comparative
Migration Studies 7 (40). doi:10.1186/s40878-019-0138-2.
Cleton,
Laura,
and
Petra
Meier.
2023.
“Contesting
Policy
Categories
Using
Intersectionality: Reﬂections for Studying Migration Governance.” Ethnic and
Racial Studies. Advance online publication. doi:10.1080/01419870.2023.2171737.
Collyer, Michael, and Hein de Haas. 2012. “Developing Dynamic Categorisations of
Transit Migration.” Population, Space and Place 18 (4): 468–481. doi:10.1002/psp.635.
Cranston, Sophie. 2017. “Expatriate as a ‘Good’ Migrant: Thinking Through Skilled
International Migrant Categories.” Population, Space and Place 23 (6): e2058.
doi:10.1002/psp.2058.
Crawley, Heaven, and Dimitris Skleparis. 2018. “Refugees, Migrants, Neither, Both:
Categorical Fetishism and the Politics of Bounding in Europe’s ‘Migration Crisis’.”
Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 44 (1): 48–64. doi:10.1080/1369183X.2017.
1348224.
3010
S. SCUZZARELLO AND L. MOROŞANU

Crenshaw, Kimberlé. 1991. “Mapping the Margins: Intersectionality, Identity Politics,
and Violence Against Women of Color.” Stanford Law Review 43 (6): 1241–1299.
doi:10.2307/1229039.
Dahinden, Janine. 2016. “A Plea for the ‘De-Migranticization’ of Research on Migration
and Integration.” Ethnic and Racial Studies 39 (13): 2207–2225. doi:10.1080/
01419870.2015.1124129.
Erdal, Marta Bivand. 2020. “Theorizing Interactions of Migrant Transnationalism and
Integration Through a Multiscalar Approach.” Comparative Migration Studies
8 (31), DOI: 10.1186/s40878-020-00188-z.
Eurostat. 2022. Migration and Migrant Population Statistics. https://ec.europa.eu/
eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?title = Migration_and_migrant_population
_statistics#Migrant_population:_23.7_million_non-EU_citizens_living_in_the_EU_
on_1_January_2021 (accessed 23 February 2023).
Favell, Adrian. 2019. “Integration: Twelve Propositions After Schinkel.” Comparative
Migration Studies 7 (21). doi:10.1186/s40878-019-0125-7.
Fischer, Carolin. 2020. “Manifestations and Contestations of Borders and Boundaries in
Everyday Understandings of Integration.” Migration Letters 17 (4): 531–540. doi:10.
33182/ml.v17i4.836.
Fischer, Carolin, Christin Achermann, and Janine Dahinden. 2020. “Revisiting Borders
and Boundaries: Exploring Migrant Inclusion and Exclusion from Intersectional
Perspectives.” Migration Letters 17 (4): 477–485. doi:10.33182/ml.v17i4.1085.
Fischer, Carolin, and Janine Dahinden. 2017. “Gender Representations in Politics of
Belonging: An Analysis of Swiss Immigration Regulation from the 19th Century
Until Today.” Ethnicities 17 (4): 445–468. doi:10.1177/1468796816676844.
Godin, Marie, and Nando Sigona. 2022. “Intergenerational Narratives of Citizenship
among EU Citizens in the UK After the Brexit Referendum.” Ethnic and Racial
Studies 45 (6): 1135–1154. doi:10.1080/01419870.2021.1981964.
Grzymala-Kazlowska,
Aleksandra,
and
Jenny
Phillimore.
2018.
“Introduction:
Rethinking Integration. New Perspectives on Adaptation and Settlement in the
Era of Super-Diversity.” Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 44 (2): 179–196.
doi:10.1080/1369183X.2017.1341706.
Haapajärvi, Linda. 2022. “Pitfalls of Belonging-Work. The Dialectics of Belonging and
Exclusion in Finnish Immigrant Integration Policies.” Ethnic and Racial Studies.
Advance online publication. doi:10.1080/01419870.2022.2149274.
Hagan, Jacqueline M., and Joshua Wassink. 2016. “New Skills, New Jobs: Return
Migration, Skill Transfers, and Business Formation in Mexico.” Social Problems 63
(4): 513–533. doi:10.1093/socpro/spw021.
Hammond, Laura. 2013. “Somali Transnational Activism and Integration in the UK:
Mutually Supporting Strategies.” Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 39 (6):
1001–1017. doi:10.1080/1369183X.2013.765666.
Hao, Yanbo, and Maggi W. H. Leung. 2023. “Wandering at the Crossroads: Gendered
Mobility Aspirations in the Study-to-Work Transition of Chinese Graduates of
Dutch Universities.” Ethnic and Racial Studies Advance online publication. doi: 10.
1080/01419870.2023.2181667.
HM Government. 2018. Integrated Communities Strategy Green Paper. https://assets.
publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
ﬁle/696993/Integrated_Communities_Strategy.pdf (accessed 3 February, 2023).
Hondagneu-Sotelo, Pierrette. 2017. “At Home in Inner-City Immigrant Community
Gardens.” Journal of Housing and the Built Environment 32 (1): 13–28. doi:10.1007/
s10901-015-9491-0.
ETHNIC AND RACIAL STUDIES
3011

Huizinga, Rik P. 2022. “Carving Out a Space to Belong: Young Syrian Men Negotiating
Patriarchal Dividend, (In)Visibility and (Mis)Recognition in the Netherlands.” Ethnic
and Racial Studies. Advance online publication. doi:10.1080/01419870.2022.
2156805.
Jenkins, Richard. 1994. “Rethinking Ethnicity: Identity, Categorization and Power.”
Ethnic and Racial Studies 17 (2): 197–223. doi:10.1080/01419870.1994.9993821.
Jenkins, Richard. 1996. Social Identity. London: Routledge.
Kofman, Eleonore. 2023. “Integration Discourses, the Puriﬁcation of Gender and
Interventions in Family Migration.” Ethnic and Racial Studies. Advance online
publication. doi:10.1080/01419870.2023.2166791.
Kofman, Eleonore, Sawitri Saharso, and Elena Vacchelli. 2015. “Gendered Perspectives
on Integration Discourses and Measures.” International Migration 53 (4): 77–89.
doi:10.1111/imig.12102.
Korteweg, Anna. 2017. “The Failures of ‘Immigrant Integration’: The Gendered
Racialized Production of non-Belonging.” Migration Studies 5 (3): 428–444. doi:10.
1093/migration/mnx025.
Korteweg, Anna, and Triadaﬁlos Triadaﬁlopoulos. 2013. “Gender, Religion, and
Ethnicity: Intersections and Boundaries in Immigrant Integration Policy Making.”
Social Politics: International Studies in Gender, State & Society 20 (1): 109–136.
doi:10.1093/sp/jxs027.
Lamont, Michèle. 2000. The Dignity of Working Men: Morality and the Boundaries of
Race, Class, and Immigration. New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
Lamont, Michèle, and Nissim Mizrachi. 2012. “Ordinary People Doing Extraordinary
Things: Responses to Stigmatization in Comparative Perspective.” Ethnic and
Racial Studies 35 (3): 365–381. doi:10.1080/01419870.2011.589528.
Lulle, Aija, Laura Moroşanu, and Russell King. 2022. Young EU Migrants in London in the
Transition to Brexit. London: Routledge.
McDowell, Linda. 2009. “Old and New European Economic Migrants: Whiteness and
Managed Migration Policies.” Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 35 (1):
19–36. doi:10.1080/13691830802488988.
Menjívar, Cecilia. 2022. “Possibilities for Sociological Research to Reduce Inequalities:
Observations
from
the
Immigration
Scholarship.”
Socius
8:
1-6:
23780231221080014. doi:10.1177/23780231221080014.
Menjívar, Cecilia, and Leisy J. Abrego. 2012. “Legal Violence: Immigration Law and the
Lives of Central American Immigrants.” American Journal of Sociology 117 (5): 1380–
1421. doi:10.1086/663575.
Moret, Joëlle, Apostolos Andrikopoulos, and Janine Dahinden. 2021. “Contesting
Categories: Cross-Border Marriages from the Perspectives of the State, Spouses,
and Researchers.” Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 47 (2): 325–342. doi:10.
1080/1369183X.2019.1625124.
Moroşanu, Laura, and Jon E. Fox. 2013. “‘No Smoke Without Fire’: Strategies of Coping
with Stigmatised Migrant Identities.” Ethnicities 13 (4): 438–456. doi:10.1177/
1468796813483730.
Phillimore, Jenny. 2012. “Implementing Integration in the UK: Lessons for Integration
Theory, Policy and Practice.” Policy & Politics 40 (4): 525–545. doi:10.1332/
030557312X643795.
Portes, Alejandro, and Ruben Rumbaut. 2006. Immigrant America: A Portrait. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Robertson, Shanthi. 2019. “Status-making: Rethinking Migrant Categorization.” Journal
of Sociology 55 (2): 219–233. doi:10.1177/1440783318791761.
3012
S. SCUZZARELLO AND L. MOROŞANU

Ryan, Louise. 2010. “Becoming Polish in London: Negotiating Ethnicity Through
Migration.” Social Identities 16 (3): 359–376. doi:10.1080/13504630.2010.482425.
Saharso, Sawitri, Jort van Hoogstraaten, Claassen Romy, and Milica Joki. 2023. “No Sex
Before Marriage? Migrant Youth Navigating Restrictive Norms Regarding Premarital
Relationships.” Ethnic and Racial Studies. Advance online publication. doi:10.1080/
01419870.2023.2168130.
Schinkel, Willem. 2017. Imagined Societies. A Critique of Immigrant Integration in
Western Europe. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Scuzzarello, Sarah. 2010. Caring Multiculturalism. Local Immigrant Policies and
Narratives of Integration in Malmö, Birmingham and Bologna. Lund: Lund
University Press.
Scuzzarello, Sarah, and Benny Carlson. 2019. “Young Somalis’ Social Identity in Sweden
and Britain: The Interplay of Group Dynamics, Socio-Political Environments, and
Transnational Ties in Social Identiﬁcation Processes.” Migration Studies 7 (4): 433–
454. doi:10.1093/migration/mny013.
Vertovec, Steven. 2007. “Super-diversity and Its Implications.” Ethnic and Racial Studies
30 (6): 1024–1054. doi:10.1080/01419870701599465.
Waldinger, Roger. 2017. “A Cross-Border Perspective on Migration: Beyond the
Assimilation/Transnationalism Debate.” Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies
43 (1): 3–17. doi:10.1080/1369183X.2016.1238863.
Wessendorf, Susanne. 2014. Commonplace Diversity: Social Relations in a Super-Diverse
Context. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Wimmer, Andreas. 2013. Ethnic Boundary Making: Institutions, Power, Networks. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Witte,
Nils.
2018.
“Responses
to
Stigmatisation
and
Boundary
Making:
Destigmatisation Strategies of Turks in Germany.” Journal of Ethnic and Migration
Studies 44 (9): 1425–1443. doi:10.1080/1369183X.2017.1398077.
Yurdakul, Gökçe, and Tunay Altay. 2022. “Overcoming Stigma: The Boundary Work of
Privileged Mothers of Turkish Background in Berlin’s Private Schools.” Ethnic and
Racial Studies. Advance online publication. doi:10.1080/01419870.2022.2152720.
Yuval-Davis, Nira. 2006. “Intersectionality and Feminist Politics.” European Journal of
Women’s Studies 13: 193–209. doi:10.1177/1350506806065752.
Yuval-Davis, Nira. 2011. The Politics of Belonging. Intersectional Contestations. London:
Sage.
Yuval-Davis, Nira, Georgie Wemyss, and Kathryn Cassidy. 2019. Bordering. Cambridge:
Polity Press.
ETHNIC AND RACIAL STUDIES
3013
