Journal of Marketing Research
Vol. XXXVIII (February 2001), 73–85 73*Rajesh Sethi is Assistant Professor of Marketing, School of Business,
Clarkson University (e-mail: sethir@clarkson.edu). Daniel C. Smith isClare W. Barker Chair in Marketing and MBA Program Chair, School ofBusiness, Indiana University (e-mail: dansmith@gsob1.bus.indiana.edu).C. Whan Park is Joseph A. DeBell Distinguished Professor of Marketing,School of Business, University of Southern California (e-mail:choong@bus.usc.edu). The authors thank Jonlee Andrews, Larry Compeau,Carolyn Nicholson, Anju Sethi, and the four anonymous JMR reviewers for
their insightful and helpful comments on previous versions of this article.RAJESH SETHI, DANIEL C. SMITH, and C. WHAN PARK*
Multiple studies have found that the primary determinant of new prod-
uct failure is an absence of innovativeness—the extent to which a newproduct provides meaningfully unique benefits. Given the persistence ofthis finding and the growing use of cross-functional teams in new productdevelopment projects, the authors examine how innovativeness isaffected by various characteristics of cross-functional teams and contex-tual influences on the team. On the basis of a study of 141 cross-func-tional product development teams, the authors find that innovativeness ispositively related to the strength of superordinate identity in the team,encouragement to take risk, customers’ influence, and active monitoringof the project by senior management. Beyond a moderate level, socialcohesion among team members has a negative effect on innovativeness.The effect of superordinate identity on innovativeness is strengthened byencouragement to take risk and weakened by social cohesion. Functionaldiversity has no effect on innovativeness. The authors discuss managerial 
and research implications of the findings.
Cross-Functional Product Development
Teams, Creativity, and the Innovativeness
of New Consumer Products
Considerable effort has been dedicated to understanding
the determinants of new product success and failure. In acomprehensive review of this work, Crawford (1977) and,more recently, Cooper (1993, 1996) find that an absence ofinnovativeness (i.e., product benefits that are unique to agiven product and are perceived as meaningful by cus-tomers) is an important underlying explanation for newproduct failure. However, despite all the attention devoted toimproving new product development practice, in manyfirms, the development of innovative products tends to be
the exception rather than the rule (Cooper 1996).
Given the history of evidence and the current state of
practice, it is somewhat surprising to find an absence ofresearch examining factors that affect new product innova-tiveness. There exists a large body of research on the deter-minants of organization-level innovation (e.g., Deshpandé,
Farley, and Webster 1993; Kanter 1988; Zaltman, Duncan,
and Holbeck 1973; Zangwill 1993). This work focuses onthe determinants of the volume or the rate of new productdevelopment, an organization’s ability to implement majornew product initiatives, a company’s tendency to be a late oran early entrant to markets, the rate at which firms adoptnew technologies, and so forth. Understanding factorsaffecting innovativeness at the product development projectlevel will provide a valuable complement to this body ofwork (Brown and Eisenhardt 1995).
Furthermore, this innovation research mainly studies the
effects of various macro, firm-level independent variables(e.g., structural and cultural factors). However, as firms arebecoming more conscious about product development cycletime, they are seeking ways to improve the effectiveness ofnew product development projects (Clark and Fujimoto1991; Eisenhardt and Tabrizi 1995; Takeuchi and Nonaka1986). The knowledge generated by research on the effectsof macro, firm-level variables provides limited explanationof variations in project-level outcomes. Indeed, within agiven firm (i.e., within a given structure and culture), thereis often considerable variation in outcomes of the new prod-uct development projects. To enable managers to improvecritical project outcomes such as product innovativeness, it74 JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, FEBRUARY 2001
is important to understand how project-level factors affect
these outcomes.
One important project-level factor is the way firms
organize new product development projects. Specifically,firms are increasingly entrusting product development to
cross-functional teams, which consist of members fromseveral functional areas such as marketing, engineering,manufacturing, and purchasing (Olson, Walker, andRuekert 1995). Therefore, the focus of our research is theeffects of various aspects of cross-functional teams on newproduct innovativeness.
Innovativeness presumes a degree of creativity in the new
product ideation and design processes. Research in the areasof social psychology of creativity and group psychologysuggests that internal dynamics in a team and the resultingcreative outcome can be affected by the characteristics of theteam and its immediate context (Amabile 1988; King andAndersen 1990). Accordingly, we consider variables relatedto each of these factors. Regarding team factors, we focus onthe physical composition of the team (functional diversity)and psychological bonds (superordinate identity and socialcohesion). For contextual influences on the team, we studythe effect of monitoring of the project by senior manage-ment, encouragement given to the team to be venturesome,and customers’ influence on decisions made during newproduct development.
It is worth noting that certain organizational factors (such
as structure, process, and culture) and market factors (e.g.,competitive pressure) also can influence the outcome of aproduct development team. However, because ours is one ofthe first attempts at examining how cross-functional teamsaffect new product innovativeness, we limit the focus of thisresearch to studying the effects of factors related to the teamand the immediate context around the team. Nonetheless,we include several important organizational and market fac-tors as covariates in the model to examine how team factorsinfluence innovativeness when the effect of such nonteamfactors is taken into account.
Focusing on the extent to which the characteristics of
cross-functional teams and contextual influences affect newproduct innovativeness makes several contributions to bothmarketing practice and theory. For example, as a practicalmatter, because we are considering variables that can beinfluenced by managers, the findings of our study shouldprovide clear recommendations that are directly related toenhancing new product innovativeness, an important under-lying explanation for new product success/failure.Considering that some of these variables may adverselyaffect team creativity, it is particularly useful to examinewhether factors managers use when forming teams enhanceor undermine new product innovativeness.
In terms of theory, innovation research has focused on
organizational-level antecedents and outcomes. Our studyextends this work to the project level. Specifically, the effec-
tiveness of new product development projects often is hin-dered by subtle and deeply rooted biases and stereotypesthat project members from various functional areas holdtoward one another (Ashforth and Mael 1989; Dougherty1992). Drawing on social identity research, we develop anapproach to understanding and overcoming such biases andstereotypes and thereby enhancing project-level outcomessuch as new product innovativeness.In the next section, we develop the conceptual underpin-
nings of our study, which in turn support the selection of thespecific variables on which we focus. We then discuss ourhypotheses, describe the method used to test them, and pres-ent our results.
CONCEPTUAL BACKGROUND
Construing New Product Innovativeness
As noted previously, a primary determinant of new product
success is the extent to which the product is different fromcompeting alternatives in a way that is valued by customers.This notion of “meaningful uniqueness” provides the founda-tion for our definition of new product innovativeness and isconsistent with several branches of literature that use the term.Forexample, research on the social psychology of creativity
suggests that for an outcome to be innovative it must be noveland appropriate (Amabile 1983; Jackson and Messick 1965).Novelty, in turn, refers to the extent to which a concept, idea,or object differs from conventional practice within the domainof interest. Appropriateness is the extent to which a given out-put is viewed as useful or beneficial to some audience(Jackson and Messick 1965). Recently, a similar construal ofinnovativeness as meaningful novelty has been applied in thecontext of marketing programs for mature products (Andrewsand Smith 1996). So, as used here, new product innovative-ness refers to the extent to which the product differs from com-peting alternatives in a way that is meaningful to customers.
Antecedents of New Product Innovativeness
Research on creativity and the creative process provides
the starting point for identifying specific variables likely toaffect new product innovativeness. According to this streamof research, there are six key conditions that are consideredessential for the emergence of a creative outcome and thatare relevant to the present study. First, it is generally recog-nized that the likelihood of producing innovative ideasimproves as the diversity of input brought to bear on a prob-lem increases (i.e., diversity of input condition). Second,innovative ideas typically are the result of finding novel rela-tionships among diverse ideas and perspectives (i.e., discov-ery of novel linkages condition; Amabile 1983; Osborn1963). Third, innovative ideas are an outcome of anextended effort focused on a well-defined problem (Hogarth
1980). As such, motivation to perform a given task is a fun-damental predictor of the innovativeness of the outcomes ofthe task (i.e., motivation to innovate condition; Amabile1983; Andrews and Smith 1996). Fourth, innovative ideasemerge from a nonroutine, as opposed to an algorithmic,problem-solving approach (Amabile 1983; Andrews andSmith 1996). Therefore, discovery of innovative ideas isfacilitated if traditional perspectives and the routine ways of
doing things are freely challenged (i.e., challenging tradi-tional perspectives condition). Fifth, innovative ideas, bytheir very definition, deviate from the status quo and there-fore not only engender a degree of risk but also may triggerdefensive reactions in others (Hogarth 1980; Osborn 1963).Therefore, the possibility of discovering novel linkages isenhanced if there exists an atmosphere that promotes risktaking (i.e., promoting risk taking condition; Slater andNarver 1995). Sixth, after coming up with creative ideas, thenext critical process is the successful implementation ofthese ideas, which requires that necessary resources andCross-Functional Product Development Teams 75
facilities be available in a timely manner (i.e., resource
availability condition; Kanter 1983).
These six conditions provide the basic conceptual foun-
dation on which we build our model of new product innov-ativeness. Specifically, we identify variables related to thecharacteristics of the team and contextual influences on theteam that are expected to play a critical role in giving rise tothese conditions (Table 1 and Figure 1).
Team characteristics . Cross-functional teams can be
viewed in terms of their (1) physical composition and (2)psychological characteristics (i.e., how members of the teamrelate to the team and to one another). Regarding the former,we focus on functional diversity within the team. Althougha large diversity of functional perspectives is generallyviewed as a favorable team characteristic, such diversity canincrease decision-making difficulty (Ancona and Caldwell1992; Milliken and Martins 1996). This difficulty can leadto a more algorithmic decision-making process that is detri-mental to creativity.
Regarding psychological characteristics, one variable we
consider, superordinate identity, refers to the extent to whichmembers identify with the team (rather than merely with theirfunctional areas) and perceive a stake in the success of theteam (Mackie and Goethals 1987; Sethi 2000; Tajfel 1982).This variable is expected to play a critical role in cross-func-tional teams because it can influence integration of diverseperspectives. Normally, such integration is difficult to achievein cross-functional settings because people from differentfunctional areas hold biases and stereotypes toward oneanother. These biases and stereotypes to a large extent arisefrom deeply rooted functional identities that people hold(Ashforth and Mael 1989; Mackie and Goethals 1987; Tajfel1982). Unless functional identities are replaced by a sense ofteam identity, it may be difficult for members in a team to dis-cover critical novel linkages among diverse perspectives.
Social identity research suggests that the adverse effect of
functional identities can be mitigated if the members of a
1Although some researchers have used a concept such as “superordinate
goal,” there is little commonality between this concept and superordinateidentity. Superordinate goal refers to an outcome that is not specific to anymembers or their functional areas but is related to the overall team or theteam’s task (Mackie and Goethals 1987; Sherif and Sherif 1969). Such anoutcome is normally imposed on the team. Whereas superordinate goalrefers to an overarching outcome, superordinate identity is essentially acognitive state in which members have a perception of oneness with theteam instead of merely viewing themselves as representatives of a func-tional area. Superordinate identity and superordinate goal are related in thatthe former can facilitate both the acceptance and achievement of the latterby team members (Mackie and Goethals 1987).
2Superordinate identity is similar in spirit to a recently proposed concept
of relative functional identification that refers to the extent to which mem-bers feel a sense of connection with their function rather than with theirorganization (Fisher, Maltz, and Jaworski 1997). The difference betweenthe two constructs, however, is that though superordinate identity is agroup-level concept that captures the extent to which team-based identityoverrides the functional identities of members, relative functional identifi-
cation has been conceptualized at the organization level and relates to thetension between functional and organizational identification.team who previously belonged to groups that hold biases
and stereotypes against one another develop a strong senseof team identity (Brewer and Miller 1984; Sethi 2000).From a cognitive perspective, in a high superordinate iden-tity team, the former interfunctional boundaries becomeweak, and instead a new, inclusive team-based boundarybecomes important in the minds of members, which reducesthe adverse effect of functional identities and orientations(Brewer and Miller 1984).
1Considering the promising role
team identity can play, it is important to examine howsuperordinate identity in a cross-functional team affectsinnovativeness.
2
Another aspect of how members relate to the team, social
cohesion, is more affective and refers to the strength ofinterpersonal ties among team members (Hogg 1992;Zaccaro and McCoy 1988). Although social cohesion hasthe potential to adversely influence some of the conditions
Table 1
CONDITIONS FOR CREATIVITY AND VARIABLES IN THE MODEL
Conditions for Creativity Related Variables in the Model Variable Type
1 Diversity of input 1. Number of functional areas
2. Customers’ Influence3. Ease of communication in the firm4. Project manager’s operating style1. Team factor
2. Contextual influence3. Covariate4. Covariate
2. Discovery of novel linkages 1. Superordinate identity
2. Social cohesion3. Functional diversity4. Team size1. Team factor
2. Team factor3. Team factor4. Covariate
3. Motivation to innovate 1. Superordinate identity
2. Project monitoring by senior management3. Extent of competition among new products4. Firm’s reward structure for project teams1. Team factor
2. Contextual influence3. Covariate4. Covariate
4. Challenging traditional perspectives 1. Superordinate identity
2. Social cohesion3. Project manager’s operating style1. Team factor
2. Team factor3. Covariate
5. Promoting risk taking 1. Encouragement to take risk 1. Contextual influence6. Resource availability 1. Project monitoring by senior management
2. Resource availability1. Contextual influence
2. Covariate76 JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, FEBRUARY 2001
Figure 1
TEAM-LEVEL FACTORS AFFECTING NEW PRODUCT INNOVATIVENESS
Social Cohesion
Superordinate
Identity
Functional Diver sityContextual Influences
Encouragement to
 Take RiskCustomers’ Infl uence
++
+
––
–Extent of Project
 Monitoring
+Team Characteristics
Innovativeness
for creativity (e.g., integration of diverse functional perspec-
tives to discover novel ideas, challenging of functional per-spectives), it is not well understood how this variable willaffect new product innovativeness. More critically, priorresearch on social cohesion has been done with groups inwhich members come from the same background and havesimilar perspectives. It is not known what type of effectsocial cohesion will have in teams in which members fromdifferent functional areas come to the team with attendantbiases and stereotypes toward one another.
Contextual influences on the team . We consider three con-
textual influences on the team that can play an importantrole in creating conditions that affect creativity. The first isthe extent of project monitoring by senior management.Senior management’s close monitoring of the project canprovide a signal of the importance of a given project, whichin turn is expected to affect the team’s motivation level andaid in garnering resources from individuals/units outside theteam (Andrews and Smith 1996; Gupta, Raj, and Wilemon1986; Kanter 1988). However, very close senior manage-ment monitoring can have a downside, as teams can viewsuch monitoring as interference, which may adversely affecttheir motivation.
The second contextual influence on the team is the extent
to which the team is encouraged to take risk. Such encour-agement could be the result of senior managers urging theteam to be venturesome (either through verbal encourage-ment or by setting up a reward system that encourages risktaking) or could be due to an environment around the team
that promotes a risk-taking orientation (Slater and Narver1995). Encouragement to take risk affects the extent towhich new product development teams deviate from routineproblem-solving approaches and feel comfortable pursuinguntried ideas, a crucial factor for the emergence of innova-tiveness (Amabile 1988; Andrews and Smith 1996). It is par-ticularly important to examine whether this variable affectsinnovativeness, because many firms, in their search forimproved quality through continuous improvement of exist-ing products and processes, may implicitly discourage suchrisk taking, because it is likely to disturb the pursuit of incre-mental continuous improvement (Clark and Fujimoto 1991).
The third contextual influence on the team comes from
customers. Teams that take customers’ views into account, atleast during the initial part of the development process, canincrease the diversity of ideas that are available to them dur-ing the idea/concept development and design stages.However, some researchers believe that customers cannothelp much in the development of unique products, becausethey can provide only incremental ideas (Bennett and Cooper1981). Given these conflicting views, it is important to inves-tigate how customers’ influence affects innovativeness.
Covariates . Although in this study our interest is mainly
with team factors, we have included several organizationaland market factors as covariates that can influence newproduct outcomes. By including these variables, we can bet-ter identify the unique effects of team factors and contextualCross-Functional Product Development Teams 77
influences on innovativeness. Also, some of the team vari-
ables we consider may be confounded with other team vari-ables not explicitly of interest in this study. When possible,we have included these other team variables (which arelikely to create potential confounding) as covariates in themodel. The first covariate of interest is the general ease ofcommunication among functional areas at the firm level thatcan help the team acquire a wide variety of diverse perspec-tives from others in the firm and thereby have a positiveinfluence on innovativeness. Second, we account for theeffect of competition among new products in the target mar-ket: If team members are targeting a market in which com-
petitors are vigorously introducing new products, this canhelp motivate the team to develop and launch a superiorproduct in such a market. Third, if the reward structure in thefirm is such that members involved in projects are rewarded
on the basis of the project’s overall performance rather thanfor their performance on their respective functional tasks, itis likely to enhance members’ motivation to strive for asuperior project outcome, which can improve product inno-vativeness (Amabile 1983). Fourth, if the project manager
has an operating style that encourages members to partici-pate actively in discussions related to the project, it can helpin the emergence of more diverse perspectives in the team aswell as increase the amount of questioning and challengingof one another’s perspectives (Slater and Narver 1995)—theconditions that can help in the development of innovativeproducts. Fifth, to help a team implement its creative ideas,the organization must make adequate resources and facilitiesavailable to the team. Therefore, resource availability can be
an important influence on product innovativeness. Sixth, weaccount for the effect of team size, and thus we are betterable to get an estimate of the effect of functional diversity oninnovativeness.
THEORY AND HYPOTHESES
Characteristics of the Team
Superordinate identity . By nature, a low superordinate
identity team will be characterized by a retention of func-tional identities, biases, and stereotypes. As a result, mem-bers from one functional area may tend to overlook or rejectthe information and perspectives of members from otherfunctional areas (Maltz and Kohli 1996). This problem isaggravated by interdepartmental rivalry and politicalmaneuvering over scarce organizational resources (Friedkinand Simpson 1985; Maltz and Kohli 1996; Ruekert andWalker 1987). Consequently, members are unable to inte-
grate the information and perspectives of different func-tional areas effectively (Jaworski and Kohli 1993; Slater andNarver 1995). As such, teams with low superordinate iden-tity are less likely to discover complex and novel linkagesamong market needs, technology, and the company’sresources.
In contrast, as noted previously, high superordinate iden-
tity in a team can override the adverse effects of functionalidentities of team members (Brewer and Miller 1984;Mackie and Goethals 1987; Sherif and Sherif 1969). Highsuperordinate identity enhances the perception of intrateamsimilarities and leads to psychological acceptance of mem-bers from other functional areas and their work methods,thereby reducing the adverse effect of interfunctional biasesand stereotypes (Ashforth and Mael 1989; Mackie andGoethals 1987; Sherif and Sherif 1969). In other words, a
feeling of psychological ownership of the project arisesamong team members, which enhances cooperative behav-iors and motivation (Pierce, Rubenfeld, and Morgan 1991).As a result, members in such a team are more likely to inte-grate a variety of diverse functional perspectives effectively(Deshpandé and Zaltman 1982; Mackie and Goethals 1987).Therefore,
H1: The level of superordinate identity in a cross-functional
product development team is positively related to new prod-uct innovativeness.
Social cohesion .Social cohesion is generally viewed by
managers as a desirable criterion for team formation. Somelevel of social cohesion is necessary for the team to workeffectively. However, beyond a moderate level, social cohe-sion is expected to have a negative effect on new product inno-vativeness. This negative relationship can be explained on the
basis of the occurrence of groupthink, which often arises inhighly cohesive groups (Janis 1982). Groupthink refers to ahigh level of concurrence seeking and conformance by mem-bers of the group. Such behavior adversely affects the creativ-ity of a team’s decisions, because it leads to an incompletesurvey of alternatives, poor information search, and selectiveperception of information and alternatives (Janis 1982).
Although this discussion suggests a nonlinear relationship
between social cohesion and innovativeness, in our inter-views at the outset of this study, we found that new productdevelopment teams with extremely low levels of socialcohesion are rare (managers usually attempt to assembleteams that will work well together). In other words, socialcohesion typically will be in the moderate-to-high range,and thus we expect a negative relationship between socialcohesion and innovativeness. Therefore,
H2: Beyond a moderate level, social cohesion is negatively
related to new product innovativeness.
Functional diversity . Team diversity refers to the number
of functional areas represented on the team whose membersare fully involved in the project. As the number of functionalareas represented on the team increases, so does the varietyof ideas and perspectives brought to the team. This, in turn,increases the possibility of discovering novel linkages(Milliken and Martins 1996; Osborn 1963). However, atsome point, the diversity of ideas can create informationoverload, but because many of these perspectives are at odds
with one another, high diversity also makes it difficult toresolve differences among perspectives (Olson, Walker, andRuekert 1995). To handle such problems, it is not uncom-mon to find teams resorting to simplifying heuristics oralgorithmic problem solving (Andrews and Smith 1996; Vande Ven 1986). As noted previously, such routine or algorith-mic problem solving is likely to reduce the ability of theteam to discover novel linkages (Amabile 1983).
This discussion suggests a nonlinear relationship between
functional diversity and innovativeness. As functional diver-sity increases from a low to a moderate level, it enhancesinnovativeness. However, when functional diversity goesbeyond a moderate level, it has a negative effect on innova-tiveness. Therefore,
H3: New product innovativeness will be highest at a moderate
level of functional diversity.78 JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, FEBRUARY 2001
Contextual Influences on the Team
Encouragement to take risk .Innovative ideas, by defini-
tion, deviate from the status quo and thus engender adegree of risk for those who propose them (Kanter 1983;Osborn 1963). It is therefore not surprising to find thatinnovative ideas are more likely to arise in environmentsthat encourage risk taking (Amabile 1988; Gupta, Raj, andWilemon 1986). Unfortunately, even though the very
involvement in new product development activity shouldmotivate people to take risks, organizational systems androutines, in subtle ways, tend to make product develop-ment professionals avoid new ideas and approaches (Cyertand March 1963; Van de Ven 1986). For example, after thefailure of the Edsel, the unwritten rule at Ford Motor
Company was “not to break the mold.” As a result,although Ford product designers were the first to conceiveof the contemporary (and very popular) minivan, the ideanever went past the drawing board stage because it wasconsidered inconsistent with the unwritten rule (Taylor1994). However, when the same designers from Fordmoved to Chrysler and received encouragement to pursuethe idea in the face of great uncertainty, the minivan theydeveloped turned out to be one of the most innovative andsuccessful new products in the recent history of the auto-mobile industry. Therefore, senior managers who wantproduct development teams to strive for innovative out-comes should motivate team members to take the risk ofpursuing unique and untried ideas. As such, we expect thefollowing:
H4: Encouragement given to a cross-functional product develop-
ment team to take risk is positively related to new productinnovativeness.
Monitoring of the project by senior management . As
noted previously, innovative ideas do not just happen.Rather, they typically emerge from an effort-intensiveprocess that requires perseverance to overcome inevitableconceptual and technical obstacles. Indeed, one of the mostsignificant determinants of the creativity of outcomes is themotivation people have to engage in the task at hand(Amabile 1983; Andrews and Smith 1996).
In the context of cross-functional teams, close monitoring
of a project by senior management signals to the team andto others in the firm that a particular project is important.This contributes to creating a sense of pride among teammembers and builds enthusiasm and excitement toward theproject (Kanter 1988; Van de Ven 1986). In essence, closemonitoring should elevate the team’s motivation, which inturn leads to the development of innovative products(Amabile 1983).
Close monitoring of a project by senior management can
also help a team obtain cooperation for the project from oth-ers in the firm. Because a new product development team isdependent on the resources and facilities of various func-tional areas, such cooperation is critical to implementing ateam’s innovative ideas and plans. It is difficult not to coop-erate with a project team whose progress is closely moni-tored by senior management.
Conversely, if monitoring of the project by senior man-
agers becomes excessively close or involved, the team canperceive this as interference in the project. Such a perceptioncan have a negative effect on the team’s motivation and itscommitment to developing a truly innovative product
(Kanter 1983, 1988). In other words, beyond a point, closemonitoring of the project by senior management may haveadverse consequences for innovativeness. Therefore,
H5: New product innovativeness will be highest when project
monitoring by senior management is moderate.
Customers’ influence on the new product development
process .Inthis study, we focus on customers’ influence during
the initial stages of the product development process—wherethe foundation for product innovativeness is usually laid. It hasbeen argued that input from customers will result in only incre-mental product improvements that are less novel than what ispossible through engineering-driven innovation (Bennett andCooper 1981). Certainly, such a situation can arise if managerspassively accept customer input and do not subject it to furtherevaluation. However, the bulk of the evidence suggests that
customer input will enhance innovativeness. At the outset of aproject, directly exposing members of the product develop-ment team to customers’ needs/problems and the consumptioncontext can motivate members to strive for more innovativesolutions to customers’ problems (Kanter 1988). Likewise,systematic study of lead users has proven to be a source ofinnovative ideas (von Hipple 1988). As a project goes on, cus-tomer research—in particular, extensive concept testing duringthe early stages of a project—is one of the major processes thatdistinguish successful new product development projects fromfailures (Cooper 1993). Indeed, given that one of the most
basic issues addressed in concept testing is the extent to whichaproposed new product adds value compared with existing
alternatives, customer input should result in more innovativeproducts. We therefore predict the following:
H6: Customers’ influence on the new product development
process is positively related to new product innovativeness.
Team Characteristics and Contextual Influences on the
Team as Moderators of the Superordinate
Identity–Innovativeness Relationship
The integration of diverse perspectives and ideas is at the
core of the creative process and therefore is a central deter-minant of the innovativeness of the new product concept. Wehave also discussed the expectation that a strong psycholog-ical bond (i.e., superordinate identity) among members in across-functional team will be a primary determinant of theextent to which the integration of diverse ideas and perspec-
tives occurs. As such, it is worthwhile to examine conditionsthat may elevate or blunt the superordinate identity–innova-tiveness relationship.
In essence, as superordinate identity increases, the poten-
tial for surfacing innovative new product concepts increases.In this study, we examine the role of three factors that areexpected to affect the extent to which this potential is real-
ized: (1) encouragement to take risk, (2) social cohesion,and (3) functional diversity. We focus on these variablesbecause they are among the factors most widely consideredby managers in forming cross-functional teams (Gupta, Raj,and Wilemon 1986; Katzenbach and Smith 1993; Takeuchiand Nonaka 1986).
Encouragement to take risk . Although an increase in
superordinate identity creates the potential for creativebreakthroughs, if encouragement to take risk is low, theCross-Functional Product Development Teams 79
motivation to strive for such breakthroughs by thinking out-
side the box is limited. We return to the Ford minivan exam-ple cited previously to examine how this might happen. It isconceivable that this team had a high degree of superordi-nate identity, but the unwritten rule of sticking to conven-tional practice would constrain any potential for break-through thinking. Conversely, when encouragement to takerisk is high, we would expect the effect of superordinateidentity in such a team to be elevated. High encouragementto take risk provides the motivation to think outside the boxand tap the creative potential that increases as superordinateidentity increases. As such, we expect the following:
H7: The positive effect of superordinate identity on new product
innovativeness will be enhanced as encouragement given tothe team to take risk increases.
Social cohesion . As we discussed previously, the discov-
ery of novel linkages among ideas and concepts does notjust happen on its own but requires surfacing and challeng-ing assumptions held by various team members (Mason andMitroff 1981). At a minimum, it requires that team membersfeel free to express opinions, perspectives, and beliefs thatdiffer from those held by others in the team. However, associal cohesion goes beyond a moderate level, assumptionchallenging and sharing of divergent/dissenting beliefs maynot readily occur and may even be thwarted (Janis 1982;King and Anderson 1990). Thus, when superordinate iden-tity increases, a moderate level of social cohesion enables ateam to walk the fine line between integrating diverse viewsand simultaneously being able to challenge one another’sideas freely. In comparison, high social cohesion will havean adverse effect when superordinate identity increases.When members in a high superordinate identity team striveto integrate functional information, high social cohesionconstrains the expression of dissenting views and the chal-lenging of assumptions underlying existing approaches andthus reduces the likelihood of discovering novel linkages.Therefore,
H8: The positive effect of superordinate identity on new product
innovativeness will be weakened as social cohesionincreases from moderate to high levels.
Functional diversity . Functional diversity can be thought
of as providing the basic building blocks for creative think-ing—different perspectives and ideas. As such, when func-tional diversity is low, high superordinate identity teamshave minimal raw material to work with; that is, the poten-tial to integrate diverse perspectives is high, but there arefew perspectives to integrate. At the other extreme, however,when functional diversity becomes too great, it createsinformation overload and increases the general complexityof team problem solving. Under such conditions, there is astrong tendency to revert to algorithmic forms of problemsolving (Van de Ven 1986), which circumvents the discoveryof novel linkages. Thus, although superordinate identityincreases the likelihood of integrating diverse perspectives,high functional diversity is expected to blunt this benefit bylimiting a team’s ability to discover new connections. Assuch, we expect the following:
H9: The positive effect of superordinate identity on new product
innovativeness will be highest at a moderate level of func-tional diversity.METHOD
Data Collection
Wetested hypotheses using data collected through a mail
survey from key informants in cross-functional teamsinvolved in recent major new product initiatives. To identifycandidate projects and related key informants, we created a listof consumer product manufacturing firms and their divisionsthat introduced new products within the two years precedingthis survey. Following similar key informant research, our goalwastoidentify a person who would be highly knowledgeable
about team events and practices (Cini, Moreland, and Levine1993). In the present study, this person was the project man-ager. Project managers can belong to various functional areas,butwedecided to focus only on projects that had project man-
agers from the marketing area, because in consumer productcompanies (the focus of our study), many new product devel-opment projects are coordinated by marketing managers.
Wecontacted our short-listed firms by telephone to iden-
tify managers from the marketing area who recently coordi-nated new product development projects. Next, we contactedthese people and screened them to confirm that they hadrecently managed new product development initiatives andthat such initiatives used a cross-functional team. Projectmanagers who met these criteria were asked to completequestionnaires that were mailed to them after the screening.
In completing the questionnaire, respondents were asked
to focus on their most recently completed new product devel-opment project that met the previously discussed criteria.Questionnaires were sent to 240 project managers. Areminder with another copy of the questionnaire was sent tomanagers who had not responded after three weeks. A totalof 141 usable responses were received, yielding a 58.8%response rate. The industries in the sample consisted of appli-ances, lawn care equipment, office supplies, toys, processedfood products, health and beauty aids, and household prod-ucts. There were no significant differences between early andlate respondents, which suggests that nonresponse bias wasnot a serious concern (Armstrong and Overton 1977). Theaverage time taken for the development of the products
reported in our study was 16.4 months, indicating that thesewere indeed major new product initiatives. On average, theseprojects were completed 7.8 months before data collection.
Measures
Whenever possible, existing measures of the constructs
were used. All measures were pretested on 37 project man-agers. On the basis of the pretest, measures were refined.Detailed interviews were held with seven of these managersto ascertain their interpretation of the items in the measures.On the basis of their feedback, the questionnaire was furtherrevised and administered to the full sample (for sample scaleitems, see the Appendix). Descriptive statistics and reliabil-ity for each measure and correlations among measures areincluded in Table 2.
New product innovativeness was operationalized as the
extent to which a new product is perceived to be novel com-
pared with other competing products and appropriate fromthe perspective of the marketplace. This measure is a slightmodification of the creativity scale used by Andrews andSmith (1996) and Besemer and O’Quin (1986). The innova-tiveness scale is a ten-item, seven-point semantic differential80 JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, FEBRUARY 2001
Table 2
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS, RELIABILITIES, AND INTERCORRELATIONS AMONG REFINED MEASURES
Simple CorrelationsStandard
Measures Mean Deviation Alpha 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1. Innovativeness 4.13 .59 .80 1.00
2. Superordinate identity 4.82 1.32 .91 .39*** 1.003. Social cohesion 5.07 1.11 .86 .05 .34*** 1.004. Functional diversity 5.72 1.85 — .08 .14* .10 1.005. Encouragement to take risk 4.41 1.36 .83 .33*** .32*** .13 .00 1.006. Project monitoring 3.75 1.36 .68 .20** –.23*** –.08 .07 –.04 1.007. Customers’ influence 4.85 1.56 .91 .22*** .25*** –.02 .16* .18** –.03 1.00
*p< .10.
**p< .05.
***p< .01.
3To examine the extent to which the judgment of the project manager
about new product innovativeness reflected that of consumers who are thefinal judges of product innovativeness, we obtained additional data from
consumers. Specifically, some of our respondents revealed the brand namesof their products. From these, we picked 12 products that were recentlyintroduced in the market. A product concept sheet was prepared for eachproduct, which included a picture and a brief written description of theproduct. After reading a product concept sheet, consumers responded to thesame innovativeness scale that was used by project managers. We collected328 responses from 82 respondents. To determine the extent to which con-sumers’ assessments agreed with those of project managers, we examinedthe correlation between the average of consumers’ ratings for a particularproduct and the corresponding manager’s rating (n = 23). The correlation(r = .75, p< .01) suggests a reasonably high match between the two groups
and supports the use of managers’ ratings of new product innovativeness.scale that taps the novelty and appropriateness dimensions
of innovativeness. 3
A principal component factor analysis using varimax
rotation suggested that the scale had two dimensions: onerepresenting novelty and the other appropriateness of thenew product. Although these two dimensions are conceptu-ally different from each other, as discussed previously, theyare an integral part of the overall concept of innovativenessof a new product and thus should be combined to form a sin-gle scale (Andrews and Smith 1996). To determine howthese two dimensions should be combined, we regressed aglobal measure of innovativeness on novelty and appropri-ateness. The global measure was a single-item, seven-pointscale that asked the respondents to rate how innovative theproduct was in satisfying customer needs compared withcompeting products. We used the standard regression coeffi-cients of novelty and appropriateness as weights for com-bining these dimensions.
Superordinate identity was operationalized as the extent
to which members of a team identify with the team (ratherthan merely with their functional areas) and perceive a stakein the success of the team. The superordinate identity meas-ure is based on a measure proposed by Hinkle and col-leagues (1989). The superordinate scale is a six-item, seven-point Likert-type scale.
Social cohesion was measured as the degree of interper-
sonal attraction, comfort, and commitment to maintainingclose interpersonal relationships with other members of theproject team. Our measure was based on a measure used byZaccaro and McCoy (1988). The social cohesion scale is afour-item, seven-point semantic differential scale. The meanof this scale is 5.1, which suggests that social cohesion in thesample is beyond a moderate level, as was anticipated at the
outset of this study.
Functional diversity was operationalized as the number of
functional areas represented on the team whose memberswere fully involved in the project rather than being ad hocspecialists or consultants who were engaged only for a lim-ited time (Brown and Eisenhardt 1995). The average num-ber of functional areas in a team was six.
Encouragement to take risk was measured in terms of the
degree to which team members perceived that they wereencouraged to be venturesome and to pursue unique anduntried ideas. A new four-item, seven-point Likert-typescale was developed to measure encouragement to take risk.
Monitoring by senior management was operationalized as
the extent to which senior management showed interest in theproject and monitored its progress. A new three-item, seven-point Likert-type scale was developed for this construct.
Customers’ influence was operationalized as the extent to
which input from end customers was relied on in the devel-opment of the product concept and design. Customer influ-ence is a new three-item, seven-point Likert-type scale.
Covariates . The first covariate, ease of communication
among departments, was measured on a two-item, seven-point Likert-type scale that was based on the items in theinterdepartmental connectedness measure used by Jaworskiand Kohli (1993). The second covariate, extent of competi-tion among new products, was operationalized as the aver-age number of new products that are launched in the targetmarket every year. The project manager’s style was meas-ured on a new three-item, seven-point scale that captures theextent to which the manager encouraged members to partic-
ipate actively in the discussions/decisions related to theproject. Reward structure was measured as the extent towhich rewards for members involved in projects are linkedto the performance of the overall project rather than to theperformance on their respective functional tasks. Resourceavailability was measured by a single item. Finally, team
size referred to the number of full-time members.
RESULTS
Hypothesis Testing
We tested hypotheses using the moderated regression
analysis suggested by Aiken and West (1991) and Jaccard,Wan, and Turrisi (1990). To minimize multicollinearity
among interaction terms and their constituent terms in theregression model, we mean-centered all independent vari-Cross-Functional Product Development Teams 81
ables (Aiken and West 1991; Jaccard, Wan, and Turrisi
1990). We also calculated variance inflation factors forindependent variables in the model and found that all werewell below ten, the value above which there should be con-cern about multicollinearity (Myers 1986). As can be seen inTable 3, the terms in the model account for 32% of the vari-
ance in new product innovativeness, and the F statistic was4.64 ( p< .001).
Effects of Team Characteristics and Contextual Influences
on New Product Innovativeness
It is important to note that because we have mean-
centered the variables in the model, the interpretation ofmain effects changes slightly. In a main effects–only model,the main effects are interpreted as constant effects. Forexample, in a main effects model (y = a
0+ a1X1+ a2X2), the
coefficient of X 1represents the effect of the variable X 1on
Y, holding all other variables in the model constant. In a
mean-centered interaction effects model, the coefficient ofX
1is instead interpreted as the regression of Y on X 1when
the variable X 2is at its mean value (Aiken and West 1991;
Jaccard, Wan, and Turrisi 1990). Indeed, main effects in thelatter model can be considered the weighted average effectacross all observed values of the other predictors (Aiken andWest 1991). In view of this interpretation, we refer to the
main effects as centered main effects.
We found that superordinate identity is positively related
to new product innovativeness (b = .28, t = 3.26, p< .01). H
1
is supported. Also, as predicted in H 2, social cohesion is
negatively related to innovativeness, though marginally (b =4There was some concern that variables such as social cohesion, func-
tional diversity, and encouragement to take risk can also act as antecedentsof superordinate identity and thus may influence innovativeness throughsuperordinate identity. We therefore conducted a test of mediation (Baronand Kenny 1986), which suggests that these variables are not antecedentsof superordinate identity.–.16, t = –1.41, p< .10). 4Functional diversity was predicted
to have an inverted-U relationship with innovativeness.However, we found no relationship between functionaldiversity and innovativeness: The coefficients of the linearterm (b = –.22, t = –.67, p< .30) and the squared term (b =
.07, t = .68, p< .30) are not significant. H
3is not supported.
Consistent with our expectation, encouragement to take
risk is positively related to new product innovativeness (b =.18, t = 1.97, p< .05). Thus, H
4is supported. It was hypoth-
esized that monitoring by senior management would have anonlinear (inverted-U) relationship with new product innov-ativeness (H
5). This prediction is not supported because the
coefficient of the squared term for monitoring is not signifi-cant (b = .01, t = .68, p< .30). However, the linear term for
monitoring is significant and positive, suggesting that thereexists a positive, centered main effect of monitoring by sen-
ior management on new product innovativeness (b = .44, t =4.09, p< .01). Also, as expected, customers’ influence is
positively related to new product innovativeness (b = .17, t =1.72, p< .05). H
6is supported.
Table 3
UNSTANDARDIZED REGRESSION COEFFICIENTS
Centered Main Effects b Standard Error t
H1 Superordinate identity .28 (.09) 3.26***
H2 Social cohesion –.16 (.11) –1.41*
H3 Functional diversity –.22 (.35) –.67Diversity (squared term) .07 (.10) .68
H
4 Encouragement to take risk .18 (.09) 1.97**
H5 Monitoring by senior management .44 (.11) 4.09***Monitoring (squared term) .01 (.02) .68
H
6 Customers’ influence .17 (.10) 1.72**
Interaction Effects
Moderating Effects of Characteristics of the Team and Contextual 
Influences on the Effect of Superordinate Identity
H7 Superordinate identity ×encouragement to take risk .02 (.01) 1.67**
H8 Superordinate identity ×social cohesion –.04 (.01) –3.01***
H9 Superordinate identity ×functional diversity –.04 (.03) –1.28*
Superordinate identity ×diversity (squared term) –.00 (.01) –.21
Covariates
Ease of interfunctional communication .40 (.19) 2.14**Resource availability .12 (.27) .44Competition among new products –.07 (.05) –1.31*Firm’s reward structure for projects –.12 (.28) –.43Project manager’s operating style .15 (.16) .92Team size .22 (.26) .84
R-square = .41
Adjusted R-square = .32F=  4.64***
*p< .10.
**p< .05.
***p< .01.82 JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, FEBRUARY 2001
Team Characteristics and Team–Senior Management
Interface as Moderators of the SuperordinateIdentity–Innovativeness Relationship
Consistent with H
7, the relationship between superordi-
nate identity and new product innovativeness is strengthenedby encouragement to take risk. The interaction betweenencouragement to take risk and superordinate identity is sig-nificant in the expected direction (b = .02, t = 1.67, p< .05).
Likewise, beyond a moderate level, social cohesion weakensthe relationship between superordinate identity and newproduct innovativeness (b = –.04, t = –3.01, p< .01). H
8is
supported.
Finally, H 9predicts that the positive effect of superordi-
nate identity on new product innovativeness will be highestat a moderate level of functional diversity. This hypothesis isnot supported, as the coefficients of both the linear term (b =–.04, t = –1.28, p< .1) and the squared term (b = –.01, t =
–.83, p< .25) of the interaction between functional diversity
and superordinate identity are not significant.
Covariates
As expected, the covariate ease of communication among
functional areas at the firm level has a positive effect on newproduct innovativeness (b = .40, t = 2.14, p< .05). Resource
availability does not have any effect on innovativeness (b =
.12, t = .44, p< .35). The extent of competition among new
products has a weak, negative relationship with innovative-ness (b = –.07, t = –1.31, p< .10). One possible explanation
for this negative effect could be that in markets character-ized by a high velocity of innovation, managers often findthemselves in catch-up positions, which is likely to con-strain the time made available to the team for product devel-opment. High time pressure adversely affects creativity(Amabile 1983; Andrews and Smith 1996) and thus con-strains the innovativeness of the new product. Reward struc-ture does not influence innovativeness (b = –.12, t = –.43,p< .35). There is no effect of the project manager’s operat-
ing style on innovativeness (b = .15, t = .92, p< .20). Finally,
team size is not related to innovativeness (b = .22, t = .84,p< .25).
CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION
In this research, we examined how the characteristics of
cross-functional teams and contextual influences on teamsaffect new product innovativeness. Our results indicate thatinnovativeness is positively related to the level of superordi-nate identity in the team, encouragement to take risk, cus-tomers’ influence, and monitoring of the project by seniormanagement. Social cohesion has a negative effective onnew product innovativeness. Finally, the relationshipbetween superordinate identity and new product innovative-ness is strengthened as encouragement to take risk increases,but it is weakened as social cohesion moves beyond a mod-
erate level.
Functional diversity had no effect on new product innov-
ativeness. With an average of six functional areas in theteam, the teams in our sample might have been beyond athreshold at which functional diversity matters. Likewise,this level of diversity might not have reached a threshold ofbeing dysfunctional. Further research may be able to iden-tify teams with a wider range of functional diversity tounderstand how this variable affects innovativeness.Also, contrary to our expectations, we did not find an
inverted-U relationship between monitoring of the projectby senior management and innovativeness. Instead, ourresults suggest only a positive effect of monitoring on inno-vativeness. It is possible that the effects of close project
monitoring need to be studied jointly with the effects of thetype of monitoring or control (behavioral versus outcome)exercised by senior management (Hendersen and Lee 1992;
Olson, Walker, and Ruekert 1995). We speculate that thoughbehavioral control may restrict decision-making freedomand therefore creativity, outcome control would place nodirect bounds on decision making per se. Perhaps manyteams in our study were not under behavioral control, and asa result, close monitoring might not have had a negativeeffect on innovativeness. The potential for such an interac-tion suggests that type of control would be an interestingvariable to include in future studies on cross-functional
teams and product innovativeness.
Limitations
This study deals with relatively stable and mature con-
sumer products for which the product development processconsists of well-understood steps. Such products require adeliberate development process that emphasizes extensiveplanning. In contrast, for products in an uncertain industry,such as high technology, experiential tactics involving fre-quent iterations of design are more appropriate (Brown andEisenhardt 1997; Eisenhardt and Tabrizi 1995). As such, thefindings of our research may not generalize to firms that
operate in uncertain or rapidly changing environments.
Also, our study is focused primarily on internal dynamics
in the team. As such, we have considered variables related tothe characteristics of the team and contextual influences onthe team that are expected to play an important role inaffecting internal team dynamics and thereby influencingnew product innovativeness. However, factors related toorganization structure and culture are also expected to affectnew product outcomes (Brown and Eisenhardt 1997;Eisenhardt and Tabrizi 1995). Although we have accountedfor several organizational factors either as contextual influ-ences or as covariates, there are several others that our team-level study has not considered. Inclusion of organizationalfactors in future studies on teams can help draw implications
for the design and development of organization structureand culture that help promote innovativeness in new productdevelopment teams.
Research and Managerial Implications
The findings of this study have several implications for
researchers and managers. Regarding the former, recentwork in the area of organizational innovation notes that the
different “thought worlds” of functional areas can hindernew product development (Dougherty 1992). In the presentstudy, we augment this research by showing that creating astrong superordinate identity within a cross-functional teamcan reduce the adverse effects of functional identities orthought worlds.
More generally, the superordinate identity construct intro-
duced in this study can serve as a foundation for furtherresearch on cross-functional teams in new product develop-ment and brand management. In particular, three researchareas are in need of special attention. First, the developmentCross-Functional Product Development Teams 83
of many complex products involves the use of multiple
teams that handle different parts of the product or focus ondifferent technologies involved in the product. The problemsof such multiple-team projects can be different from those ofthe single-team projects that we have focused on in thisstudy. For example, in multiple-team projects, managinginterteam relations can turn out to be as complicated as man-aging intrateam relations. Researchers may want to examinewhether superordinate identity is an equally important fac-tor in multiple-team projects in terms of creating harmo-nious and productive relationships among various teams.
Second, a psychological bond such as superordinate iden-
tity is expected to play a particularly crucial role in settingsin which team members are located far from one another andrarely meet (as is increasingly happening in computer-medi-ated communication). In such teams, spatial proximity,which is considered important for integration among teammembers, is generally absent. The extent to which a strongsense of superordinate identity may be able to compensatefor the absence of spatial proximity in such teams needs tobe examined.
Third, although we have focused on the effect of superor-
dinate identity, creating a strong sense of organizationalidentity can be another way to overcome the adverse effectof functional identities (Fisher, Maltz, and Jaworski 1997).However, it might be speculated that because superordinateidentity is based on an immediate and well-defined projectteam with which a member can identify easily, it is expectedto be more salient and perhaps more effective than organi-zational identity, which is based on a diffused entity such asa large organization. In further research, it would be usefulto compare the effects of these two factors on new productoutcomes.
Furthermore, regarding research implications, our study
has empirically shown for the first time that, beyond a mod-erate level, social cohesion has a negative effect on newproduct innovativeness. Further research can explore thisrelationship in teams with a wide range of social cohesion(or by manipulating this variable in an experimental setting)
to understand if the relationship is nonlinear in nature; thatis, as social cohesion increases from a low to a moderatelevel, innovativeness improves, but beyond the moderatelevel, innovativeness is hindered. Relatedly, from a practicalperspective, senior managers should manage social cohesioncarefully because of its negative effect on innovativenessand its ability to weaken the positive effect of superordinateidentity on innovativeness.
Our study also informs senior managers that certain popu-
lar notions about what is good for teams may not be correct.Forexample, it is generally believed that high diversity helps
teams become more creative. However, our results suggestthat functional diversity (within the range covered in thisstudy) does not affect new product innovativeness.Considering that the formation of highly diverse productdevelopment teams has its own costs (e.g., many employeesmay be diverted from their current positions to work on theproject, team members can face adjustment problems whenthey rejoin their functional areas after project completion;Ford and Randolph 1992), senior managers may want to
include in teams only functional areas that are essential to theproject. Representatives from areas that have been skippedcan be appointed as part-time consultants to the team so thattheir input and feedback are still available to the project.
Finally, this research reinforces the importance of a cul-
ture that encourages risk taking among teams during the newproduct development process. If firms indeed want uniqueproducts, they need to be careful that any other steps theytake do not subtly discourage such risk taking. For example,in their search for improved product quality, firms areincreasingly subscribing to the notion of continuousimprovement of existing products and processes. Suchimprovements have at their foundation the removal of vari-ation in and high standardization of these processes (Clarkand Fujimoto 1991). However, innovativeness requires a cli-mate in which variation is accepted.
Appendix
SAMPLE SCALE ITEMS
A. Innovativeness
Novelty Predictable 1234567 N o v e l
Commonplace 1234567 Original
Appropriateness Useful * 1234567 Useless
Appropriate * 1234567 Inappropriate
B. Superordinate Identity a
1. Members felt strong ties to the team.
2. Members behaved like departmental representatives who were driven by their respective departmental agendas.*
C. Social Cohesion
1. Members were very friendly with each other.* 1234567 Members were not very friendly with each other.
2. Members were committed to maintaining close 1234567 There was no such commitment to maintaining close 
interpersonal relationships.* interpersonal relationships.
D. Encouragement to Take Risk a
1. The team was encouraged to take the risk of pursuing very new product ideas.2. It was expected that the team would be venturesome while developing this product.REFERENCES
Aiken, Leona S. and Stephen G. West (1991), Multiple Regression:
Testing and Interpreting Interactions . Newbury Park, CA: Sage
Publications.
Amabile, Teresa M. (1983), The Social Psychology of Creativity .
New York: Springer-Verlag.
——— (1988), “A Model of Creativity and Innovation in
Organizations,” in Research in Organization Behavior , V ol. 10,
Barry M. Staw and L.L. Cummings, eds. Greenwich, CT: JAIPress, 123–67.
Ancona, Deborah G. and David F. Caldwell (1992), “Demography
and Design: Predictors of New Product Team Performance,”Organization Science , 3 (3), 321–41.
Andrews, Jonlee and Daniel C. Smith (1996), “In Search of
Marketing Imagination: Factors Affecting the Creativity ofMarketing Programs for Mature Products,” Journal of
Marketing Research , 33 (May), 174–87.
Armstrong, J. Scott and Terry S. Overton (1977), “Estimating
Nonresponse Bias in Mail Surveys,” Journal of Marketing
Research , 14 (August), 396–402.
Ashforth, Blake E. and Fred Mael (1989), “Social Identity Theory
and the Organization,” Academy of Management Review , 14 (1),
20–39.
Baron, Reuben M. and David A. Kenny (1986), “The
Moderator–Mediator Variable Distinction in SocialPsychological Research: Conceptual, Strategic, and StatisticalConsiderations,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,
51 (December), 1173–82.
Bennett, R.C. and R.G. Cooper (1981), “The Misuse of Marketing:
An American Tragedy,” Business Horizons , 24 (6), 51–61.
Besemer, Susan and Karen O’Quin (1986), “Analyzing Creative
Products: Refinement and Test of a Judging Instrument,”Journal of Creative Behavior , 20 (2), 115–26.
Brewer, Marilynn B. and Norman Miller (1984), “Beyond the
Contact Hypothesis: Theoretical Perspectives onDesegregation,” in Groups in Contact: The Psychology of
Desegregation , Norman Miller and Marilynn B. Brewer, eds.
Orlando, FL: Academic Press, 281–302.
Brown, Shona L. and Kathleen M. Eisenhardt (1995), “Product
Development: Past Research, Present Findings, and FutureDirections,” Academy of Management Review , 20 (2), 343–78.
——— and ——— (1997), “The Art of Continuous Change:
Linking Complexity Theory and Time-Paced Evolution inRelentlessly Shifting Organizations,” Administrative Science
Quarterly , 42, 1–34.
Cini, Marie A., Richard L. Moreland, and John M. Levine (1993),
“Group Staffing Levels and Response to Prospective and NewGroup Members,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,
65 (4), 723–34.
Clark, Kim B. and Takahiro Fujimoto (1991), Product Development
Performance .Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Cooper, Robert G. (1993), Winning at New Products . New York:
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company.
——— (1996), “New Products: What Separates the Winners from
Losers,” in The PDMA Handbook of New Product Development ,
Milton D. Rosenau, ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 3–18.
Crawford, C. Merle (1977), “Marketing Research and the New
Product Failure Rate,” Journal of Marketing , 41 (April), 51–61.
Cyert, Richard M. and James G. March (1963), A Behavioral
Theory of the Firm . Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Deshpandé, Rohit, John U. Farley, and Frederick E. Webster Jr.
(1993), “Corporate Culture, Customer Orientation, andInnovativeness in Japanese Firms: A Quadrad Analysis,” Journal
of Marketing , 57 (January), 23–37.
——— and Gerald Zaltman (1982), “Factors Affecting the Use of
Market Information: A Path Analysis,” Journal of Marketing
Research , 21 (February), 14–31.
Dougherty, Deborah (1992), “Interpretive Barriers to Successful
Product Innovation in Large Organizations,” Organization
Science , 3 (2), 179–202.
Eisenhardt, Kathleen M. and Behnam N. Tabrizi (1995),
“Accelerating Adaptive Processes: Product Innovation in the
Global Industry,” Administrative Science Quarterly , 40 (March),
84–110.
Fisher, Robert J., Elliot Maltz, and Bernard J. Jaworski (1997),
“Enhancing Communication Between Marketing andEngineering: The Moderating Role of Relative FunctionalIdentification,” Journal of Marketing , 61 (July), 54–70.
Ford, Robert C. and W. Alan Randolph (1992) “Cross-Functional
Structures: A Review and Integration of Matrix Organization andProject Management,” Journal of Management ,18(2), 267–94.
Friedkin, Noah E. and Michael J. Simpson (1985), “Effects of
Competition on Members’ Identification with Their Subunits,”Administrative Science Quarterly , 30 (September), 377–94.
Gupta, Ashok K., S.P. Raj, and David Wilemon (1986), “A Model
for Studying R&D–Marketing Interface in the ProductE. Monitoring of the Project by Senior Management a
1. Senior management was very actively involved in the project.
2. Senior management very closely monitored the progress of the project.
F. Customers’ Influence b
Extent to which input and feedback from end users was relied on during the
1. Development of product idea/concept.*2. Development of design.*
G. General Ease of Communication Among Departments a
1. In this organization, employees from different departments feel comfortable contacting each other when the need arises.
H. Project Manager’s Operating Style a
1. Encouraged team members to actively participate in project planning.
*Reverse coded.
a1= strongly disagree, 7 = strongly agree.
b1= a great extent, 7= not at all.84 JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH, FEBRUARY 2001
Appendix
CONTINUEDCross-Functional Product Development Teams 85
Development Process,” Journal of Marketing , 50 (April), 7–17.
Hendersen, John C. and Soonchul Lee (1992), “Managing I/S
Design Teams: A Control Theories Perspective,” Management
Science , 38 (6), 757–78.
Hinkle, Steve, Laurie A. Taylor, D. Lee Fox-Cardamone, and
Kimberly F. Crook (1989), “Intragroup Identification, andIntergroup Differentiation: A Multicomponent Approach,”British Journal of Social Psychology , 28 (December), 305–17.
Hogarth, Robin (1980), Judgement and Choice . Chichester,
England: John Wiley & Sons.
Hogg, Michael A. (1992), The Social Psychology of Group
Cohesiveness . New York: New York University Press.
Jaccard, James, Choi K. Wan, and Robert Turrisi (1990), “The
Detection and Interpretation of Interaction Effects BetweenContinuous Variables in Multiple Regression,” Multivariate
Behavioral Research , 25 (October), 467–78.
Jackson, Phillip W. and Samuel Messick (1965), “The Person, the
Product, and the Response: Conceptual Problems in theAssessment of Creativity,” Journal of Personality , 33
(September), 309–29.
Janis, Irving L. (1982), Groupthink . Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Jaworski, Bernard J. and Ajay K. Kohli (1993), “Market
Orientation: Antecedents and Consequences,” Journal of
Marketing , 57 (July), 53–70.
Kanter, Rosabeth Moss (1983), Change Masters . New York: Simon
and Schuster.
——— (1988), “When a Thousand Flowers Bloom: Structural,
Collective, and Social Conditions for Innovation inOrganizations,” in Research in Organizational Behavior , V ol.
10, Barry M. Staw and L.L. Cummings, eds. Greenwich, CT:JAI Press, 169–211.
Katzenbach, Jon R. and Douglas K. Smith (1993), Wisdom of
Teams . Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
King, Nigel and Neil Anderson (1990), “Innovation in Working
Groups,” in Innovation and Creativity at Work , Michael A. West
and James L. Farr, eds. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 81–100.
Mackie, Diane M. and George R. Goethals (1987), “Individual and
Group Goals,” in Review of Personality and Social Psychology ,
C. Hendrick, ed. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications, 144–66.
Maltz, Elliot and Ajay K. Kohli (1996), “Market Intelligence
Dissemination Across Functional Boundaries,” Journal of
Marketing Research , 33 (February), 47–61.
Mason, Richard O. and Ian L. Mitroff (1981), Challenging
Strategic Planning Assumptions . New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Milliken, Frances J. and Luis L. Martins (1996), “Searching for
Common Threads: Understanding the Multiple Effects ofDiversity in Organizational Groups,” Academy of Management
Review , 21 (2), 402–23.
Myers, Raymond H. (1986), Classical and Modern Regression
with Applications . Boston: Duxbury Press.
Olson, Eric M., Orville C. Walker Jr., and Robert W. Ruekert
(1995), “Organizing for Effective New Product Development:The Moderating Role of Product Innovativeness,” Journal of
Marketing , 59 (January), 48–62.
Osborn, Alex F. (1963), Applied Imagination . New York: Charles
Scribner’s Sons.
Pierce, Jon L., Stephen Rubenfeld, and Susan Morgan (1991),
“Employee Ownership: A Conceptual Model of Process andEffects,” Academy of Management Review , 16 (1), 121–44.
Ruekert, Robert W. and Orville C. Walker Jr. (1987), “Marketing’s
Interaction with Other Business Units: A ConceptualFramework and Empirical Evidence,” Journal of Marketing , 51
(January), 1–19.
Sethi, Rajesh (2000), “Superordinate Identity in Cross-Functional
Product Development Teams: Its Antecedents and Effect on NewProduct Performance,” Journal of Academy of Marketing
Science , 28 (3), 330–41.
Sherif, Muzafer and Carolyn W. Sherif (1969), Social Psychology .
New York: Harper & Row.
Slater, Stanley F. and John C. Narver (1995), “Market Orientation
and Learning Organization,” Journal of Marketing , 59 (July),
63–74.
Tajfel, Henri (1982), “Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations,”
Annual Review of Psychology , 33, 1–39.
Takeuchi, Hirotaka and Ikujiro Nonaka (1986), “The New New
Product Development Game,” Harvard Business Review , 64
(January/February), 137–46.
Taylor, Alex, III (1994), “Iacocca’s Minivan,” Fortune , (May 30),
56–66.
VandeVen, Andrew (1986), “Central Problems in the
Management of Innovation,” Management Science ,32(5),
590–607.
von Hipple, Eric (1988), The Sources of Innovation . New York:
Oxford University Press.
Zaccaro, Stephen J. and Catherine M. McCoy (1988), “The Effects
of Task and Interpersonal Cohesiveness on Performance of aDisjunctive Group Task,” Journal of Applied Social Psychology ,
18 (10), 837–51.
Zaltman, Gerald, Robert Duncan, and Jonny Holbek (1973),
Innovations and Organizations . New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Zangwill, Willard (1993), Lightning Strategies for Innovation .
New York: Lexington Books.