
  in the project, which the concerned instructors awarded to them based on a predetermined
  criterion. There were 51 different groups of four respondents each, therefore, instructors
  awarded marks to individual students, which were summated for group performance.
> Measures
> While adapting measures, we considered two aspects, i.e., ensuring the consistency between
> measures included in the survey questionnaire and the respective construct of interest and
  incorporating slight modifications to help participants familiarize with the study context.
  Relationship quality. Relationship quality was measured using 14 items from Ural (2009).
  This construct comprises four elements, therefore, amount of information sharing had three
  items (the sample item is: “Different approaches to complete the given project successfully
  were frequently discussed within the group”), communication quality (four items, “Group
  members continuously interacted to complete the project”), long-term relationship
  orientation (four items, “I focused on long-term goals in this relationship”) and
  satisfaction with the relationship (three items, “My association with this group was
  successful one”). All items were measured using a five-point Likert type scale, ranging from
  1 ¼ strongly disagree to 5 ¼ strongly agree.
  Group performance. For measuring group performance, marks given by the instructors
  on the basis of group members’ performance in the projects were utilized. These marks were
  used as they were actual and more authenticated than perceived group performance.
  Internal resources. Internal resources at individual level include time and finance.
  Respondents were asked whether they are 1 ¼ full-time students or 2 ¼ part-time students.
  Regarding financial support, respondents were asked whether they are 1 ¼ self-financed or
  2 ¼ scholarship recipients. Internal resources at group level include group members’
  experience and group composition. For measuring the former, respondents were asked that
  how many times they remained involved in group projects: 1 ¼ less than three times,
  2 ¼ four times, 3 ¼ five times, and 4 ¼ six times or more. Whilst for measuring the latter,
  respondents were categorized into three groups: 1 ¼ only males, 2 ¼ only females and
  3 ¼ both.
  External resources. External resources include instructors’ support and external
  communication. For measuring the both these variables, respondents were asked to mention
  the level of instructors’ help and external communication on the following scale: 1 ¼ low,


