Journal of Business-to-Business Marketing
ISSN: 1051-712X (Print) 1547-0628 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/wbbm20
The Strategic Role of the Salesperson in
Established Buyer-Seller Relationships
Harald Biong & Fred Selnes
To cite this article: Harald Biong & Fred Selnes (1997) The Strategic Role of the Salesperson in
Established Buyer-Seller Relationships, Journal of Business-to-Business Marketing, 3:3, 39-78,
DOI: 10.1300/J033v03n03_03
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1300/J033v03n03_03
Published online: 26 Oct 2008.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 604
View related articles 
Citing articles: 7 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=wbbm20

The Strategic Role of the Salesperson
in Established Buyer-Seller Relationships
Harald Biong
Fred Selnes
ABSTRACT. When the ordering function is governed by administra-
tive arrangements and sales are regulated by long-term contracts,
managers may question the necessity and the tasks of the sales func-
tion within established customer relationships. The authors examine
three issues related to the role of the salesperson in established indus-
trial buyer-seller relationships: (1) appropriate measures of salesper-
son performance within a relationship, (2) behaviors and skills affect-
ing salesperson performance, and (3) the effect of salesperson
performance on the relationship. The results from a survey of indus-
trial buyers suggest that the salesperson has a significant and substan-
tial effect on relationship continuity. They also show that the salesper-
son contributes to perceptions of the supplier’s reliability and supplier
services. The key attributes of an effective salesperson are ability to
resolve conflicts, ability to develop a personal relationship with cus-
tomers, and ability to facilitate exchange of information between the
supplier and buyer firms. [Article copies available for a fee from The
Haworth Document Delivery Service: 1-800-342-9678. E-mail address:
getinfo@haworth.com]
Harald Biong is Assistant Professor of Marketing, Norwegian School of Man-
agement. Fred Selnes is Professor of Marketing, School of Marketing, Norwegian
School of Management.
The study has been funded by a grant from the Norwegian Research Council.
The authors thank Jan B. Heide at the University of Wisconsin for his valuable
support in the study. They also acknowledge the valuable and insightful com-
ments from the three anonymous Journal of Business-to-Business Marketing
reviewers. The authors contributed equally to the article.
Address correspondence to the authors at the Norwegian School of Manage-
ment, Elias Smiths vei 15, POB 580, 1301 Sandvika, Norway.
Journal of Business-to-Business Marketing,Vol. 3(3) 1996
E 1996 by The Haworth Press, Inc. All rights reserved.
39

JOURNAL OF BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS MARKETING
40
INTRODUCTION
One of the rationales for developing long-term buyer-seller relation-
ships is to make transactions more efficient through administrative rou-
tines and contractual arrangements (Arndt 1979; Heide 1994; Sheth and
Parvatiyar 1992). When the ordering function is governed by administra-
tive arrangements and sales are regulated by long-term contracts, manag-
ers may question the necessity and the tasks of the sales function within
established buyer-seller relationships. Research on selling and salesforce
management has to a large extent treated selling as an order-producing
function (Ford 1980) and has measured sales function performance mainly
as sales volume or sales value, market share, or the attainment of a sales
quota (Behrman and Perreault 1982; Churchill et al. 1985; Cravens et al.
1992). If only the order-taking and short-term selling role of the salesper-
son is considered, the importance of the sales function might be ques-
tioned. However, because the role of the marketing function is affected by
the formation of buyer-seller relationships (Dwyer, Schurr, and Oh 1987;
Webster 1992), such a perspective of the salesperson and sales function
may be too narrow in scope. The literature suggests that the role of the
salesperson is in transition toward being that of a relationship manager
rather than that of a seller (O’Neal 1989, Webster 1992). With emphasis on
relationship management, the salesperson is supposed to influence long-
term more than short-term sales. However, with few exceptions (Crosby,
Evans, and Cowles 1990; Lagace, Dahlstrom, and Gassenheimer 1991),
the role of the salesperson within established relationships has not been
studied. We therefore conducted a study to investigate how industrial
buyers perceive the strategic role of salespersons in terms of influencing
various aspects of the relationships with a selection of their suppliers.
We first develop hypotheses about the strategic role of the salesperson
and the behaviors and skills affecting salesperson performance in estab-
lished buyer-seller relationships with respect to relational interactions.
Then we describe the methods used in our study and report the results.
Finally, we discuss the theoretical and managerial implications of our
findings and suggest directions for future research.
THE ROLE OF THE SALESPERSON IN RELATIONSHIPS
Past research in sociology (Larson 1992), economics (Kranton 1996),
and relational contracting (Dwyer, Schurr, and Oh 1987) shows that rela-
tionships usually evolve incrementally and reflect an ongoing process. The

Harald Biong and Fred Selnes
41
same research identifies interpersonal attachments, previous experience,
specific investments, and incentives or relational benefits as mechanisms
that may promote the evolution of the relationships (Axelrod 1984; Gane-
san 1994; Larson 1992; Morgan and Hunt 1994; Seabright, Levinthal, and
Fichman 1992). Over time various departments and functions of the sell-
er’s organizations interact with the buyer, with consequences for fulfilling
the intentions of the relationship (Gummesson 1991; Kanter 1994). The
activities of those functions must be coordinated. Building on the argu-
mentation that within relationships the salesperson should be a relation-
ship manager, a coordinator (O’Neal 1989), and also an internal marketer
(Arndt 1983), we developed the theoretical model in Figure 1.
Relationship Continuity
Understanding the salesperson’s role in developing and maintaining
relationships with buyers requires an understanding of the value of a
long-term exchange relationship to both the supplier and the buyer. The
value of a relationship is assumed to be rooted in the continuity of the
H5d
FIGURE 1. Theoretical Model of the Hypothesized Antecedents and Con-
sequences of Salesperson Performance
Information
Personal
Conflict
Customer
Aggressive
exchange
relationship
resolution
knowledge
sales influence
Salesperson
performance
Supplier
services
Continuity of
relationship
Supplier
reliability
Dependence
on supplier
H2a
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
−
H2b
H4a
H4b
H1
H3a
H3b
H5a
H5b
H5c
H5e
+

JOURNAL OF BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS MARKETING
42
relationship between the parties. Continuity means the parties’ willingness
to prolong the cooperation or agreement to cooperate for a finite or indefi-
nite period of time into the future (Anderson and Weitz 1989; Heide and
John 1990). The motivation for long-term relationships can be explained
by various theoretical perspectives. Efficiency and safeguarding aspects
are central to transaction cost theory (Heide and John 1988; Noordevier,
John, and Nevin 1990; Williamson 1979, 1991). As Ganesan (1994) ar-
gues, firms with a long-term orientation will rely on relational exchanges
to maximize their profits over a series of transactions. Relational ex-
changes obtain efficiencies through joint synergies resulting from invest-
ments in and exploitation of idiosyncratic assets and risk sharing. Also, the
long-term perspective increases the probability of securing a profitable
return on the relational investments. Transactional value theory (Zajac and
Olsen 1993) focuses on joint value maximization of the parties in the
relationship. Managing dependence and uncertainty is central to resource
dependence theory (Pfeffer and Salancik 1978), while development of
competence is an issue when the perspective is human relations (Kumar,
Stern, and Achrol 1992). A buyer provides valuable resources to a supplier
in the form of money in exchange for products or services, access to
markets, and competence that may enhance innovation (Buchanan 1992;
Heide 1994; Pfeffer and Salancik 1978; Reve and Stern 1979). The suppli-
er may provide valuable resources to the buyer in the form of reduced
uncertainty in the procurement of important products, more cost-efficient
supply, and competence that may enhance the buyer’s competitiveness,
such as production methods, increased sales, and new products (Asmus
and Griffin 1993).
How long the parties expect the relationship to last will have implica-
tions for the nature and degree of their cooperative behavior. When the
parties regard the relationship as a series of discrete transactions, motiva-
tion and incentives to cooperate are likely to be minimal and tied to the
output of each transaction (Dwyer, Schurr, and Oh 1987; Ganesan 1994;
Heide 1994; Macneil 1978). In contrast, when the parties regard the rela-
tionship as a series of interdependent transactions, motivation and incen-
tives are likely to be long-term oriented and behavior more cooperative
(Axelrod 1984; Heide 1994; Heide and Miner 1992; Macneil 1978). In
general, both parties are expected to be motivated to have a long-term
focus when the rewards from relational cooperation are perceived to be
more attractive than those from other possible exchanges (Anderson and
Narus 1984; Dwyer, Schurr, and Oh 1987; Webster 1992).

Harald Biong and Fred Selnes
43
Salesperson Performance
Cravens et al. (1993) note that developing accurate evaluations of sales-
people is an unresolved problem for both sales researchers and organiza-
tions. They suggest that one should distinguish between salesperson behav-
ioral and outcome performance when doing sales research. Furthermore,
one should distinguish between the salesperson outcome performance and
the sales organization effectiveness. Salesperson behavior performance
refers to behaviors, like providing information and using technical knowl-
edge (Behrman and Perreault 1982), intended to affect a certain outcome,
for example, achieving a sales quota (Cravens et al. 1993). The behavioral
aspects of salesperson relational performance will be discussed more in
detail subsequently in this paper. Salesperson outcome performance refers
to the outcomes that can be directly attributed to the salesperson, while
sales organization effectiveness refers to a summary evaluation of overall
organizational outcomes taking into account the influence of both the
salesperson and other organizational activities (Cravens et al. 1993; Chur-
chill, Ford, and Walker 1990). According to Craven et al. (1993), total
sales volume is the the most popular measure of sales organization effec-
tiveness, while cost reductions, asset utilizations, enhancing core compe-
tence, increasing future revenues, or continuity of the relationship are
suggested as organizational performance measures in cooperative relation-
ships (e.g., Anderson and Weitz 1989; Sheth and Parvatiyar 1992; Wil-
liamson 1985; Zajac and Olsen 1993). In this study salesperson perfor-
mance refers to the salesperson outcome performance related to the
relational interactions with the buyer. As will be discussed more in detail
in the following section, we propose the domains of the salesperson out-
come performance measure to be (1) the buyer’s satisfaction with the
salesperson, (2) the salesperson’s achievement of results in the buying
company, and (3) the salesperson’s ability to strengthen the relationship.
Most measures used in studies of salesperson performance emphasize
outcomes such as market share, dollar volume, sale of most profitable
products, number of contracts won, cross selling of other products, sales
commission, and the attainment of sales quota (e.g., Bagozzi 1978; Behr-
man and Perreault 1982; Cravens et al. 1993; Crosby, Evans, and Cowles
1990). A question is whether these performance measures are appropriate
for measuring salesperson performance in established relationships. As
noted by Webster (1992, p. 6), there has been a long-standing and clear
tendency for marketing practice and theory to focus on the sale, the single
event of a transaction as the objective of marketing activity and the depen-
dent variable for analysis. However, studies in sales force management

JOURNAL OF BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS MARKETING
44
(e.g., John and Weitz 1989) note that focus on single sales and sales
volume may foster a short-term orientation of the salespeople. As such,
some of the traditional sales performance measures may reflect a transac-
tional more than a relational perspective on performance. However, the
bottom line will always be important and it can be argued that market
share, accumulated volumes and values, and other quantitative measures
of sales performance also may result from long-term relationships. It can
be argued as well that within multiple-sourcing arrangements the salesper-
son can influence the choice of supplier over time. On the other hand, the
number of single sourcing and just-in-time relationships is increasing
(Frazier, Spekman, and O’Neal 1988). One aspect of these arrangements is
that the ordering of products is governed by administrative routines, while
short-term sales volume may be determined by the success or failure of the
customer’s efforts. A consequence for the salesperson is that short-term
sales may depend on factors outside his or her control like, for example,
the market or competition within the customer’s industry (i.e., Churchill et
al. 1985).
We recognize the importance of the traditional measures for sales per-
formance in established relationships. However, for the purpose of this
study we will propose an additional performance measure that reflects the
salesperson’s role as a relationship manager, a coordinator, and a promoter
of interfirm cooperation as suggested by Ford (1980) and O’Neal (1989).
In a relational context an aspect of salesperson performance should be the
salesperson’s contribution to realizing the objectives of the relationship;
either they are cost reductions, revenue enhancement, or stimulation of
competitiveness (e.g., Dwyer, Schurr, and Oh 1987; Sheth and Parvatiyar
1992; Zajac and Olsen 1993). The performance of the supplier’s salesper-
son can be judged either by the salesperson’s objective accomplishments
of relational objectives or by the buyer’s satisfaction with the salesperson.
Building on the argument that satisfaction is considered as an appropriate
measure of relationship performance (Anderson and Narus 1984, 1990;
Dwyer and Oh 1987; Gaski 1984; Gaski and Nevin 1985; Robicheaux and
El-Ansary 1975), we propose satisfaction with the supplier’s salesperson
as one domain of the overall salesperson outcome performance measure
(Crosby, Evans, and Cowles 1990; Crosby and Stephens 1987). As noted
above, the salesperson performance can also be evaluated by objective
accomplishments of relational objectives, for example, contribution to
cost reductions or increasing competitiveness. Although relational results
may be long-term in their nature and therefore difficult to evaluate in the
short run (Dwyer, Schurr, and Oh 1987; Heide 1994; Macneil 1978), we
assume that the buyer has a notion of whether the salesperson contributes

Harald Biong and Fred Selnes
45
to the achievements of the relational goals. Hence, we propose the sales-
person’s achievements of results in the buyer’s company to be another
domain of the salesperson outcome performance measure as a proxy for
the achievement of more objective measurable results. To influence long-
term sales to an established customer, an objective for the salesperson
should be to secure and improve the buyer’s motivation to continue the
relationship. Research in economics (Kranton 1996) shows that coopera-
tion can be sustained if the relational parties monotonically increase the
level of cooperation within a relationship. A perception of an increasing
level of cooperation demonstrated by the supplier’s salesperson should
therefore be expected to reinforce the relationship. Reinforcement could
act as a demotivation to switch to alternative partners as well as a founda-
tion for expansion of the relationship (Crosby, Evans, and Cowles 1990).
Thus, the ability to strengthen the supplier’s position within the buyer’s
organization is proposed as a third domain of the global salesperson per-
formance measure.
Salesperson Performance and Relationship Continuity
The literature on relationship marketing suggests that the task of mar-
keting in a relationship context is to guide the buyer through the stages of
the relationship-development process, from establishing a business rela-
tionship to long-term commitment (Jackson 1985; Levitt 1983; Morgan
and Hunt 1994). Within the terms of sales research, long-term commit-
ment or continuity of the relationship is a sales organization effectiveness
variable (Cravens et al. 1993, Weitz 1981). Willingness to continue the
relationship thus acts as a signal of cooperative behavior. The continuity of
the relational cooperation is perceived more attractive than searching for
alternative partners (Crosby, Evans, and Cowles 1990; Kranton 1996).
Past research in sociology (Larson 1992; Seabright, Levinthal, and Fich-
man 1992) and relationship marketing (e.g., Webster 1992; Wilson 1995)
suggests interpersonal attachment between boundary personnel to be a
major force for maintaining and developing cooperative relationships be-
tween firms. However, scholars currently disagree in which way interper-
sonal attachments actually affect the quality of performance in the rela-
tionship. Seabright, Levinthal, and Fichman (1992) note that performance
will suffer as the parties begin to take the relationship for granted, but that
interpersonal attachments act as an inertial force to switching. Others (e.g.,
Larson 1992) argue that interpersonal attachments promote joint utility
and cooperative performance. Our perspective is utilitarian in the way that
the parties cooperate to realize some goals. When the salesperson contrib-
utes to achieve relational goals, the customer will be satisfied with the

JOURNAL OF BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS MARKETING
46
salesperson and will continue the relationship (Biong 1993; Fornell 1992;
Kranton 1996). This is in line with the results of Crosby, Evans, and
Cowles (1990) showing a positive relationship between salesperson rela-
tionship quality and anticipation of future interaction. The dynamic, often
complex, role performed by salespeople in long-term relationships in-
creases the importance of the customer’s perception and evaluation of the
salesperson’s efforts to manage the often multifaceted relationship over
time (Frazier 1983). Therefore, when a buyer perceives a salesperson to be
doing a good job in terms of achieving relational goals, the probability of
relationship continuity is likely to be high. We propose that a salesperson
evaluated as a high performer in the mind of the buyer will enhance the
likelihood of continuity.
H1: There is a positive relationship between the evaluation of the
salesperson’s performance and the buyer’s motivation to con-
tinue the business relationship with the supplier.
Salesperson Performance and Supplier Reliability
Reliability of the supplier is defined as the ability to fulfill the terms
agreed upon for deliveries of goods and services. Reliability is related to
the actual delivery of products and services (Lambert and Sterling 1987).
Therefore, supplier reliability is mainly a responsibility of the production
and logistic functions. However, as argued below, reliability is also in-
fluenced by the performance of the salesperson. Products and services
usually have to meet specific standards regarding quality, quantity, price,
and time of delivery regulated by the agreements between buyer and seller.
Transaction cost theory suggests that parties may act opportunistically if
given the chance (Stump and Heide 1996). In this case, supplier opportun-
ism may manifest itself in deviations from negotiated terms and specifica-
tions in order to generate a short-term profit. One mechanism for control-
ling opportunism is monitoring (Eisenhardt 1985; Ouchi 1979; Williamson
1994). However, as monitoring may promote cooperation (Eisenhardt
1985; Ouchi 1979), it also involves ongoing costs in connection with
inspection and processing of performance data. A non-reliable supplier
thus incurs increased transaction costs, which argues against one reason
for engaging in cooperative relationships. A reliable supplier saves the
buyer from disturbances in production and administrative routines due to
late deliveries, failures in quality or quantity, and prices that differ from
those agreed upon, which also reduces the necessity for monitoring.
From a game theoretical perspective, parties can enhance cooperation

Harald Biong and Fred Selnes
47
by signaling cooperative behavior (Axelrod 1984; Heide and Miner 1992).
Main elements of supplier reliability are the supplier’s ability to fulfill its
obligations to the buyer (Dwyer, Schurr, and Oh 1987) and to stand by its
word (Anderson and Narus 1990; Kumar, Scheer, and Steenkamp 1995).
Thus, reliability may serve as a means for the supplier to demonstrate
cooperativeness and consistency in the working relationship between the
two parties (Dwyer, Schurr, and Oh 1987). As partners fulfill their ex-
change obligations, cooperation rises to higher levels (Kranton 1996).
Reliability is closely connected to overall buyer satisfaction because it
reflects the supplier’s ability to fulfill the buyer’s expectations. As satis-
faction has been found to affect loyalty (i.e., Biong 1993; Fornell 1992;
Gladstein 1984), experienced reliability is likely to enhance the buyer’s
motivation to continue a business relationship with the supplier.
The tasks in industrial selling may be complex as products and terms
usually are adapted to fit the specific needs of the customer (Webster
1991). During the interactions with the buyer the salesperson must under-
stand the customer needs correctly and communicate the specifications
regarding quality, quantity, price, and delivery accurately to his or her
organization. Part of the selling role can be to cooperate with the customer
on tasks such as capacity planning and production scheduling (Shapiro
and Moriarty 1982). Furthermore, the sales management literature (Wil-
liams and Seminerio 1985) suggests that buyers expect the salesperson to
be responsible that agreements are kept and that the salesperson in general
act in the customer’s best interests within the supplier’s organization. This
argument suggests that salesperson performance influences reliability.
However, the literature is unclear about the causality between organiza-
tional variables (Crosby and Stephens 1987). In their study they show that
satisfaction with the contact person can affect satisfaction with the core
service and institution, just as satisfaction with core service and institution
can affect satisfaction with the contact person. Our rationale for the pre-
dicted causality lies in the assumption that professional buyers learn the
working routines of their suppliers and are able to make distinct evalua-
tions of each of the variables affecting the relationship. Summing up our
arguments, we propose:
H2a: The salesperson’s performance has a positive effect on the
buyer’s perception of the supplier’s reliability.
H2b: The perceived reliability of the supplier has a positive effect on
the buyer’s motivation to continue the business relationship.

JOURNAL OF BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS MARKETING
48
Salesperson Performance and Supplier Services
Supplier services in our study refer to services and assistance the sup-
plier gives the buyer beyond the core ‘‘contractual’’ product or service to
add value to the relationship and to help the buyer improve its competi-
tiveness (Anderson and Narus 1991). For example, the supplier may pro-
vide services in product development projects, or improvement programs
in production, logistics, procurement, and other processes of the buyer’s
organization (Morgan and Hunt 1994). Usually, other departments such as
R & D, technical department, or engineering department will be engaged
in delivering these kinds of assistance. The supplier’s intention is to pro-
vide added value beyond a standard buyer-seller relationship (Sheth and
Parvatiyar 1992) and thus develop a preference for that supplier (Ander-
son and Narus 1995; Cadotte and Stern 1979; Jüttner and Wehrli 1994).
Thus, the additional services provided act as incentives that make it eco-
nomically attractive for the buyer to cooperate with the supplier. Zajac and
Olsen (1993) note that a variety of formal interorganizational arrange-
ments is more a function of future value gains, rather than anticipated
losses due to the cost of constraining opportunism, and that a focal firm
should consider the value sought by that firm’s exchange partner. In a
theoretical perspective the overall goal in offering the services is to estab-
lish a self-enforcing agreement, which makes the buyer’s gain from con-
tinuing the relationship with the supplier exceed any gain for dissolving
the relationship and starting with another supplier (Kranton 1996; Telser
1980).
Shapiro and Moriarty (1982) argue that when products are undifferen-
tiated from competing offerings, a seller can gain preferred supplier status
by anticipating customer needs, responding to those needs, and providing
value-added services. The management literature reports that leading com-
panies such as IBM and Xerox use their salespeople actively in carrying
out a support strategy and train their salespeople in active problem solving
(Fierman 1994). By engaging in value-adding activities the salesperson
demonstrates cooperativeness by selling solutions, coordinating product
development projects, and recommending sets of actions to help the buyer
to become more profitable. According to the market orientation theory
(Gummesson 1991; Kohli and Jaworski 1990), the salesperson is depen-
dent on his or her organization in providing the services to the customer.
As noted in the previous section, the path of causality might be unclear
(Crosby and Stephens 1987). Services provided by the supplier might
affect the perceived performance of the salesperson, just as perceived
performance of the salesperson can affect the perceived supplier services.
Our argument is that the salesperson has to act as an internal coordinator to

Harald Biong and Fred Selnes
49
ensure the fulfillment of the relational obligations (O’Neal 1989) and thus
influence the departments and functions providing the services. Hence, we
propose:
H3a: The salesperson’s performance has a positive effect on the
buyer’s perception of services provided by the supplier.
H3b: The perceived services provided by the supplier have a posi-
tive effect on the buyer’s motivation to continue the business
relationship.
Salesperson Performance and Dependence on Supplier
Dependence on the supplier refers to the difficulty the buyer perceives
in replacing the supplier with another supplier. Dependence can occur
when the buyer faces high psychological, physical, and economic costs in
changing a supplier (i.e., Jackson 1985, p. 13). Dwyer, Schurr, and Oh
(1987) note that when a relationship develops over time, the two parties
gain experience and learn to trust each other. Consequently, they may
gradually increase their commitment through transaction-specific invest-
ments in products, processes, or people dedicated to the particular relation-
ship, thus reducing the number of alternative partners (Emerson 1962;
Johanson, Hallén, and Seyed-Mohamed 1991). Furthermore, the buyer
may incrementally invest resources in the relationship (asset specificity)
like just-in-time programs and voluntarily increase its switching costs and
dependence on the supplier (Anderson and Narus 1991). Increasing the
buyer’s dependence may be an intentional strategy from the supplier.
However, as noted by Ganesan (1994), one-sided dependence on the sup-
plier leaves a potential risk of the buyer to be exposed to opportunism and
exploitation rather than cooperation. Therefore, with no reasonable alter-
natives, dependence on, and not necessarily the attractiveness of, the sup-
plier may motivate the continuation of the business relationship (Ganesan
1994).
Human assets tailored to a relationship create specialized knowledge
and experience, and may improve selling performance in that particular
relationship (Anderson 1985). A relationship-dedicated salesperson is a
potential asset not only for the supplier, but also for the buyer. An out-
standing salesperson from the perspective of the buyer shows ‘‘willing-
ness to go to bat for the customer within the supplier firm,’’ ‘‘imagination
in applying his/her products to the buyer’s needs,’’ and ‘‘knowledge of the
buyer’s product line’’ (Williams and Seminerio 1985, p. 76). More formal-
ly, from an agency-theoretical and transaction cost perspective the buyer

JOURNAL OF BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS MARKETING
50
delegates some tasks to the supplier’s salesperson and invests in the sales-
person by educating him or her about company products, production pro-
cesses, and organization policy (Anderson 1985; Bergen, Dutta, and Walk-
er 1992; Crosby, Evans, and Cowles 1990; Heide and John 1988). These
costs will be sunk by switching to another supplier; also it will incur costs
to educate the new supplier’s salesperson (Heide and John 1988). Further-
more, the buyer is familiar with the performance of the current salesper-
son, while the performance of the salesperson of a new supplier will be
uncertain. Therefore, the working experience and performance of a suppli-
er’s salesperson is expected to create switching costs and dependence on
the supplier.
H4a: The salesperson’s performance has a positive effect on the
buyer’s perception of dependence on the supplier.
H4b: The perceived dependence on the supplier has a positive effect
on the buyer’s motivation to continue the business relationship.
BEHAVIORS AND SKILLS AFFECTING SALESPERSON
PERFORMANCE
As noted above, the sales research literature distinguishes between
salesperson outcome performance and salesperson behavioral perfor-
mance (Churchill et al. 1985; Cravens et al. 1993). In this section we will
discuss the behavioral performance, that is, behavior and skills related to
the salesperson’s relationship manager role (Crosby, Evans, and Cowles
1990) affecting his or her outcome performance with respect to the rela-
tionship. Recall that one aspect of salesperson performance is to realize the
relational objectives and to promote cooperation. From a review of the
literature in sales management (Behrman and Perreault 1982; Cravens et
al. 1992, 1993; Crosby, Evans, and Cowles 1990; Weitz 1981), channel
research (Anderson and Narus 1990), relational contracting (Dwyer,
Schurr, and Oh 1987; Macneil 1978), and sociology (Granovetter 1985;
Larson 1992; Ring and Van de Ven 1994) we identified five salesperson
behaviors and skills that reflect different parts of a salesperson’s role
within an established buyer-seller relationship. These are (1) information
exchange, (2) personal relationship, (3) conflict resolution, (4) customer
knowledge, and (5) aggressive sales influence. Each of these behaviors
and skills and their effect on salesperson behavior is discussed further.
Information Exchange and Salesperson Performance
Information exchange refers to the behavior of the salesperson in terms
of mediating operative information between the two firms. The literature

Harald Biong and Fred Selnes
51
in various research disciplines such as sociology (Granovetter 1985; Lar-
son 1992; Ring and Van de Ven 1994), relational contracting (Dwyer,
Schurr, and Oh 1987; Macauley 1963), and economics (Williamson 1985)
identifies information exchange or communication as a means for the
smooth functioning of interfirm relationships. In this vein it is interesting
to note that efficiency in both market and relational governance relies on
shared or symmetric information among the parties. An open exchange of
information may build trust (Morgan and Hunt 1994), while asymmetric
information is claimed to be a major source of opportunism (Williamson
1985). Interfirm cooperation in close buyer-seller relationships involves
the exchange of information needed to coordinate the operations in the
relationship, such as exchange of production schedule information, sales
forecasts, prices, and calculations (Anderson and Narus 1990; Farmer and
MacMillan 1976; Metcalf, Frear, and Krishnan 1992; O’Neal 1989). Ex-
change of information is also suggested to be an important element of both
traditional industrial selling and selling within relationship marketing (An-
derson and Weitz 1989; Behrman and Perreault 1982; Crosby, Evans, and
Cowles; Frazier and Rody 1991; Metcalf, Frear, and Krishnan 1992). The
salesperson of the supplier provides the buyer with information and rec-
ommends sets of actions whereby the buyer can have higher profits by
development and adaptation of products, coordination of plans, joint
learning, and prevention and correction of failures (Frazier and Summers
1984; O’Neal 1989). Thus we propose:
H5a: The more a salesperson uses information exchange as a part of
his or her mode of behavior with the buyer, the better the buyer
perceives the salesperson’s performance to be.
Personal Relationship and Salesperson Performance
Personal relationship refers to the ability to get along with various
functions at the buyer’s company as well as the perceived similarity of the
salesperson in terms of values, reasoning, and norms (Bonoma and John-
ston 1978; Ford 1980; Metcalf, Frear and Krishnan 1992; Rand and
Wexley 1975; Weitz 1981; Wilson 1995). While economists claim that
appropriate design of economic incentives can produce interfirm coopera-
tion (Kranton 1996; Williamson 1985), sociologists have explored the
effects of interpersonal relationships (Granovetter 1985; Larson 1992,
Seabright, Levinthal, and Fichman 1992). In general, Granovetter (1985)
states that all economic activity between firms is embedded in social
relations. More specifically, Larson (1992) found that personal relation-

JOURNAL OF BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS MARKETING
52
ships were central to both establishing, maintaining and enhancing rela-
tionships among firms, and Seabright, Levinthal, and Fichman (1992)
posit interpersonal relationships to be a source of individual attachment.
The development of interorganizational relationships is proposed to be
‘‘grounded in the motivational and cognitive predisposition of individuals
to engage in sense-making and bonding processes’’ (Ring and Van de Ven
1994, p. 99). The sense-making process results in congruent expectations
and agreement on norms. Such development is important because it may
produce congruent directions for the working relationship (Anderson and
Weitz 1989; Frazier, Spekman, and O’Neal 1988; Heide and John 1992).
According to Ford (1980), personal interactions are essential to the contin-
uation of business relationships, and relationship failures can be traced to
boundary-personnel problems or turnover. Personal relationships are also
expected to contribute to the creation of goodwill and trust, which in turn
contribute to the relationship as a risk-reducing mechanism (Bradach and
Eccles 1989; Håkansson and Östberg 1975; Macaulay 1963). Perceived
similarity is suggested to be an element of both a personal relationship
(Byrne and Nelson 1965; Rand and Wexley 1975) and of personal selling
(Weitz 1981). Research in psychology (Rand and Wexley 1975) has found
that personal similarity could cause a positive evaluation of perceived
performance of other persons, while Crosby, Evans, and Cowles (1990)
found that personal similarity affected sales effectiveness within a rela-
tional context in the life insurance industry. However, previous studies
have used physical as well as psychological and cultural dimensions of
similarity in their similarity measurements (Crosby, Evans, and Cowles
1990; Rand and Wexley 1975). As noted by Crosby, Evans, and Cowles
(1990), the psychological and cultural dimension of similarity might be a
more long-term aspect than the physical similarity dimensions also in-
cluded in other studies using this construct. Hence, we included only the
psychological and cultural dimension of similarity in our construct. Sum-
ming up this argumentation, we propose:
H5b: A positive perception of the personal relationship with the
salesperson will have a positive effect on the evaluation of
salesperson performance.
Conflict Resolution and Salesperson Performance
Conflict resolution refers to the salesperson’s ability to minimize the
negative consequences of actual and potential conflicts. Within a buyer-
supplier relationship, conflict as a consequence of different perceptions of
goals and roles is as common as misunderstandings and incorrect deliver-

Harald Biong and Fred Selnes
53
ies (Dwyer, Schurr and Oh 1987; Macneil 1978). Conflict can be destruc-
tive, with hostility, bitterness, and isolationism resulting. However, a total
suppression of conflict can result in a relationship that lacks vitality and
does not develop into more fruitful cooperation. The question is how
conflict should be avoided or resolved. Williamson (1996, p. 50) states
‘‘governance is the means by which order is accomplished in a relation
where potential conflict threatens to undo or upset opportunities to realize
mutual gains.’’ Transaction cost (e.g., Williamson 1985) and agency
theory (e.g., Bergen, Dutta, and Walker 1992) suggest incentives as mech-
anisms to align parties with conflicting interests. Research on relational
contracting (Macaulay 1963; Macneil 1978) and sociology (Ring and Van
de Ven 1994) suggest that parties must resolve disputes by private settle-
ments when the preservation of the relationship is an objective. In this vein
Anderson and Narus (1990) suggest that boundary personnel should be
trained in conflict resolution to solve conflicts before they reach their
manifest state. Hence, we propose that conflict resolution should be a skill
of the salesperson in a relationship management context.
H5c: The salesperson’s contribution to resolving conflicts between
the selling and buying firms will have a positive effect on the
perceived performance of the salesperson.
Customer Knowledge and Salesperson Performance
By customer knowledge is meant the buyer’s perception of the sales-
person’s knowledge of various aspects of the buyer’s business such as its
production methods, products and their application as well as its market
situation and the market performance of the buyer’s products. Seabright,
Levinthal, and Fichman (1992) note that sources of individual attachment
include personal skills and knowledge. From social exchange theory the
related construct expertise is considered as one of the basic sources of
influence (French and Raven 1959), with positive effect on satisfaction
(Gaski 1984). Marketing and relationship literature identifies salesperson
competence or expertise to be an important variable in sales (i.e., Behrman
and Perreault 1982; Cravens et al. 1992; O’Neal 1989). Studies of rela-
tional selling and salesperson performance (Crosby, Evans, and Cowles
1990; Sujan, Weitz, and Kumar 1994), show that customer knowledge or
expertise has been positively related to sales effectiveness. Knowledge-
able salespeople are better able to communicate, which in turn reduces
uncertainty and leads to more trust within the relationship (Anderson and
Weitz 1989; Crosby, Evans, and Cowles 1990; Lagace, Dahlstrom, and
Gassenheimer 1991; Swan, Trawick, and Silva 1985). However, the con-

JOURNAL OF BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS MARKETING
54
cept of expertise is complex and compound. We therefore limit expertise
to the salesperson’s knowledge of the buyer in terms of the buyer’s firm
and production technology, markets, competitors, and industry. Such
knowledge is necessary to understand buyer needs and relate them to
supplier firm capabilities to create customer value (Webster 1991). Hence
we propose:
H5d: The salesperson’s knowledge of the customer’s operations will
have a positive effect on the buyer’s perception of salesperson
performance.
Aggressive Sales Influence and Salesperson Performance
Aggressive sales influence refers to the salesperson’s use of pressure
and aggressiveness to achieve sales. Aggressive sales influence is often
associated with traditional ‘‘foot-in-the-door’’ sales behavior. The sales-
person typically tries to convince the buyer to order larger quantities or to
order earlier than originally planned and generally focuses on sales and
order taking in the customer interaction. This behavior can be motivated
by the peers of the salesperson pressuring him or her to sell extra units
within a period of time to save a budget or achieve a bonus that depends on
sales. The construct is derived from the sales literature (Weitz 1981, p. 92)
noting that ‘‘the use of control or pressure is a method of aggressively
directing the flow of the interaction toward making a sale’’ and ‘‘the
salesperson aggressively structuring the customer’s problem so that the
solution involves purchasing the salesperson’s product.’’ Furthermore
Weitz (1981) posits that this type of behavior frequently directs the inter-
action toward an outcome that is more compatible with the needs of the
salespeople than the needs of the customer, but that it might violate cus-
tomer satisfaction. Williamson (1975, from Granovetter 1985, p. 495)
makes a similar statement, ‘‘Repeated personal contacts across organiza-
tional boundaries support some minimum level of courtesy and consider-
ation between the parties . . . In addition, expectations of repeat business
discourage seeking a narrow advantage in any particular transaction . . .
Individual aggressiveness is curbed by the prospect of ostracism among
peers in both trade and social circumstances.’’ Summing up this argu-
mentation we propose:
H5e: A perceived aggressive salesperson behavior will have a nega-
tive effect on the buyer’s perception of salesperson perfor-
mance.

Harald Biong and Fred Selnes
55
METHODS
The data used to test the hypotheses were collected in a mail survey of
industrial buyers. We wanted the population selected for the study to
reflect a variety of purchasing practices to avoid biases due to using a
specific industry or one or a few dominating suppliers. An extensive
questionnaire was mailed to a total of 576 companies. These were selected
from databases covering the information technology industry, the apparel
and sports equipment industry, the food processing industry, manufactur-
ers of chemicals and of cosmetics, the pharmaceutical industry, and mis-
cellaneous other industries. The informant was the person responsible for
purchases of the product category in question. In order to generalize from
the data, our main premise was that relational selling behavior should
apply to various categories of purchased goods. Thus, the informant was
asked to identify a supplier of packaging, a supplier of component parts,
and a supplier of accessories. For each of the three chosen suppliers,
informants were asked to evaluate the supplier’s salesperson on several
behaviors in addition to characteristics of the buyer-supplier relationship.
If suppliers for only one or two of the product categories could be identi-
fied, the informant was asked to evaluate those suppliers.
Qualitative interviews with two sales managers and two purchasing
managers within different industries, a total of four interviews, were con-
ducted prior to the main study. The purpose of the qualitative interviews
was to get deeper insight about the selling role in buyer-seller relationships
as perceived from both the seller and the buyer side, to discuss the ap-
propriateness of the hypotheses derived from the literature review, and to
generate items to measure the constructs. Furthermore, the prestudy indi-
cated that the person responsible for purchases was the one having the best
overview and knowledge of the supplier relationships, and that the pur-
chasing managers considered themselves to be the most appropriate to
provide the type of information wanted. That observation is in accordance
with the experience of other researchers studying industrial buyer-seller
relationships (Anderson and Weitz 1989; Heide and John 1990). Hence,
the person in charge of purchasing was expected to have the qualifications
to serve as key informant (Campbell 1955). The informants were encour-
aged to confer with their colleagues, if necessary, in completing the ques-
tionnaire.
The questionnaires, together with a prepaid self-mailing response enve-
lope and a cover letter explaining the purpose of the survey, were mailed
personally addressed to the purchasing managers within the selected com-
panies. After three weeks, non-respondents received a copy of the ques-
tionnaire together with a prepaid response envelope and another cover

JOURNAL OF BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS MARKETING
56
letter. In return for their cooperation, informants were promised a short
version of the report from the study. This procedure produced completed
questionnaires from 126 companies (a response rate of 22%). We eva-
luated nonresponse bias by comparing early and late responders, follow-
ing the procedure suggested by Armstrong and Overton (1977). No signif-
icant differences were found on such variables as sales volume, number of
employees, supplier dependence, and motivation to continue the relation-
ship, suggesting that nonresponse bias was not a problem. A total sample
of 279 relationships was collected. Thus, on average each informant eva-
luated about two relationships.
Development of Measures
The measures were developed based on a literature review and the
reported in-depth qualitative interviews. Then the questionnaire for the
survey was developed and pretested. All measures used in the study are
reported in the Appendix.
Continuation of the relationship (CONTIN). Continuation of the rela-
tionship was defined as the buyer’s commitment to a future relationship
with the supplier. That definition of continuity is consistent with the ones
used in other empirical research on interorganizational relationships (An-
derson and Weitz 1989; Heide and John 1990). The scale consisted of
three items tapping (1) motivation to continue the cooperation with the
supplier, (2) what it takes to break the relationship, and (3) intention to
purchase an equal or larger share from the supplier.
Salesperson performance (SALPER). Salesperson performance refers
to the salesperson outcome performance related to the interactions with the
buyer. We therefore developed an overall measure of salesperson outcome
performance to capture the relational perspective of the study inspired by
Crosby, Evans, and Cowles (1990). The scale items were (1) evaluation
of the salesperson’s achievements of results within the buying company,
(2) ability to strengthen the supplier’s position, and (3) overall satisfaction
with the salesperson.
Reliability of the supplier (RELIAB). Reliability of the supplier refers to
the ability to fulfill the terms agreed upon for deliveries of goods and
services. The scale was built on the work of Lambert and Sterling (1987)
and consisted of four items, (1) fulfilling quality norms, (2) timely deliv-
ery, (3) delivery of agreed-upon quantity, and (4) keeping agreed-upon
prices.
Supplier services (SUPSER). We defined supplier services as the per-
ceived ability of the supplier to deliver forms of services beyond the core
‘‘contractual’’ product or service. The scale consisted of four items per-

Harald Biong and Fred Selnes
57
taining to whether the supplier (1) provides technical services related to
the use of the supplier’s products, (2) contributes to solving production
problems, (3) contributes to solving problems when products or product
specifications are changed, and (4) contributes to new and efficient
constructions for products.
Dependence (DEPEND). Dependence was defined as the difficulty the
buyer perceives in replacing the supplier with another supplier due to
perceived switching costs (i.e., Jackson 1985, p. 13) and relationship spe-
cific investments (i.e., Johanson, Hallén, and Seyed-Mohamed 1991). The
three scale items reflected (1) perceived physical and/or mental costs of
switching suppliers, (2) perceived asset-specific investments in production
and/or administrative routines, and (3) perceived dependence on the sup-
plier.
Information exchange (INFEXC). We defined information exchange
behavior of the salesperson in terms of mediating operative information
between the two firms. The items on this scale partly build on the scales
used by Anderson and Narus (1990). The scale consisted of two items
related to (1) providing operative information from the supplier, and
(2) acquiring operative information from the buyer.
Personal relationship (PERSON). Personal relationship addresses the
ability to get along with various functions at the buyer’s company as well
as the perceived similarity of the salesperson in terms of values, reasoning,
and behavior (Bonoma and Johnston 1978; Ford 1980; Metcalf, Frear, and
Krishnan 1992; Rand and Wexley 1975; Weitz 1981; Wilson 1995). The
scale items reflected four issues: (1) the perceived professional personal
relationship between the purchaser and the salesperson, (2) the salesper-
son’s ability to get along with members of the buyer’s organization, (3) the
similarity in values, norms, and reasoning between the purchaser and the
salesperson, and (4) the salesperson’s understanding of the buyer’s cultur-
al business mentality.
Conflict resolution (CNFLCT). Conflict resolution was defined as the
salesperson’s ability to minimize the negative consequences of actual and
potential conflicts. That definition is in line with Dwyer, Schurr, and Oh’s
(1987). The two scale items reflected (1) ability to avoid potential con-
flicts, and (2) ability to resolve actual conflicts before they create prob-
lems.
Customer knowledge (CUSKNO). We defined customer knowledge as
the buyer’s perception of the salesperson’s knowledge of various aspects
of the buyer’s business. The measure was inspired by the literature (An-
derson and Weitz 1989; Behrman and Perreault 1982; Cravens et al. 1993;
Williams and Seminerio 1985), but developed based on the in-depth quali-

JOURNAL OF BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS MARKETING
58
tative interviews. The three-scale items were (1) knowledge about buyer’s
organization and production methods, (2) knowledge about buyer’s prod-
ucts and their application, and (3) knowledge about the market for the
buyer’s products.
Aggressive sales influence (AGRINF). Aggressive sales influence was
defined as the salesperson’s use of pressure and aggressiveness to achieve
sales. The construct was inspired by the literature (e.g., Weitz 1981) and on
information from the qualitative in-depth interviews suggesting that sales-
people are sometimes pressured by their peers to achieve short-term sales
objectives by any possible means. The three-scale items reflected the degree
to which the salesperson (1, 2) focuses on pushing products, even when the
buyer says there is no need and (3) engages in aggressive behavior.
Ten scales were computed by taking the mean of the items of the
theoretical scales. Statistical descriptions of the 10 scales are given in
Table 1. Skewness and kurtosis statistics indicate that the scales follow a
normal distribution. The reliability coefficients exceed or are close to the
recommended level of .7 (Nunnally 1978).
We tested convergent and discriminant validity of the scales by a con-
firmatory factor analysis procedure recommended by Anderson and Gerb-
ing (1988). Convergent validity was assessed by goodness-of-fit indices
and t-values associated with individual items of the scale. We per-
formed confirmatory factor analysis for all 10 scales by using the maxi-
mum likelihood procedure in LISREL VII. The estimated measurement
model is reported in Table 2. All item coefficients (loadings) are signifi-
cant (p < 0.000). Chi-square for the total measurement model is 790.31
TABLE 1. Statistical Description of Estimated Scales
Number of
items
Mean
S.D.
Skewness
Kurtosis
Reliability
CONTIN
3
4.60
.87
−.64
.46
.67
SALPER
3
4.51
.87
−.57
.12
.83
RELIAB
4
5.00
.67
−.66
.49
.78
SUPSER
4
3.94
1.14
−.44
−.18
.81
DEPEND
3
2.72
1.26
.54
−.44
.75
INFEXC
2
3.65
1.35
−.15
−.79
.65
PERSON
4
4.50
.83
−.94
1.13
.70
CNFLCT
2
4.65
.89
−.76
.67
.78
CUSKNO
3
3.72
1.23
−.09
−.89
.83
AGRINF
3
2.59
1.16
.48
−.59
.83




















