An integration team ’s diagnosing
of context, spanning boundaries
and creating psychological safety
within a multiteam system
Ronald Archie Charles Huggins andCaren Brenda Scheepers
Gordon Institute of Business Science, University of Pretoria, Johannesburg,
South Africa
Abstract
Purpose –The purpose of this study is to explore how integration teams can build trusting relationships in
component teams to enhance their leadership capability within multiteam systems to achieve commonsuperordinate goals. The study investigates how an integration team diagnoses contextual dynamics toenhance understanding of goals in component teams and spans boundaries to create trusting relationships.
Design/methodology/approach –The proposed model was tested by surveying 396 respondents
nested within component teams working within ﬁve South African manufacturing companies. Structural
Equation Modeling was used to analyse the data.
Findings –The study reveals that by diagnosing the contextual dynamics within a multiteam system and
through boundary spanning, an integration team builds trusting relationships, which will, ultimately, enableteams to achieve common superordinate goals.
Practical implications –This study offers organisations insights into how multiple component teams of
different functional disciplines can work effectively towards achieving an overall or common superordinate
goal. It offers insights on how to mitigate misalignment challenges by implementing an integration teamwithin the multiteam system context.
Originality/value –Research participants were employees within a manufacturing context, which sets
this study apart from many previous ones conducted in a simulated environment within a military context.
The study investigates building trusting relationships among multiple component teams within a multiteam
system through the implementation of an integration team, which has not been speci ﬁcally addressed in
previous studies.
Keywords Teams, Leadership, Organizational effectiveness, Manufacturing systems,
Team management
Paper type Research paper
1. Introduction
Changes in technology spawn new challenges that compel companies to act smarter in the
way they govern their operational activities, bringing with it a higher level of complexity
(Kutz and Bamford-Wade, 2013 ). Typically, challenges at this higher level of complexity are
beyond the capacity of individual people or close-knit teams ( Zaccaro et al. ,2 0 1 2 ). These
complex challenges require multiple teams and individuals working interdependently to
solve them. The challenge for leadership within organisations is how to get different teams
to work interdependently over the long term.
The concept of multiple teams working interdependently as teams of teams, has been
referred to in previous studies as a multiteam system ( Zuofa and Ochieng, 2017 ;Cuijpers
et al., 2016 ;Firth et al., 2015 ;Lanaj et al.,2 0 1 3 ;Zaccaro et al., 2012 ). Multiteam systems areA multiteam
system
279
Received 1 December 2018
Revised 21 February 2019
2 March 2019
Accepted 13 March 2019
Team Performance Management:
An International Journal
Vol. 25 No. 5/6, 2019
pp. 279-298
© Emerald Publishing Limited
1352-7592
DOI 10.1108/TPM-12-2018-0071The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on Emerald Insight at:
www.emeraldinsight.com/1352-7592.htm
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tpm/article-pdf/25/5-6/279/2368958/tpm-12-2018-0071.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026formally de ﬁned as “two or more teams that interface directly and interdependently in
response to environmental contingencies toward the accomplishment of collective goals ”
(Marks et al.,2 0 0 1 , p. 290). Multiteam systems are, thus, a hybrid organisational form that is
larger than an individual team, but smaller than an organisation, potentially spanningacross boundaries to other organisations ( Rico et al.,2 0 1 7 ;Shufﬂeret al., 2015 ). The criteria
for a multiteam system include, individual teams within the multiteam system, calledcomponent teams, to work coherently to achieve a common or shared goal or to address
demands imposed by the external environment ( Firth et al. ,2 0 1 5 ;Luciano et al. ,2 0 1 8 ).
Zaccaro et al. (2012 , p. 7) highlight that “a multiteam system brings together a complex
variety of skills, knowledge and functions in adaptive structures that are especially suited tomanaging a highly complex environment ”.
This study suggests that a multiteam system approach could be advantageous for
managing the degree of complexity in manufacturing processes, such as fast movingconsumer goods processes or continuous chemical process operations. In these contexts,
issues develop that require the introduction of a multiteam system with multiple input
processes, which rely on the interactions of various component teams and individuals to beresolved. Typical component teams found in such processes in the South Africanmanufacturing environment, as the context for the current study are: production teams,engineering and maintenance teams, quality and process-technical teams, safety, health andenvironmental compliance teams and sales and marketing teams. Each component teamwould have its own departmental reporting structures, team-speci ﬁc targets and objectives,
specialised skills, knowledge, aspirations and motivational drivers based on their
organisational requirements.
The current study identi ﬁed particular scenarios within each sampled manufacturing
process, where departmental silos were creating con ﬂict and preventing a particular
objective from being met. Multiteam systems were introduced to resolve these issues. Theresolution of the identi ﬁed scenarios or pain points became the superordinate goals. For
example, the company where 83 per cent of the respondents came from, experienced the
following real-life scenario: two ﬁnal product assembly processes had common upstream
feeder processes. They made similar products, however, one was an automated process andthe other was a labour-intensive manual process. The pain point of concern was that therewas destructive rivalry between these ﬁnal assembly processes. The automated process
would secure and demand upstream product to be delivered, without concern for theconsequence to the manual process and vice versa.
The result was that the upstream process would become frustrated because both
assembly process departments would often complain of stock outs, due to either of them,
which had booked and consumed the required upstream product. Prior to theimplementation of an integration team to address this scenario, neither of the ﬁnal processes
had collectively addressed the issues, as each one focussed only on their own proximal goalsand targets. The integration team that was formed comprised eight members of differentfunctions spanning both assembly processes, the upstream processes and some of theexternal planning departments. There were more than 20 component teams identi ﬁed within
the system that had to contribute to resolve the con ﬂict. The component teams included 11
production teams, 4 logistics teams, 2 engineering teams and 4 quality assurance teams.Collectively, 412 individual members made up this multiteam system.
The scenario described above illustrates that interaction within a multiteam system
differs from traditional departmental interaction in the following manner: functionaldepartments tend to work in psychological silos, focussing on their individual goals andobjectives. These are driven by their own departmental priorities, targets or motivationalTPM
25,5/6
280
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tpm/article-pdf/25/5-6/279/2368958/tpm-12-2018-0071.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026incentives. Unfortunately, goal and objective misalignment between those departments
regularly lead to con ﬂict and discordance. Teams within the muliteam system structure are,
however, formed to supersede departmental interaction and work towards achieving asuperordinate goal, without the barrier of psychological silos that could exist betweenorganisational departments. Depending on the nature of the goal to be achieved, these teamscould be formed on a temporal or permanent basis.
For business leaders, this complexity poses a challenge around which mechanisms they
should use to ensure that the multiteam system is appropriately aligned and functions
coherently, thereby minimising con ﬂict and creating an environment of psychological safety
and trust, such that common superordinate goals are achieved (
DeChurch et al. ,2 0 1 1 ). A
typical superordinate goal in a complex manufacturing process could be to produce diverse,large volume, high quality, cost-effective products from multiple production facilities,resolving a recurring product speci ﬁc quality defect or resolving a particular con ﬂict
between functional departments. In obtaining multiteam system performance, relationships
characterised by trust and mutual respect within the multiteam system are required
(Luciano et al. , 2018 ;Gerber et al. , 2016 ;Millikin et al. , 2010 ). As trust is an important
predictor of achieving positive multiteam system performance ( Luciano et al.,2 0 1 8 ;Gerber
et al. , 2016 ;Millikin et al. , 2010 ), this cross-sectional study will focus on trusting
relationships as a contribution to multiteam system performance.
2. Theoretical background
2.1 The role of leadership in multiteam systems
The value proposition of a multiteam system is the achievement of a common superordinate
goal through multiteam system performance ( Rico et al.,2 0 1 8 ).Gerber et al. (2016) conﬁrm
the notion that common overarching goals can be achieved through a multiteam systembuilt on trusting relationships.
However, Rico et al. (2017) noted that multiteam systems by their very nature and
purpose contain divisional seeds among their component teams that threaten the stability ofthe entire multiteam system over time. Some of these divisional seeds include: differences ingoal hierarchy and goal prioritisation among component teams, differences in teamstructure and misalignment and inadequate coordination among component teams ( Rico
et al., 2017 ). Other divisional seeds that may threaten the stability of the multiteam system
are the component team members ’self-efﬁcacy, social identi ﬁcation and disparity between
work and personal values ( Osborn and Marion, 2009 ) or collective emotion regulation ( van
den Berg et al., 2014 ). This suggests that should these divisional seeds go unquenched, the
level of trusting relationships within the multiteam system may be negatively impacted.
The potential for division, highlights the important role of leadership of the multiteam
systems. In this regard, DeChurch et al. (2011) describe leadership functions that impact
multiteam systems, including: cognitive processes, such as situational analysis, roles andresponsibility establishment; developing plans; and behavioural processes, such asinitiative. They suggest that these leadership functions or leader strategies are critical
mechanisms to achieve successful multiteam system performance ( DeChurch et al.,2 0 1 1 ).
For leaders to manage multiteam systems effectively, several leadership strategy actions
should be considered. They include: coordination (establishing roles and responsibilities)(
De Vries et al., 2016 ), mindful teaming ( Weaver, 2016 ), planning ( Lanaj et al., 2013 ), learning
processes ( Sessa, London and Wanamaker, 2018 ), goal alignment (prioritisation), boundary
spanning ( Rico et al. , 2018 ), inclusivity and diagnosing context (analysing the situation)
(Kutz, 2008 ).A multiteam
system
281
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tpm/article-pdf/25/5-6/279/2368958/tpm-12-2018-0071.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026Davison et al. (2012) propose the concept of the leadership of an integration team as a
vertical coordination mechanism in a multiteam system. An integration team comprises
boundary-spanning representatives (team leaders) from each component team and roles
with system-wide responsibilities within the multiteam system. These integration teams
form part of the multiteam system structure and are responsible for ensuring effective
coordination between specialised component teams and the achievement of the common
superordinate multiteam system goals ( De Vries et al.,2 0 1 6 ). This implies that integration
teams are central to the ﬂow of work with members dedicated to spanning boundaries
between component teams. This role enables integration teams to develop a holistic
contextual view of the broader system ( Davison et al. ,2 0 1 2 ).Bienefeld and Grote (2014)
identify boundary-spanning leadership as a key success factor for positive performance in
the multiteam system.
Osborn and Marion (2009) note that followers ’self-efﬁcacy, social identi ﬁcation and
concordance between work and personal values are important for performance. Applying
this to the multiteam system context, a key leadership strategy for the integration team is to
establish a superordinate social identity that the integration team itself could aspire to and
to bridge the social identities of the relevant component teams ’social identities. This will
ensure component team members feel psychologically safe, respected and included in the
superordinate social form ( Glynn et al. , 2010 ). Establishing this superordinate social form
would enhance both horizontal and vertical coordination within the multiteam system.
Aligned interaction among component teams o n the same hierarchical level, referred to as
horizontal coordination ( De Vries et al. ,2 0 1 6 ), enables component teams to integrate their
unique skill sets and knowledge contributions pe rmitting the multiteam system to achieve a
common superordinate goal. Factors that may in ﬂuence the success of this horizontal
coordination include: misunderstanding of component teams ’languages, routines and thought-
worlds ( De Vries et al., 2016 ), frame-of-reference ( Firth et al.,2 0 1 5 ),locus of planning ( Lanaj et al.,
2013), inter-team con ﬂict, measurement and metrics ( Cuijpers et al. , 2016 ), intra-teamwork
quality ( Chaet al., 2015 ), goal hierarchy and prioritisation ( Rico et al., 2017 ), goal discordancy
and differentiation ( Luciano et al. , 2018 ), social identi ﬁcation ( Osborn and Marion, 2009 ),
collective emotion regulation ( van den Berg et al., 2014 ) and leadership style ( Liet al., 2016 ).
Horizontal coordination is particularly important in highly stressful contexts such as
emergency situations or disaster recovery scenarios where different response teams need to
coordinate seamlessly to address the situation effectively. Similarly, in a manufacturing
context, sudden changes in the system such as unplanned breakdowns or unforeseen short
supply of raw materials require teams of different disciplines to function cohesively to avoid
fatal outcomes that could jeopardise critical business objectives. Horizontal coordination
amongst component teams in such situations becomes critical ( De Vries et al.,2 0 1 6 ).
Developing component teams as cross-functional teams to become broad functional
generalists rather than narrow specialists, through cross-training, could improve horizontal
coordination in a multiteam system ( De Vries et al.,2 0 1 6 ). In a manufacturing context, this
entails upskilling production personnel with engineering skills or vice versa. Such cross-
functional upskilling enhances the contextual intelligence of the different component teams ’
members and improves their cohesive interdependence. Contextual intelligence is a
leadership competence that incorporates diagnosing context and knowledge utilisation
(Kutz, 2008 ).
2.2 An integration team building trusting relationships within multiteam systems
The Rousseau et al. (1998) seminal study on trust in the workplace emphasises the
importance of followers trusting the benevolence of leaders, which could be achieved byTPM
25,5/6
282
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tpm/article-pdf/25/5-6/279/2368958/tpm-12-2018-0071.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026leaders including them in decisions which impact them. Trust between leaders and followers
leads to trusting relationships, which are critical for achieving multiteam systemperformance ( Millikin et al., 2010 ). It is the role of leadership to create meaning for a situation
that assists team members to align to a common goal in a way that builds trust ( Ruben and
Gigliotti, 2016 ). Authentic leadership theory claims that the attitude and work behaviour of
team members is derived from the trusting relationship and social identi ﬁcation between the
leader and team members ( Alavi and Gill, 2017 ). Trust plays a critical role because
transparency enhances leader and follower perceptions of each other, thus impacting the
quality of the bi-directional engagement ( Alavi and Gill, 2017 ). Linking this to a multiteam
system, it is imperative that the component teams experience having a good relationshipwith the integration team, as the team members ’attitudes and work behaviour is derived
from this trust relationship ( Millikin et al.,2 0 1 0 ). This infers that if an integration team can
build and facilitate trusting relationships between component teams within the multiteam
system, a common superordinate goal is achievable. It was, therefore, important for this
study to investigate the experience of, mainly, the component team members of theirworking relationship with the integration team and with other component teams. As
Rousseau et al. (1998) note that employees have to feel included in decision-making to
develop trusting relationships with leadership, the current study investigated whether the
component teams felt entrusted to the extent of being included in decision-making. As
the integration team is an important element in a multiteam system, the respondents fromthe integration teams ’perceptions were also important in this study.
2.3 Diagnosing context in building trusting relationships within multiteam systems
Context is the circumstances in which events take place. Diagnosing context is de ﬁned as
knowing the speci ﬁcs of the context to accurately interpret or diagnose an event ( Kutz,
2008). An important element of the context is clarity on which goals have to be achieved.
Sound diagnosis of the contextual variables, thus, enables the integration team ’s ability to
formulate actions and strategies to achieve the superordinate goal. Successful vertical
coordination requires that the integration team members, ﬁrstly, understand the
superordinate goals themselves, then to break it down into proximal goals and ensure
component team members understand the superordinate goals and their own proximal teamgoals. These goals (proximal and superordinate goals) have to be aligned to one another. A
sound diagnosis of the context or circumstances within which the multiteam system
operates, is required to be able to have adequate insight to align these proximal team goalsto the superordinate goals. The comprehension of the bigger picture context enables the
appropriate prioritisation of goals. A thorough diagnosis of the contextual variables within
the complex manufacturing environment is, thus, critical to prioritising goals accurately,
which maintains interdependent harmony.
For this reason, the current study investigated the perception of component team
members and integration team members ’understanding of their proximal or own team ’s
goals and the superordinate goals, called company goals, as well as the extent of the
alignment between their own team or proximal goals and the superordinate goals.
As component teams have their own proximal goals and priorities that may differ from
the common superordinate goals, the integration team must analyse the contextual impact
when prioritising superordinate goals over proximal goals. Failure to do so could lead tounforeseen consequences in the future if inappropriately diagnosed.
Kutz (2008) suggests
that being contextually aware involves being able to detect the attitudes, motivations and
values of the stakeholders impacted by a particular situation ( Kutz, 2008 ). Linking this
competence to a multiteam system, this study posits that contextual variables such asA multiteam
system
283
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tpm/article-pdf/25/5-6/279/2368958/tpm-12-2018-0071.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026demographics, social structures, social background, culture and stereotyping could impact
component teams ’willingness to engage ( Davison et al., 2012 ). If inappropriately diagnosed
by the integration team, these contextual variables could negatively impact the trusting
relationships among component teams if inappropriately acted upon. Members of the
integration team must analyse these contextual variables and implement appropriate
measures to manage them to build trust in their competence and benevolence. For example,
in cases where the integration team members would prioritise their own team ’s proximal
goals, above the superordinate or company goal, it will break down the trust relationship
between the component teams and the integration team.
This suggests that the direct relationship between successfully diagnosing context,
(which leads to an understanding of how team goals are aligned to superordinate goals) andenabling the building of trusting relationships will, in turn, positively impact multiteam
system performance. The current study, therefore, proposes that the integration team
members ’successful diagnosis of context will allow them to create the environment in which
the individual members of the component teams and the integration team will understand
their own proximal goals, their superordinate goals and the alignment between these goals.
This understanding will, thus, contribute to trusting relationships. Therefore, the diagnosis
of context will positively impact trusting relationships within a multiteam system. Thus, H1
focusses on this relationship:
H1. Diagnosing context positively impacts trusting relationships.
2.4 Boundary spanning in building trusting relationships within multiteam systems
Boundary spanning is de ﬁned as the bridging of functional boundaries by individuals
within an organisation to formulate a broader perspective, and therefore, is a key enabler tosuccessful multiteam performance (
Bienefeld and Grote, 2014 ), further supported by
Davison et al. (2012) andMarrone (2010) .DeChurch et al. (2011) ﬁnd that within context
diagnosis, often the process of gathering information includes boundary spanning, not only
across component teams but also outside the multiteam system, which enables the
development of an accurate picture of the problem. As integration team members
are responsible to create a climate where information gathering includes input from outside
their own teams, boundaries have to be spanned. To this end, the integration team has to beopen to the input of the members of the component teams and their own integration team
members ’input. The boundaries have, thus, to be stretched to allow input from various
sources. For these reasons, the current study was interested in the perception of the
component team members, whether their input was, indeed, welcomed when they offer input
to other component teams; and whether they have received input by other teams. The study
also included integration team members, as these integration team members also need to
experience that their input is welcomed by their own team members and other componentteams.
To enhance the integration team ’s contextual intelligence, boundary spanning is critical
to effectively coordinate and prioritise goals for component teams within the multiteam
system ( DeChurch et al.,2 0 1 1 ). Coordination and alignment can be achieved through mutual
trust among component teams, supplementing the achievement of a common superordinate
goal ( Weaver, 2016 ). Through boundary spanning, the integration team members become
knowledgeable about the collective functions within the multiteam system; thus, equipping
them to appropriately diagnose the contextual variables that positively or negatively impact
the multiteam system ’s performance. Additionally, boundary spanning would facilitate the
multiteam system learning process, enhancing the ability of the integration team to achieveTPM
25,5/6
284
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tpm/article-pdf/25/5-6/279/2368958/tpm-12-2018-0071.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026the superordinate goal ( Sessa et al. ,2 0 1 8 ). This would suggest that through boundary
spanning the integration team is better aligned at channelling information ﬂow down to
component teams, thus cultivating more accurate decision-making. Furthermore, boundaryspanning would build stronger social networks, thereby advancing the cohesive trustingrelationships within the multiteam system ( Marrone, 2010 ). This study, thus, proposes that
boundary spanning would contribute to building trusting relationships between the
component teams and with the integration team within the multiteam system. Theintegration team would, therefore, create the climate where the input of component teammembers are valued; in this sense, boundaries of the teams are spanned to allow information
ﬂow and contribute to building trusting relationships within the multiteam system. The
study, thus, proposes the following H2on this relationship:
H2. Spanning of boundaries positively impacts trusting relationships.
2.5 Psychological safety in building trusting relationships within a multiteam system
A climate where people feel safe, due to mutual respect, is de ﬁned as a work environment
where psychological safety exists ( Baer and Frese, 2003 ). Psychological safety is required
for sound interdependent coordination and positive team interaction. Environments that arenon-threatening and supportive are more likely to enhance team members ’willingness to
engage and collaborate, thus impacting positively on organisational performance ( Baer and
Frese, 2003 ). Furthermore, a climate of trust, due to psychological safety is an important
enabler for successful interdependent relationships ( Weaver, 2016 ). As an integration team
positively impacts multiteam system coordination and interdependence towards achieving acommon superordinate goal, it is proposed that the creation of a climate of psychological
safety by an integration team aids in building trust, further enhancing multiteam system
performance ( Gerber et al.,2 0 1 6 ).
For there to be an element of trust and a cohesive working relationship among
component team members, individuals need to feel psychologically safe and that theircontributions are valued and taken seriously (
Gerber et al. ,2 0 1 6 ). This study, therefore,
included items that point to how safe respondents feel that their suggestions are taken
seriously and that their integration team is open to their ideas and suggestions. To cultivatethis, a climate of psychological safety is important ( Somech and Drach-zahavy, 2013 ). The
integration team should, therefore, create a climate where component teams do not feelthreatened and where they have a place to speak up and engage with other component
teams and do not feel threatened when engaging with the integration team ( Baer and Frese,
2003). This suggests that integration team members themselves if they are to cascade a
climate of psychological safety downwards to component teams, should feel psychologicallysafe to engage with members from other functions without the threat of ridicule orsubversion.
Furthermore, it is proposed that without a climate of psychological safety, component
teams will retract and disengage, choosing to focus on their proximal goals rather thancommitting towards the achievement of the common superordinate goal (
Luciano et al. ,
2018). Such an environment would breed resentment, distrust and con ﬂict within the
multiteam system. This would result in negative multiteam system performance or failure to
achieve a common superordinate goal. This suggests that the direct relationship between aclimate of psychological safety and building trust and mutual respect positively impactsmultiteam system performance ( Gerber et al.,2 0 1 6 ). This study, therefore, proposes that the
integration team members ’creation of a climate of psychological safety positively impactsA multiteam
system
285
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tpm/article-pdf/25/5-6/279/2368958/tpm-12-2018-0071.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026trusting relationships between component teams and with the integration team within a
multiteam system. Thus, H3pays attention to this relationship:
H3. Creating psychological safety positively impacts trusting relationships.
This research suggests that enabling information ﬂow and prioritising goals through
vertical coordination by means of an integration team, appears to be the optimal solution for
effectively managing a multiteam system towards achieving a common superordinate goal
through in ﬂuencing component teams.
Moreover, it is evident that an integration team positively impacts the interdependent
interactions between component teams within a multiteam system through coordinatingvertically and enabling information ﬂow that builds trust within the multiteam system. This
cross-sectional study proposes that the measure of multiteam performance is the strength of
the trust relationship among component teams within the multiteam system, leading to theachievement of a common superordinate goal.
The conceptual model depicted in Figure 1
above illustrates the direct relationships
between diagnosing context, boundary spanning and creating a climate of psychological
safety, which contribute to a trusting relationship, which, ultimately, positively impactsmultiteam system performance ( Gerber et al.,2 0 1 6 ;Luciano et al.,2 0 1 8 ;Millikin et al.,2 0 1 0 ),
which, in turn, stimulate the achievement of a common superordinate goal ( Davison et al. ,
2012).
Figure 1 highlights the focus of this study, which is the impact of diagnosing context,
boundary spanning and creating a climate of psychological safety on trusting relationships
in the multiteam system. The study is not measuring the performance of the multiteamsystem and not measuring the ultimate achievement of a superordinate goal.
3. Methods
3.1 Sample
Five South African manufacturing companies were sampled where a particular pain pointwas identi ﬁed in each company and where the implementation of an integration team was
introduced to resolve the pain point by interacting with the various component teams that
exist within the departments concerned. The resolution of the pain point became thesuperordinate goal to be achieved for each integration team. The population consisted ofindividuals that form part of mostly component teams and a limited number of integrationteams that had in ﬂuence or could contribute towards resolving the identi ﬁed pain point
(superordinate goal) within the manufacturing companies. In total, 652 questionnaires were
distributed across the ﬁve South African manufacturing companies and 400 responses were
Figure 1.
A conceptual model
of an integration
team ’s impact on
trusting relationships
leading to positivemultiteam system
performance
TPM
25,5/6
286
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tpm/article-pdf/25/5-6/279/2368958/tpm-12-2018-0071.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026returned (overall response rate of 61.35 per cent). Four respondents did not answer all
the questions in the questionnaire and their completed questionnai res were, therefore,
discarded, leaving a total of 396 responses for analysis. The sample comprised 278 male(70.2 per cent) and 118 female (29.8 per cent ) respondents. The majority (52.2 per cent,
SD = 0.832) of the respondents were between 31 and 40 years of age. 93.9 per cent of therespondents were African, 3.3 per cent wer e Caucasian, 1.5 per cent were Indian and 1
per cent were of mixed race. A total of 22.5 per cent of the respondents occupiedmanagement positions and 77.5 per cent wer e staff members. The sample consisted of
seven different functional disciplines (pro duction = 75.3 per cent, engineering = 7.3 per
cent, health and safety = 1 per cent, quality and technical = 9.1 per cent, planning = 0.5per cent, logistics = 6.3 per cent and training = 0.5 per cent). The example that theresearchers mentioned in the introduction on the manufacturing context, will be called
Company A. The identi ﬁed goal in this Company A was to resolve destructive rivalry
between two parallel assembly processes wi th a common upstream feeder process. For
Company B, the goal was to resolve a longstanding recurring quality defect on aparticular product. For Company C, the goal was to resolve a high rate of safety related
incidents. For Company D, the goal was to r esolve the inability to meet the customer
speciﬁcation requirement for a particular raw material, and ﬁnally for Company E, it
w a st or e s o l v eac o n ﬂict issue between a production process and its supporting
departmental structures.
The sample comprised of respondents from ﬁve integration teams and the rest from
component teams and they were from different functions across the ﬁve South African
companies. Of the respondents, 83.1 per cent worked for Company A, 1.5 per cent worked forCompany B, 6.6 per cent worked for Company C, 5.3 per cent worked for Company D and 3.5
per cent worked for Company E. For the sake of con ﬁdentiality, the names of the ﬁve South
African companies and the speci ﬁc details of the identi ﬁed superordinate goals were omitted
from the study to ensure anonymity.
3.2 Procedure
After ethical clearance was given by the university ’s committee, the questionnaires were
distributed manually across ﬁve different South African manufacturing companies, all
within the same geographic location (Gauteng province). While their products and processesare quite different, all represent complex systems. The reason the questionnaires weredistributed manually was because many of the respondents did not have access to theinternet or their computer literacy and internet skills were limited. In addition, the majorityof the individuals do not speak English as a ﬁrst language. Many early mornings and late
nights were spent meeting with each of the different teams, as many of their membersworked shifts. Approximately, 15 min was spent introducing the purpose of the research.All the teams showed willingness to assist and many of them completed the questionnairesthere and then.
A pilot test of the questionnaire was conducted in Company B prior to meeting the teams
of the other companies. There were some challenges around understanding the academicwording of some of the questions as English is not the mother tongue of many respondentsand for many, matric in a rural school was their highest level of education. As a result, someof the questions from the scales were simpli ﬁed or omitted for ease of understanding. For
example, proximal goals was changed to departmental team goals andsuperordinate goals
was changed to company goals.A multiteam
system
287
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tpm/article-pdf/25/5-6/279/2368958/tpm-12-2018-0071.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 20263.3 Measures
A questionnaire was developed by amalgamating questions from several scales that showed
high reliability and validity in their original studies. The reason for amalgamating the scaleswas that some questions did not ﬁt a manufacturing context or would have been dif ﬁcult to
understand. The scales were further simpli ﬁed based on learnings from the pilot conducted
prior to the full-scale data-gathering exercise.
3.3.1 Diagnosing context. The reliability and validity of the original scale was high with
a Cronbach ’s alpha reported of 0.91 by
Kutz and Bamford-Wade (2013) ,“Understanding
contextual intelligence –A critical competence for today ’s leaders ”. For the manufacturing
context, the items have been adapted, for instance, the original item of Kutz and Bamford-
Wade (2013) :“I am familiar with the mission of my organisation ”, was adapted to speak to
the superordinate goal, which was called the goals of the company for the respondents in the
current study. The item in the current study was, “I understand my company
(superordinate) goals ”(DC2). An item of Kutz (2008) on“I am aware of my context ”, was
adapted for the manufacturing environment as follows: “I understand my team or proximal
goals ”(DC3). The alignment aspect was added to the items, to assess whether the
respondent comprehends the link between the team or proximal goals and the superordinate
or company goals as part of the diagnosing context items (DC1).
These scales were relevant to establish the understanding of the integration team and
component team respondents of their goals as it formed their context within the multiteamsystem. As noted by
Kutz (2008) and Kutz and Bamford-Wade (2013) , successfully
diagnosing context is a critical leader strategy.
3.3.2 Boundary spanning. Under boundary spanning, the current study adapted items
from Van der Vegt et al. (2001) ,“patterns of interdependence in work teams: a two-level
investigation of the relations with job and team satisfaction ”. They reported acceptable
statistical analysis of the original scale: CFI = 0.97, GFI = 0.94, SRMSR = 0.04 (Van d er Vegt
et al. , 2001 ). The item in the original scale, namely, “In order to complete their work, my
collegues have to obtain information and advice from me ”(Van der Vegt et al., 2001 ), was
adapted for the current study for application in the manufactoring context as follows: BS1 –
“I often give input into other teams in my company that have a different function to my
team ”. The next item, BS2 –“I often receive input from other teams in my company that
have a different function to mine ”, was adapted from Van der Vegt et al. (2001) . The original
item was: “I have to work closely with my collegues to do my work properly ”(Van der Vegt
et al., 2001 ). The “work closely ”was adapted to indicate “receive input from other teams ”to
illustrate the reciprocating relationship of giving input into other teams and to receive input
from other teams within a multiteam system.
These scales were relevant in terms of understanding the extent to which boundary
spanning occurs within the multiteam system as noted by Bienefeld and Grote (2014) and
Marrone (2010) .
3.3.3 Psychological safety. The items for psychological safety were sourced from Baer
and Frese (2003) ,“Innovation is not enough: climate for initiative and psychological safety,
process innovations, and ﬁrm performance ”. The reliability and validity of the original scale
reported a Cronbach ’s alpha of 0.82 ( Baer and Frese, 2003 ). The items in the original scale
included, “In our company one is free to take risks ”and “As an employee in our company
one is able to bring up problems and tough issues ”(Baer and Frese, 2003 ). In the current
study, these items were adapted for the manufacturing context where the integration teammust be open when respondents want to raise problems and tough issues as in the originalscale used. The current study adapted these items as follows, PS2 –“The integration team is
open to new ideas and suggestions ”. In the multiteam system, it is important that whenTPM
25,5/6
288
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tpm/article-pdf/25/5-6/279/2368958/tpm-12-2018-0071.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026component team members raise issues and make suggestions that the integration team
would take them seriously, and thus, the item for the current study was formulated as, PS1 –
“I feel that my suggestions are taken seriously by the integration team ”.
These items are relevant in terms of understanding the extent to which a climate of
psychological safety exists within the multiteam system, which is a critical leader strategyas noted by
Baer and Frese (2003) andGerber et al. (2016) .
3.3.4 Trusting relationships. The original scale of McAllister (1995) ,“Affect- and
Cognition-based trust as foundations for interpersonal cooperation in organizations ”,
reported Cronbach ’s alpha of 0.91 and 0.89. Items in the original scale included, “Other work
associates of mine who must interact with this individual consider him/her to betrustworthy ”. Another item from the original scale, which was relevant to the current study
was:
We have a sharing relationship. We can both freely share our ideas, feelings, and hopes. I can talk
freely to this individual about di ﬃculties I am having at work and know that (s)he will want to
listen ( McAllister, 1995 ).
The current study used this item and adapted it to refer to the integration team and instead
of“sharing relationship ”, the current study reformulated the item to read “a working
relationship ”because it was more ﬁtting to a manufacturing context, as follows: TR1 –“I
have a good working relationship with the integration team ”. As explained in the literature
review, Rousseau et al. (1998) note that employees have to feel included in decision-making
to develop trusting relationships with leadership. Being entrusted to the extent of beingincluded in decision-making was, therefore, important to the current study. We then addedthe item on being included in decision-making, as it was a good indication whether there
was a trusting relationship as follows: TR2 –“I feel that I am included in team decision
making ”. These items resorted under one factor and was called trusting relationships.
Trusting relationships is the dependent variable in this study as these trusting relationshipsare proposed to ultimately leading to multiteam system performance. These items arerelevant in determining the strength of the trust relationship as noted by Ruben and
Gigliotti (2016) andMillikin et al. (2010) . This study focussed on the strength of trusting
relationships at the component team level and relationships with the integration team. Thestudy did not measure the performance and did not measure the achievement of asuperordinate goal at the multiteam system level. Responses were recorded on a ﬁve-point
Likert scale, ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree).
A test for normality on all the items was conducted, followed by a Cronbach ’s alpha test
on the ﬁnalised amalgamated scales and composite reliability (CR), which yielded the
following results: for diagnosing context: a= 0.847, boundary spanning: a= 0.890, climate
of psychological safety: a= 0.782 and trusting relationships: a= 0.718. Adaptability and
ﬂexibility was initially added as a construct but was later discarded following a Cronbach ’s
alpha result of 0.542 for the revised scale. The descriptive statistics is shown in Table I ,
namely, mean, standard deviation and the factor analysis and Cronbach ’s alpha results.
A single questionnaire was given to all respondents, which leads to common method
bias. We conducted the Harman ’s test for common method variance (CMV) to assess the
extent of the impact of common method bias. The results showed it was acceptable, below50 per cent, which indicated that the CMV was not substantial and did not pose a seriousthreat to the validity of the results.
The Kaiser –Meyer –Olkin (KMO) measure of sampling adequacy was performed and the
Bartlett ’s test for sphericity. The KMO indicated 0.871 for boundary spanning; 0.848 forA multiteam
system
289
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tpm/article-pdf/25/5-6/279/2368958/tpm-12-2018-0071.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026diagnosing context; 0.754 for psychological safety and 0.729 for trusting relationships. The
Bartlett ’s test for sphericity was also acceptable for all the scales.
Structural equation modelling (SEM) was used for the data analysis that included all the
hypothesised paths, which is consistent with other studies conducted on multiteam system
performance ( Cuijpers et al., 2016 ;Chaet al., 2015 ). SEM was appropriate for investigating
the interrelations among the set of variables, as it offers advantages over multipleregression, accounting, as it does for measurement error ( Strasheim, 2014 ). SEM is a second
generation multivariate method used to assess the reliability and validity of the model
measures holistically, whereas ﬁrst generation multivariate methods, such as multiple
regression, are appropriate for evaluating constructs and relationships between constructs
(Tabachnick and Fidell, 2001 , p. 111). A measurement model was developed in AMOS 24.0
for the four constructs to be tested. A con ﬁrmatory factor analysis was conducted to test for
construct validity of the amalgamated scales using the measurement model. Maximumlikelihood estimation was used to estimate the parameters of the model. Factors were
reduced until a strong model ﬁt was achieved, following construct convergent and divergent
validity. Cronbach ’s alpha test for reliability, an instrument ’s ability to measure consistently
(Tavakol and Dennick, 2011 ) was conducted on the four constructs of the remaining factors.
A structured model was constructed to formulate the standardised regression estimates(
Figure 2 ).
4. Results
The factor loadings against the four constructs: diagnosing context, boundary spanning,
psychological safety and trusting relationships (dependant variables) were above 0.7, which
is desirable ( Anderson and Gerbing, 1988 ), except for “I have a good working relationship
with the integration team ”. Factors that loaded below 0.5 were, therefore, discarded from the
measurement model. CR, construct validity and discriminant validity were achieved for theremaining factors. A limitation was that several of the items from the amalgamated scalesTable I.
Scales, items anddescriptive statisticsItems M SDFactor
loadingsCronbach ’s
alpha
Diagnosing context 0.804
DC1: My team (proximal) goals and company (superordinate)goals are aligned 3.70 1.047 0.802DC2: I understand my company (superordinate) goals 3.643 0.9287 0.729
DC3: I understand my team (proximal) goals 3.582 1.0158 0.749
Boundary spanning 0.803
BS1: I often give input into other teams in my company that havea different function to my team 3.495 0.9314 0.950
BS2: I often receive input from other teams in my company that
have a different function to mine 2.940 1.288 0.706
Psychological safety 0.771
PS1: I feel that my suggestions are taken seriously by the
integration team 3.820 0.8795 0.762
PS2: The integration team is open to new ideas and suggestions 3.369 0.9340 0.823
Trusting relationships 0.666
TR1: I have a good working relationship with the integration team 3.188 1.1291 0.583
TR2: I feel that I am included in team decision making 2.940 1.288 0.908TPM
25,5/6
290
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tpm/article-pdf/25/5-6/279/2368958/tpm-12-2018-0071.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026loaded below 0.5, leaving a total of nine items across the four constructs. Several indices
were used for the analysis including the goodness of ﬁt statistic ( x2), which assesses the
magnitude of discrepancy between the sample and ﬁtted covariance matrices ( Hu and
Bentler, 1999 ), supplemented by the chi-square minimum/degrees of freedom (CMIN/DF),
the Tucker index (TLI), comparative ﬁt index (CFI), normed ﬁt index (NFI), incremental ﬁt
index (IFI), relative ﬁt index (RFI) and the root mean squared error of approximation
(RMSEA). Table II , Column 2 tabulates the strong model ﬁt values for the measurement
model.
Table II , Column 3 tabulates the results for th e structured model, which achieved a
strong model ﬁt. For the model ﬁt indicators; x2= 37.035, df = 22, p-value = 0.023,
CMIN/DF = 1.683, RMSEA = 0.042, TLI = 0.984, IFI = 0.990, CFI = 0.990, RFI = 0.961
and NFI = 0.976. These results are regarded as a strong model ﬁt for CMIN/DF values
<2, RMSEA values <0.06 and TLI, IFI, CFI, RFI and NFI values >0.95 ( Hu and Bentler,
1999 ). The structured model ﬁt indices were marginally better than the model ﬁt indices
produced by the measurement model, indicating that the structural model had
improved in terms of model ﬁt.
Table II also tabulates the signi ﬁcance levels for the hypothesised paths for the
structural model. From the regression weights, the path between psychological safety and
trusting relationships was not signi ﬁcant (0.97), the path between boundary spanning
and trusting relationships was signi ﬁcant (0.00), the path between diagnosing context and
trusting relationships was signi ﬁcant (0.00).
The standardised regression weight estimates for the hypothesised paths of the
structural model indicate that the structural model boundary spanning estimate was 0.86,Figure 2.
The study ’s SEM
structural model
A multiteam
system
291
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tpm/article-pdf/25/5-6/279/2368958/tpm-12-2018-0071.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026indicating that boundary spanning is a signi ﬁcant predictor for building trusting
relationships. The diagnosing context estimate was 0.10 indicating that diagnosing is arelatively low predictor for building trusting relationships that leads to multiteam systemperformance, yet it is still signi ﬁcant. As the path between psychological safety and trusting
relationships was not signi ﬁcant (0.97), the estimate for this path is 0.00. This would suggest
that psychological safety is not a strong predictor for impacting positive multiteamperformance through building trusting relationships. In summary, the ﬁndings are:
successfully diagnosing the contextual dynamics by the integration team positively impacts
trusting relationships between component teams and with the integration team within a
multiteam system, and thus, H1can be accepted. H2can also be accepted as the study
shows boundary spanning members of the integration team positively impact trustingrelationships between component teams and with the integration team within the multiteamsystem. Creating a climate of psychological safety by the integration team did not impact
trusting relationships between component teams and with the integration team within a
multiteam system; however, H3is, thus, rejected.
5. Discussion
This study explored some of the leadership strategies that integration teams within
organisations employ to ensure that component teams within a multiteam system are well-coordinated, appropriately aligned and work coherently within a psychologically safe and
trusting environment. Much of the research on multiteam system performance in the past
has focussed on simulation within a military context (
De Vries et al.,2 0 1 6 ;Firth et al.,2 0 1 5 ;
Davison et al. , 2012 ;Murase et al. , 2014 ) or a simulated laboratory experiment ( Guchait,
2016;Cuijpers et al. ,2 0 1 6 ). A simulated study allows a speci ﬁc multiteam system
superordinate goal to be created and the success or failure to achieve it to be accurately
measured. Several research articles have cited examples of a multiteam system in extreme
contexts or in ﬁnite situations such as disaster response and recovery contexts ( Bienefeld
and Grote, 2014 ;DeChurch et al.,2 0 1 1 ) or project implementations ( Hoegl et al.,2 0 0 4 ).
The current study makes an important contribution, as it is a cross-sectional study in a
typical real manufacturing context. However, setting a common superordinate goal andmeasuring its success or failure was a challenge in this cross-sectional study, due to the
complexity of the continual interactions within the multiteam system and the allowable timeTable II.
Model ﬁt indices,
standardised
coefﬁcients and
hypothesesFit indicesMeasure-ment
model Structural model EstimateStandardised
estimate CR p
x236.957 37.035
p-value 0.170 0.023
df 21.000 22.000
CMIN/DF 1.760 1.683RMSEA 0.044 0.042TLI 0.982 0.984
IFI 0.990 0.990
CFI 0.989 0.990RFI 0.959 0.961NFI 0.976 0.976
H1Diagnosing context ! Trusting relationships 0.146 0.063 2.322 0.02
H2Boundary spanning ! Trusting relationships 1.269 0.095 13.301 ***
H3Psychological safety ! Trusting relationships 0.003 0.073 0.037 0.97TPM
25,5/6
292
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tpm/article-pdf/25/5-6/279/2368958/tpm-12-2018-0071.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026frame given to conduct the study. Nonetheless, several studies have indicated that trusting
relationships are an important enabler of the achievement of a common superordinate goal,the ultimate measure of multiteam system performance (
Gerber et al. ,2 0 1 6 ;Luciano et al. ,
2018;Millikin et al. ,2 0 1 0 ). This cross-sectional study focussed on measuring the level of
trusting relationships as a means to predict multiteam system performance, as the outcomeof each superordinate goal could not be completely measured.
Within a manufacturing context, teams from different departmental functions need to
work coherently to achieve superordinate objectives. Several seeds for division exist withina multiteam environment that may hinder coherence and trusting relationships among
component teams. Ensuring these divisional seeds are minimised depends upon the
integration team ’s ability to anticipate and mitigate them as quickly as possible. This
requires this team to have a suf ﬁcient understanding of the contextual dynamics permeating
the multiteam system and the impact thereof.
The integration team is, thus, a means of bridging the gap between the intra-team and
the inter-team dynamic and shifting the focus from the proximal to the superordinate. The
results indicate that the integration team needs to understand the intra-team dynamics
intimately and what sparks these dynamics within the different functional areas of anorganisation. Contextual intelligence, thus, becomes a critical enabler in understanding
these intra-team dynamics (
Kutz, 2008 ). This study found that successfully diagnosing
context as a key factor of contextual intelligence ( Kutz, 2008 ), impacts the ability of an
integration team to build trusting relationships.
This study found that if members of the integration team were involved in other
departmental activities ( H2on boundary spanning), this allows individuals the opportunity
to immerse themselves within another context that potentially complements their own; the
learnings from this new context can enhance the learnings of the core context ( Marrone,
2010). Bringing the boundary spanning dynamic into an integration team widens the scope
of the team, culminating in synergetic appreciation for each member ’s contribution, and
thus, building trusting relationships among component teams.
This research found that a climate of psychological safety, where team members do not
feel threatened, was not a strong predictor of building trusting relationships, in contrast to
Weaver ’s( 2 0 1 6 ) study, which indicates that psychological safety in ﬂuences trusting
relationships. Instead, in this context of multiteam systems, the welcoming of other teams ’
input (boundary spanning) and understanding company goals (diagnosing context) were
signiﬁcant in ﬂuencers on building the required trusting relationships.
6. Implications for organisations
Traditional team dynamic theory focusses on the team as an individual entity and team
member identi ﬁcation within the team ( Murase et al.,2 0 1 4 ;Glynn et al., 2010 ), for example,
on how team diversity contributes to more dynamic and effective teams ( Van der Vegt and
Janssen, 2003 ). From this perspective, it is all about the team as the centre of attention. Many
organisations focus on team building and growing the bond within the team. Departmentswill attend strategy sessions that focus on how the department can perform better, but
rarely do these sessions involve other departments or investigate how other departments
could impact their performance.
What is missing from this focus is that the team or department forms part of a bigger
complex system ( Murase et al. ,2 0 1 4 ). The current ﬁndings prompt organisations to take
note of and focus on the larger complex system. Here, the focus is less on the individual andmore about the collective, where teams interact with other teams ( Gerber et al., 2016 ).A multiteam
system
293
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tpm/article-pdf/25/5-6/279/2368958/tpm-12-2018-0071.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026Many organisations are plagued with departmental discordance, misalignment and
psychological silo mentality. They tend to focus on the team as an individual entity butneglect the engagements between teams; particularly, engagements between different
functional teams (
Guchait, 2016 ). This neglect often results in con ﬂict and distrust between
teams or departments within organisations ( Luciano et al.,2 0 1 8 ).
The current study shows that implementation of an integration team can enable
organisations to overcome departmental discordance and misalignment, resulting in a moreharmonious working environment. The term silo mentality is often used in business to
describe virtual or psychological boundaries within which departments or teams cocoon
themselves (
Cilliers and Greyvenstein, 2012 ). This narrow mindedness leads to distrust and
misalignment between departments or teams ( Christa and Abdullahi, 2012 ). An integration
team that can successfully diagnose the contextual dynamics of the business environment
will be better equipped to detect such virtual barriers. Through boundary spanning, the
integration team can dismantle these virtual barriers and begin to forge interdependentrelationships that build trust and mutual respect by mitigating this silo mentality.
7. Limitations and future directionThe study was cross-sectional and focussed on a short period of time; it could, therefore, not
track the ﬂuctuations in performance that would have been observed in a longitudinal
study. It could not focus on the achievement of the speci ﬁc common superordinate goals
identiﬁed, but focussed on the impact of the integration team ’s ability to build trusting
relationships within the multiteam system among the component teams that would,
ultimately, lead to achieving the superordinate goal. Other potential limitations to the study
were that 93.9 per cent of the respondents were African, which could have created culturalbias and 75.3 per cent were from the same function within the ﬁve companies, namely,
production, which may have skewed responses and created the potential for common
method variance, as all the respondents had to respond to all the questions in the
questionnaire at the same point in time.
A further limitation was that several of the items from the amalgamated scales loaded
below 0.5, leaving a total of only nine items across the four constructs, which could have
diminished the reliability and validity of the ﬁndings. This outcome is related to the fact that
SEM measures the model holistically. A test using multiple regression included many more
of the scales, however, this method only measures the direct relationship between each
independent variable and the respective dependent variable and would not have been
wholly appropriate for a study of this kind. The multiteam system deserved attention in this
study and further studies are required to contribute to an understanding of the dynamicsbetween teams where the focus shifts from the proximal to the superordinate (
DeChurch and
Zaccaro, 2010 ). Unfortunately, Cuijpers et al. (2016) noted that drivers of multiteam system
performance remain under-studied.
A point for further research would be to look at other dynamics that enhance or diminish
the trusting relationship between component teams, such as leadership style or emotionalintelligence (
Liet al., 2016 ); team empowerment ( Barczak et al., 2010 ); organisational culture;
language barriers; and stereotyping. As a case in point, consider the emergency or disaster
recovery situation in which an integration team is formed to effectively deal with the
coordination effort of multiple teams to respond accordingly. Who would be the most
effective members from the different teams to make up this integration team? Would it be
most effective to integrate the most experienced members of the component teams or to
integrate those that can remain calm and logical in such a scenario or the most effectiveleaders of each component team? Each of these characteristics would bring differentTPM
25,5/6
294
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tpm/article-pdf/25/5-6/279/2368958/tpm-12-2018-0071.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026dynamics into an integration team that would either hinder or enable the team to respond to
the situation accordingly. Exploring these characteristics in more detail could reveal newinsights. Future studies could, thus, focus on the composition of the integration team andwhat characteristics of boundary spanning representatives would be most suitable tomaximise their effectiveness in advancing multiteam system performance.
8. Conclusion
This study reveals that with the implementation of an integration team made up of
inﬂuential boundary spanning representatives from different functional component teams,
trusting relationships can be built among component teams and with the integration team,within a multiteam system. By building these trusting relationships, component teams willbe more willing to collaborate and work interdependently towards achieving a commonsuperordinate goal. Through successfully diagnosing the contextual dynamics andspanning the boundaries between the teams, integration teams are better equipped to aligncomponent teams to achieve a common superordinate goal, thus positively impactingmultiteam system performance. Multiteam system dynamics remain an integral function tothe success of any organisation with trusting relationships being crucial to a sustainablefuture.
References
Alavi, S.B. and Gill, C. (2017), “Leading change authentically: How authentic leaders in ﬂuence follower
responses to complex change ”,Journal of Leadership and Organizational Studies , Vol. 24 No. 2,
pp. 157-171 , available at: http://doi.org/10.1177/1548051816664681
Anderson, J.C. and Gerbing, D.W. (1988), “Structural equation modeling in practice: a review and
recommended Two-Step approach ”,Psychological Bulletin , Vol. 103 No. 3, pp. 411-423.
Baer, M. and Frese, M. (2003), “Innovation is not enough: climates for initiative and psychological
safety, process innovations, and ﬁrm performance ”,Journal of Organizational Behavior , Vol. 24
No. 1, pp. 45-68 , available at: http://doi.org/10.1002/job.179
Barczak, G., Lassk, F. and Mulki, J. (2010), “Antecedents of team creativity: an examination of team
emotional intelligence, team trust and collaborative culture ”,Creativity and Innovation
Management , Vol. 19 No. 4, pp. 332-345 , available at: http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8691.2010.00574.x
Bienefeld, N. and Grote, G. (2014), “Shared leadership in multite am systems: how cockpit and
cabin crews lead each other ”,Human Factors: The Journa lo ft h eH u m a nF a c t o r sa n d
Ergonomics Society , Vol. 56 No. 2, pp. 270-286 , available at: http://doi.org/10.1177/
0018720813488137
Cha, J., Kim, Y., Lee, J. and Bachrach, D.G. (2015), “Transformational leadership and Inter-Team
collaboration: exploring the mediating role of teamwork quality and moderating role of team
size ”,Group and Organization Management , Vol. 40 No. 6, pp. 715-743 , available at: http://doi.
org/10.1177/1059601114568244
Christa, C.T. and Abdullahi, I. (2012), “Rising above the grain silo mentality through collaboration:
Creating opportunities between the LIS educators and practionners in developing countries ”,
paper presented at the World Library and Information Congress 78th IFLA Geberal Conference
and Assembly, Helsinki, 24 July, available at: http://conference.i ﬂa.org/i ﬂa78 (accessed 2
November 2017).
Cilliers, F. and Greyvenstein, H. (2012), “The impact of silo mentality on team identity: an
organisational case study ”,SA Journal of Industrial Psychology , Vol. 38 No. 2, pp. 1-9 , available
at:http://doi.org/10.4102/sajip.v38i2.993A multiteam
system
295
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tpm/article-pdf/25/5-6/279/2368958/tpm-12-2018-0071.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026Cuijpers, M., Uitdewilligen, S. and Guenter, H. (2016), “Effects of dual identi ﬁcation and interteam
conﬂict on multiteam system performance ”,Journal of Occupational and Organizational
Psychology , Vol. 89 No. 1, pp. 141-171 , available at: http://doi.org/10.1111/joop.12113
Davison, R.B., Barnes, C.M., Hollenbeck, J.R., Barnes, C.M., Sleesman, D.J. and Ilgen, D.R. (2012),
“Coordinated action in multiteam systems ”,Journal of Applied Psychology , Vol. 97 No. 4,
pp. 808-824 , available at: http://doi.org/10.1037/a0026682
De Vries, T.A.D.E., Hollenbeck, J.R., Davison, R.B. and Walter, F. (2016), “Managing coordination in
multiteam systems: Integrating micro and macro perspectives ”,Academy of Management
Journal , Vol. 59 No. 5, pp. 1823-1844.
DeChurch, L.A. and Zaccaro, S.J. (2010), “Perspectives: teams won ’t solve this problem ”,Human
Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society , Vol. 52 No. 2, pp. 329-334 .
available at: http://doi.org/10.1177/0018720810374736
DeChurch, L.A., Burke, C.S., Shuf ﬂer, M.L., Lyons, R., Doty, D. and Salas, E. (2011), “A historiometric
analysis of leadership in mission critical multiteam environments ”,The Leadership Quarterly ,
Vol. 22 No. 1, pp. 152-169 , available at: http://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2010.12.013
Firth, B.M., Hollenbeck, J.R., Miles, J.E., Ilgen, D.R. and Barnes, C.M. (2015), “Same page, different
books: extending representational gaps theory to enhance performance in multiteam systems ”,
Academy of Management Journal , Vol. 58 No. 3, pp. 813-835 , available at: http://dx.doi.org/
10.5465/amj.2013.0216 .
Gerber, D.E., Reimer, T., Williams, E.L., Gill, M., Priddy, L.L., Bergestuen, D. and Lee, S.J.C. (2016),
“Resolving rivalries and realigning goals: challenges of clinical and research multiteam
systems ”,Journal of Oncology Practice , Vol. 12 No. 11, pp. 1020-1028 , available at: http://doi.org/
10.1200/JOP.2016.013060
Glynn, M.A., Kazanjian, R. and Drazin, R. (2010), “Fostering innovation in complex product
development settings: the role of team member identity and interteam interdependence ”,Journal
of Product Innovation Management , Vol. 27 No. 7, pp. 1082-1095.
Guchait, P. (2016), “The mediating effect of team engagement between team cognitions and team
outcomes in service-management teams ”,Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Research , Vol. 40
No. 2, pp. 139-161 , available at: http://doi.org/10.1177/1096348013495698
Hoegl, M., Weinkauf, K. and Gemuenden, H.G. (2004), “Interteam coordination, project commitment,
and teamwork in multiteam R&D projects: a longitudinal study ”,Organization Science , Vol. 15
No. 1, pp. 38-55 , available at: http://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1030.0053
Hu, L. and Bentler, P.M. (1999), “Cutoff criteria for ﬁt indexes in covariance structure analysis:
conventional criteria versus new alternatives ”,Structural Equation Modeling: A
Multidisciplinary Journal , Vol. 6 No. 1, pp. 1-55 , available at: http://doi.org/10.1080/
10705519909540118
Kutz, M.R. (2008), “Contextual intelligence: an emerging competency for global leaders ”, School of
Global Leadership and Entrepreneurship, August, pp. 5-8.
Kutz, M.R. and Bamford-Wade, A. (2013), “Understanding contextual intelligence: a critical
competency for today ’sl e a d e r s ”,Emergence: Complexity and Organization , Vol. 15 No. 3,
pp. 55-80.
Lanaj, K., Hollenbeck, J.R., Ilgen, D.R., Barnes, C.M. and Harmon, S.J. (2013), “The double-edged sword
of decentralized planning in multiteam systems ”,Academy of Management Journal , Vol. 56
No. 3, pp. 735-757.
Li, Z., Gupta, B., Loon, M. and Casimir, G. (2016), “Combinative aspects of leadership style and
emotional intelligence ”,Leadership and Organization Development Journal , Vol. 37 No. 1,
pp. 107-125 , available at: http://doi.org/10.1108/LODJ-04-2014-0082
Luciano, M.M., DeChurch, L.A. and Mathieu, J.E. (2018), “Multiteam systems: a structural framework
and Meso-Theory of system functioning ”,Journal of Management , Vol. 44 No. 3, pp. 1065-1096 ,
available at: https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206315601184TPM
25,5/6
296
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tpm/article-pdf/25/5-6/279/2368958/tpm-12-2018-0071.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026McAllister, D.J. (1995), “Affect and cognition based trust as foundations for interpersonal cooperation in
organizations ”,Academy of Management Journal , Vol. 38 No. 1, pp. 24-59.
Marks, M.A., Mathieu, J.E. and Zaccaro, S.J. (2001), “A temporally based framework and taxonomy of
team processes ”,Academy of Management Review , Vol. 26 No. 3, pp. 356-376.
Marrone, J.A. (2010), “Team boundary spanning: a multilevel review of past research and proposals for
the future ”,Journal of Management , Vol. 36 No. 4, pp. 911-940 , available at: http://doi.org/
10.1177/0149206309353945
Millikin, J.P., Hom, P.W. and Manz, C.C. (2010), “Self-management competencies in self-managing
teams: their impact on multi-team system productivity ”,The Leadership Quarterly , Vol. 21 No. 5,
pp. 687-702 , available at: http://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2010.07.001
Murase, T., Carter, D.R., DeChurch, L.A. and Marks, M.A. (2014), “Mind the gap: the role of leadership
in multiteam system collective cognition ”,The Leadership Quarterly , Vol. 25 No. 5, pp. 972-986 ,
available at: http://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2014.06.003
Osborn, R.N. and Marion, R. (2009), “Contextual leadership, transformational leadership and the
performance of international innovation seeking alliances ”,The Leadership Quarterly , Vol. 20
No. 2, pp. 191-206 , available at: http://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2009.01.010
Rico, R., Hinsz, V.B., Burke, S. and Salas, E. (2017), “A multilevel model of multiteam motivation and
performance ”,Organizational Psychology Review , Vol. 7 No. 3, pp. 197-226 , available at: http://
doi.org/10.1177/2041386616665456
Rico, R., Hinsz, V.B., Davison, R.B. and Salas, E. (2018), “Human resource management review structural
inﬂuences upon coordination and per formance in multiteam systems ”,Human Resource
Management Review , Vol. 28 No. 4, pp. 332-336 , available at: http://doi.org/10.1016/j.hrmr.2017.02.001
Rousseau, D., Sitkin, S.B., Burt, R.S. and Camerer, C. (1998), “Not so different after all: a cross-discipline
view of trust ”,Academy of Management Review , Vol. 23 No. 3, pp. 393-404.
Ruben, B.D. and Gigliotti, R.A. (2016), “Leadership as social in ﬂuence: an expanded view of leadership
communication theory and practice ”,Journal of Leadership and Organizational Studies , Vol. 23
No. 4, pp. 467-479 , available at: http://doi.org/10.1177/1548051816641876
Sessa, V.I., London, M. and Wanamaker, M. (2018), “How multiteam systems learn ”,Team
Performance Management: An International Journal , available at: https://doi.org/10.1108/TPM-
06-2018-0039 .
Shufﬂer, M.L., Jiménez-Rodríguez, M. and Kramer, W.S. (2015), “The science of multiteam systems: a
review and future research agenda ”,Small Group Research , Vol. 46 No. 6, pp. 659-699 , available
at:http://doi.org/10.1177/1046496415603455
Somech, A. and Drach-Zahavy, A. (2013), “Translating team creativity to innvovation implementation:
the role of team composition and climate for innovation ”,Journal of Management , Vol. 39 No. 3,
pp. 684-708 , available at: http://doi.org/10.1177/0149206310394187
Strasheim, A. (2014), “Testing main and interaction effects in structural equation models with a
categorical moderator variable ”,Management Dynamics , Vol. 23 No. 4, pp. 31-69.
Tabachnick, B.G. and Fidell, L.S. (2001), Using Multivariate Statistics ,4 t he d .,Allyn and Bacon,
Needham Heights, MA.
Tavakol, M. and Dennick, R. (2011), “Making sense of Cronbach ’s alpha ”,International Journal of
Medical Education , Vol. 2, pp. 53-55 , available at: http://doi.org/10.5116/ijme.4dfb.8dfd
van den Berg, W., Curseu, P.L. and Meeus, M.T.H. (2014), “Emotion regulation and con ﬂict
transformation in multi-team systems ”,International Journal of Con ﬂict Management , Vol. 25
No. 2, pp. 171-188 , available at: http://doi.org/10.1108/IJCMA-05-2012-0038
Van der Vegt, G. S. and Janssen, O. (2003), “Joint Impact of Interdependence and Group Diversity on
Innovation ”,Journal of Management , Vol. 29 No. 5, pp. 729-751 , available at: http://doi.org/
10.1016/S0149-2063(03)00033-3A multiteam
system
297
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tpm/article-pdf/25/5-6/279/2368958/tpm-12-2018-0071.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026Van der Vegt, G.S., Emans, B.J.M. and Van de Vliert, E. (2001), “Patterns of interdependence in work
teams: a two-level investigation of the relations with job and team satisfaction ”,Personnel
Psychology , Vol. 54 No. 1, pp. 51-69.
Weaver, S.J. (2016), “From teams of experts to mindful expert teams and multiteam systems ”,Journal of
Oncology Practice , Vol. 12 No. 11, pp. 976-979 , available at: http://doi.org/10.1200/
JOP.2016.018184
Zaccaro, S.J., Marks, M.A. and DeChurch, L. (2012), Multiteam Systems: An Organisation Form for
Dynamic and Complex Environments , Routledge, New York, NY.
Zuofa, T. and Ochieng, E.G. (2017), “Working separately but together: appraising virtual project team
challenges ”,Team Performance Management: An International Journal , Vol. 23 Nos 5/6,
pp. 227-242.
Further reading
Sinha, K.K. and Van de Ven, A.H. (2005), “Designing work within and between organizations ”,
Organization Science , Vol. 16 No. 4, pp. 389-408 , available at: http://doi.org/10.1287/
orsc.1050.0130
Corresponding author
Caren Brenda Scheepers can be contacted at: scheepersc@gibs.co.za
For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website:
www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htmOr contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.comTPM
25,5/6
298
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tpm/article-pdf/25/5-6/279/2368958/tpm-12-2018-0071.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026