 
 
 
 
 
PERSPECTIVES OF INNOVATION: A STUDY OF HOW INNOVATION IS DEFINED 
IN A GROUP OF INDIAN AMERICAN PROFESSIONALS  
by 
Chandragupta Gudena 
 
GREGORY MCLAUGHLIN, DBA, Faculty Mentor and Chair 
VINNY CARABALLO, DIBA, Committee Member 
RICK DANIELS, PhD, Committee Member 
 
Barbara Butts Williams, PhD, Dean, School of Business and Technology 
 
 
 
 
A Dissertation Presented in Partial Fulfillment 
Of the Requirements for the Degree 
Doctor of Business Administration 
 
 
Capella University 
April 2014 

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted.  Also,  if material had to be removed, 
a note will indicate the deletion.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor,  MI 48106 - 1346
UMI  3624283
Published by ProQuest LLC (2014).  Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
UMI Number:  3624283

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© Chandragupta Gudena, 2014 
 

 
Abstract 
The definition of innovation varies from individual to individual and between individual and the 
team or the team and an organization. The perception of innovation and how individuals define 
innovation can make an organization stay competitive or go out of business. Research had shown 
that a traditional approach of idea generation as innovation at well intentioned organizations 
afforded success only 10% of the time after three years.  In forming and managing project teams, 
which are made up of individuals or selling a service or product to a certain demography it is 
important and beneficial to understand their perception of innovation and if they see innovation 
as new, change or improvement. This study is built upon the earlier work of Zhuang (1995), 
Zhuang, Williamson, and Carter (1999), and McLaughlin and (2013). Prior research conducted 
by Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) focused on understanding the perception of innovation as 
defined or understood by a homogeneous demography of Latino American professionals. This 
dissertation furthers the research conducted by Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) with a focus on 
comprehending how a homogenous group Indian American professionals in the United States 
perceive or define innovation into the three categories of new, improve and change. While 
innovation may be understood by individuals as a multi-dimensional construct, the research tried 
to identify the relationship between perceptions, and gender, age and job function for the 
homogenous group of Indian Americans in the United States. The research followed the 
approach and methodology used by Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) and the study is 
quantitative, exploratory and used web-based surveys to gather responses from respondents.  
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
Acknowledgments 
To my mother, Pushpa Rao, and my wife Archana, for inspiring me, standing by me, 
encouraging me, persuading me and most importantly understanding and morally supporting me 
throughout this journey and my life. 
To my mentors, Dr. Greg McLaughlin, Dr. Vinny Caraballo and Dr. Rick Daniels, 
without whose support, understanding, mentorship and coaching, I would not have had the 
strength to complete my journey.  
To my boss and President, Dr. Debbie Sydow, for her understanding, flexibility, support 
and encouragement. 
To Dr. Mary Whitman and all Capella University faculty and staff, who engaged with me 
and helped me throughout the doctoral program. 
 
 

iv 
Table of Contents 
 
Acknowledgments 
iii 
 
List of Tables 
vi 
 
List of Figures 
vii 
CHAPTER 1.  INTRODUCTION 
1 
Introduction to the Problem 
1 
Background of the Study 
4 
Statement of the Problem 
8 
Purpose of the Study 
9 
Rationale 
9 
Research Questions 
11 
Significance of the Study 
11 
Definition of Terms 
12 
Assumptions and Limitations 
12 
Theoretical Framework 
14 
Organization of the Remainder of the Study 
17 
CHAPTER 2.  LITERATURE REVIEW 
18 
CHAPTER 3.  METHODOLOGY 
72 
Research Design 
72 
Sample 
74 
Setting 
77 
Instrumentation 
77 
Data Collection  
79 

v 
Data Analysis 
80 
Validity and Reliability 
82 
Ethical Considerations 
82 
CHAPTER 4.  RESULTS  
85 
 
Introduction 
85 
 
Description of Sample 
86 
 
Findings 
87 
 
Summary 
94 
 
CHAPTER 5.  DISCUSSION, IMPLICATIONS, RECOMMENDATIONS 
96 
REFERENCES 
104 
APPENDIX A. STATEMENT OF ORIGINAL WORK 
115 
 
APPENDIX B. SURVEY INSTRUMENT  
117 
APPENDIX C. FACTOR ANALYSIS 
128 
 
 
 

vi 
List of Tables 
Table 1. Variables in the Study 
79 
Table 2. Distribution of Demographic Profile of Participants 
87 
Table 3. ANOVA Analysis Results 
88 
Table 4. Levene’s Test of Equality of Error Variances 
89 
Table 5.  Multivariate Tests 
90 
Table 6. Allocation of each statement to the construct of innovation 
93 
Table 7. One-way ANOVA Analysis Results: New, Improve or Change 
93 
Table C1. Factor Analysis of all 200 participants at 95% confidence level 
128 
Table C2. Descriptive Statistics 
128 
Table C3. KMP and Bartlett’s Tests 
130 
Table C4. Communalities 
130 
Table C5. Total Variance Explained 
131 
Table C6. Rotation Sum of Squares  
 
 
 
 
 
      132 
Table C7. Component Matrix 
133 
Table C8. Rotated Component Matrix 
134 
Table C9. Component Transformation Matrix 
136 
Table C10. Reliability Statistics 
137 
Table C11. Cronbach Alpha 
137 
 
 
 
 

vii 
List of Figures 
Figure 1. Chain of Stimuli and Influence 
16 
 
Figure 2. Reduced Chain of Stimuli and Influence 
17 
 
Figure 3. Basic Innovation Process 
31 
 
Figure 4. Innovation Continuum 
70 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
 
CHAPTER 1.  INTRODUCTION 
Introduction to the Problem 
 
Innovation is a broadly used term with multiple definitions and applies to products, 
services, processes and business models (Baregheh, Rowley, & Sambrook, 2009). Innovation can 
be outcomes-based or knowledge-driven and be the outcome of a process or a new process itself 
(Quintane, Casselman, Reiche, & Nylund, 2011). Thus, articulating a single definition of 
innovation becomes challenging and restrictive. For an organization to sustain and stay 
competitive, innovation becomes a critical need (Caraballo & McLaughlin, 2012). Innovation 
could be the invention of a new product or service or changing an existing process that leads to a 
suitable and competitive advantage for the organization. As an example, Apple’s iPhone and 
iPod was an innovative product built on an innovative service iTunes and Apps platform (Finkle 
& Mallin, 2010). The assembly line design for Dell computers, introduced by Michael Dell that 
allowed customers to build their own computers online as opposed to purchasing a pre-built 
computer was an innovation in service design. Nissan’s approach under the leadership of Carlos 
Goshn to leverage Reanult’s infrastructure to build standardized automobile models, may be seen 
as diffusion of innovation or adoption of innovation.  Even though innovation is crucial to 
sustenance and continued market competitiveness, due to the various interpretations and 
definitions, organizations struggle to strategize and overcome the diversified interpretations and 
understanding between teams and individuals (Bouncken, 2009).   
 
Innovation could be an outcome or an input to a product or a service that an organization 
delivers, or innovation could be the diffusion or adoption of an innovation that have been used in 

2 
another organization, and hence innovation could be incremental, disruptive and/ or sudden 
(Zhuang, Williamson, & Carter, 1999).  McAdam and McClelland (2002) noted that creativity is 
the precursor (Amabile, 1997) and an integral part of idea generation, which ultimately leads to 
innovations. Due to the multitude of definitions and review of such literature led Baregheh et al. 
(2009) to conclude that innovation lacks a clear definition. 
 
Innovation leads to or is a result of some shape or form of change. The delta for change is 
not fixed and varies to a large and incalculable degree (Baregheh et al., 2009). As delta/ amount 
of change increases, so does the risk associated with such change varies. The risk could result in 
personnel changes, friction or sheer newness and navigation in unchartered waters of the market, 
thereby making the organization and its employees nervous (Baregheh et al., 2009; Birtchnell, 
2011;). Risk aversion or risk avoidance and the affinity to take risk are impacted by behaviors 
imbued in individuals from their respective cultures, which in turn are made from the nationality 
and region of origin of the individual or location of the organization (Hofstede, 1980; Hofstede, 
2001). Cultures differ in beliefs and values which are derived from history and traditions, and 
hence adding to diversity of the background and intellect that one brings to the table. As a result 
of cultural diversity, integration of innovation in a specific direction becomes challenging. 
Cultural diversity on a team brings diverse ideas and increases creativity as part of innovation, 
although the very same diversity could lead to obstacles within the team and such hindrances, 
although uncertain, are to be tackled via interaction as every point of friction leads to an 
innovative opportunity (Bouncken, 2009).   
The core of every culture are people. Perceptions, interactions, beliefs and practices of 
people in a certain given environment along with the history of the area form culture (Hofstede, 
1980). Although not a tangible and surmountable aspect, culture is a heavy impact characteristic 

3 
as it pertains to perceptions of innovation.  Perception of individuals and teams are driven by the 
culture and experiences of individuals (DeCusatis, 2008). Perceptions are a result of learnings, 
knowledge and experiences. Hence, perceptions are open for interpretation.  
Different generations transfer knowledge in differ ways, using different communication 
and pragmatic channels. For instance, due to social networks, such as Facebook, Twitter and 
LinkedIn, generations in the current age leverage social networks to transfer and translate 
information. In addition information transmitted is across borders and has a wider net for 
audiences. According to Hofstede (1980), there are three levels to mental programming that vary 
from universal to individual and collective that would illustrate and help identify collective and 
individual behaviors. One of the primary drivers for collective behaviors, as noted by Hofstede 
(1980) is driven via formal, information and experimental learning. For instance, in the current 
day, Facebook could be a platform for informal and experimental learning. With advancements 
in technology and proliferation of the internet platform, the gaps between generations and 
geographies have been minimized. However, different cultures and generation transfer and 
translate knowledge in different ways, which would also differ in observations, interaction and 
participation. Thus, when forming a diverse organization, we also receive diverse national 
cultures, and the precursor to national cultures are perceptions. Reversing the order, it is logical 
to assume that individual behaviors are influenced by perceptions (Hofstede, 1980) and thus 
perceptions of innovation vary by culture.  

4 
Background of the Study 
 
This research has furthered the work done by Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) that 
focused on how Latino American professionals residing in the United States perceived 
innovation.  
Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) built their research on the work done by 
Zhuang (Zhuang, 1995; Zhuang et al., 1999), which studied and researched the perceptions of 
managers in small and medium businesses in England as applied to innovation. According to 
Zhuang et al. (1999), innovation could be an invention of a new product or service, and/ or 
improvement of an existing product, process or service, and/ or adoption or diffusion of 
innovation developed elsewhere into an existing service, product or process.  Questionnaires 
were distributed to certain employees of two businesses and data were collected from 
anonymous responses to the distributed questionnaires.  Lack of structured and mechanized or 
standardized means for idea generation leads to inconsistency and limited transformation from 
ideas to deeds. As a result, respondents to the Zhuang (1995) and Zhuang et al., (1999) surveys 
demonstrated unclear understanding on the concept and perceptions of innovations and as to who 
or how innovation might be fostered in an organization. Hence the lack of clarity on the subject 
of creativity, although the research found general agreement on the definitions of innovation.  
Overall responses indicated that creative people existed in all organizations, but the variation in 
creativity was a result in the diversity of the professions. Hence, all professions were not deemed 
to be equally creative. The research clearly indicated the lack of a structured means to integrate 
and assimilate innovation into an organization’s DNA in a structured and methodical manner, 
regardless of the innovation being applied to a product, service or process. 
As part of McAdam and McClelland’s (2002) literature review, McAdam and 
McClelland (2002) used the definition of innovation as laid out by Zhuang et al. (1999) and 

5 
researched the connection/ difference between idea generation at a team level and individual 
level. McAdam and McClelland (2002) identified the linkage between creativity and idea 
generation as creativity being the precursor for innovation. In addition, McAdam and 
McClelland (2002) listed motivation, skill, and expertise as components of idea generation. 
Although, McAdam and McClelland (2002) identified the linkage between idea generation and 
creativity, their research could not ascertain the source of ideas.  
 
The exploratory research conducted by Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) focused on 
Latino American demography within the Information Technology (IT) industry. Leveraging the 
aforementioned research on perceptions of innovation at the individual and team level, Caraballo 
and McLaughlin (2012) explored the impact of sub-segments such as age, gender and/ or job on 
perception of innovation at the individual level. The research conducted by Caraballo and 
McLaughlin (2012) further defined innovation at various levels of the organization, and hence 
providing greater insight into building cultures of innovation as an outcome and evolution driven 
model. In conducting the research, Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012), used an internet-based 
survey tool to gather data from randomly and anonymously self-selected individuals, who 
competed the surveys. 
Caraballo and McLaughlin’s (2012) research on innovation perceptions in the Latino 
American professionals was part of the larger and global research being conducted by the Project 
Impact Institute, a not-for-profit organization that conducts innovation research at a global level. 
(Caraballo & McLaughlin, 2012; Caraballo, Bynum, & McLaughlin, 2011).   
 
In their research, Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) validated the reliability of the results 
from the research done by Zhuang (1995) and Zhuang et al. (1999), further confirming the 
variation amongst individuals of a relatively homogenous group, within the same vertical of 

6 
business or similar industry, on perception of innovation. Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) 
further examined the analysis of results on perception of innovation by categorizing the 
demography into categories of age, gender and job. From the results it was evident that the 
variations on perceptions of innovation were minor between female technical and non-technical 
respondents. On the other hand significant variations were observed between male technical and 
non-technical respondents. Hence, the thought process on the perception of innovation between 
males and females varied from a homogenous perspective when associating and within the data 
block of technical and non-technical job functions. Association of innovation with new ideas or 
people, regardless of source, emerged from male technical respondents. From a practical 
applicability perspective, this is a group that can be construed to associate and further the 
cultivation of innovation in a product arena. On the other hand non-technical males associated 
innovation with internal activities and hence from an applicability perspective, this could be a 
group that would foster innovation in the service or process arena.  
The research done by Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) also included an analysis of 
perception of innovation as viewed or applied from a generational standpoint. For instance, the 
results showed that Generation Y, ages 10 to 30, as compared to other generations, comprehend 
innovation in a much more structured sense of an innovation being more of an invention. From a 
practical applicability standpoint, a person in Gen Y would be much aligned and acceptable to 
innovation leading to new products or inventions. On the other hand, the rest of the generations 
seemed open to innovation in services and processes, in addition to products. The applicability of 
such research would be seen at an organizational level and at an individual level. At the 
organizational level, the research helped develop innovation and idea generation teams that align 

7 
with the organizations mission and vision at an individual level, the research could drive 
consumer trends in terms of aligning the products and services from a consumer standpoint.  
Innovation by its very nature is driven by creativity and the one hindrance to creativity is 
restriction. Thus, restricting definition for innovation, has a negative effect on competitive 
advantage and creativity, which ultimately hinders innovation. Research conducted by Caraballo 
and McLaughlin (2012) confirmed that vast and distinct variation of perceptions of innovation at 
the individual level and also found that restricting definitions of innovation arrests creativity and 
competitive sustenance. Variation and distinction on perception of innovation at an individual 
level is beneficial and of extreme value to an organization that intends to breed creativity via 
ideation. The challenge however in managing the process of ideation and innovation, is aligning 
diverse employees as teams, even though the organizational structure might preclude them from 
being in the same team or reporting to the same individual (Thompson, 1965). Thereby, making 
it further challenging for the managers to operate in an area with accountability but no authority 
and ensuring that the innovation efforts are in fact in line with the missions and vision of the 
organization. Identifying a leader with strategic foresight and coupling with a tactical approach at 
the individual and team levels can help catalyze the process of idea creation via multiple 
communication channels and managing the efforts as a project that bolsters the organizational 
strategic goals of the organization. The value that project teams bring is that the teams are 
temporary in nature and can focus on strategic aspects within a restricted period with a fixed 
deliverable, while returning to the tactical jobs upon completion of deliver in an innovative 
product, service or process. 
The research conducted by Caraballo and McLaughlin’s (2012) validates prior research 
and work, and also lays the roadmap for further exploratory work to be conducted in sub-groups 

8 
and in association with the Project Impact Institute to observe and understand perception of 
innovation at an individual and team level at a global, industry and demographic level. Project 
Impact (Caraballo et al., 2011) with a team of researchers continues the exploratory work in 
various countries, but there does not appear to be any research done to analyze and study 
perception of innovation within a certain ethnic group and specifically the Indian American 
ethnic group in the United States. This dissertation furthered the research conducted by Caraballo 
and McLaughlin (2012) by applying their methodology and survey to the Indian American 
homogenous group in the United States.               
Statement of the Problem 
 
     Innovation is a critical need for all organizations as it adds value and sustains 
competitive advantage (Baregheh, Rowley, and Sambrook, 2009, p.1323). Businesses need to 
innovate to increase performance and competitive advantage (McLaughlin, McLaughlin and 
Preziosi (2004) and as a primary source of wealth creation (de Waal, Maritz, and Shieh, 2010). 
Innovation is a concept that extends to technology, products, processes, and services. Innovation 
begins at the individual level with the recognition of a need (Caraballo, and McLaughlin, 2012).  
      Involving personnel is a necessity for initiating, developing, and implementing an innovation 
project for both competitive advantages, as ideas and needs drives innovation. Given its critical 
function, innovation should be a readily identified concept that has a generally accepted 
definition. Flight, Allaway, Kim and D’Souza (2011) state that ability to measure how 
individuals perceive innovation is important for identifying problems related to success. 
Baregheh, et al. (2009), identified over 60 unique definitions of innovation collected from 
disciplines such as management, economics, technology, knowledge management, and 
marketing. Given that innovation is a key ingredient for success, is there a simple but effective 

9 
method of understanding innovation from an individual perspective (Zhuang, 1995,1998)? In 
addition, many definitions of innovation exist at the managerial, technical, and functional level. 
Finally, is there a difference between individual perceptions of innovation across demographic 
categorizations of gender, job function, and age (generational cohort)?  
     Research continues on an international basis on how to recognize innovation. Caraballo and 
McLaughlin (2012) studied a homogeneous Latino population of those individuals employed 
within the IT profession. Other groups, cultures, and ethnicities require evaluation to determine if 
the patterns exhibited are consistent throughout different countries and cultures. Innovation is 
misunderstood, poorly defined, and lacks an understanding of how culture and the individual 
play a role in identifying innovation.  This dissertation examined Indian professionals to 
determine if their perceptions of innovation follow the patterns established or whether this group 
diverged from previous groups surveyed.   
Purpose of the Study 
Understanding how Indian professionals perceive innovation, and identifying if there is a 
relationship between these perceptions and gender, age and functional association, formulated 
the purpose of this study.  A prior study of Latino American professionals by Caraballo and 
McLaughlin (2012) was extended via a quantitative exploratory study. Although there are 
additional studies and research ongoing in different countries, there weren’t any similar work 
focused on the Indian ethnic group located in the United States.       
Rationale 
Building on the research conducted by Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012), the rationale 
for conducting this research rose from the opportunity to expand and further research existing 
knowledge on the methods, mannerisms and beliefs on how various distinct cultural groups 

10 
perceived innovation. The research conducted by Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) focused on 
the Latino American professionals. Given that limited research exists in this area and because 
most of the research done thus far looks into culture and innovation at a team, group, 
organization and national level. In addition, economic and technological changes have stimulated 
globalization, and hence the call to question the validity of this theoretical model. 
 
Innovation is key to ensuring sustenance of competitive advantage and financial success, 
whether such success or sustenance is in regard to a product, service or even at a national level 
(Arbolino, 2011; Caraballo & McLaughlin 2012). There were many reasons for focusing this 
research on Indian professionals living in the United States. One of the reasons was that the 
researcher himself was an Indian origin professional working in the United States. The group 
was large enough to gain a good sample and small enough in terms of an absolute sample. 
Secondly, as Project Impact expands globally, cultural sub-groups are not a primary focus for 
research and the entire practice in India could potentially become a vertical for culture for 
innovation research with a broad horizontal of industries. According to the 2010 US Census, 
Indian Americans represent 1% of the total US population and the group has seen a 69.3% 
increase since 2000 census. The group is growing at a rate much higher than the Hispanic/ Latino 
population, which comprises of 16.3% of the US population as per 2010 Census. Fourthly, 
according to the 2010 US census data, Indian American households have the highest household 
income, with a median household income of $88, 538 (2009 census), amongst all the ethnic 
groups in the United States. Hence, even though the absolute numbers are smaller for the group, 
the population selection demonstrates exponential and significant economic impact, both 
nationally and internationally. 

11 
The revised, and previously validated survey instrument used earlier by Caraballo and 
McLaughlin (2012) and Project Impact was used for this dissertation as a survey instrument.  
Keeping consistent with the previous study by Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012), this 
dissertation used random sample approach.  
Research Questions 
 
Cooper and Schindler’s (2007) management research hierarchy was used by the 
researcher to develop the research questions.  The objective of this study from this structure was 
to study and explore the management question: how is innovation perceived by members of a 
distinct cultural and homogenous group at an individual level? The hope of the researcher was 
that the answers would provide insights and better understanding of this subject and improve 
efforts to innovate and generate innovation, both at a team/ vertical and organizational level.  
The research questions were:  
1. What are the perceptions of Indian professionals residing in the US toward 
innovation? 
2. What is the relationship between gender, generational cohort, functional association, 
and one’s individual (personal) perception of innovation among Indian professionals? 
The survey questions were both forced choice and close-ended using a Likert scale.  
Significance of the Study 
 
Generation of additional data that would help better understand how individual perceive 
innovation, extending the previous work done on this subject, and adding to the limited body of 
research on this subject, are some of the anticipated outcomes and pertinent significance of this 
study.  

12 
 
Every culture in this world is unique and so are the challenges and coping mechanisms in 
respective cultures. This study builds on the research of Hofstede (Hofstede, 1980; Hofstede & 
Bond, 1988; Hofstede & Minkov, 2010) that accepts that cultures develop based on how distinct 
groups interpret, understand, and cope with challenges unique to their world.  The differences in 
development, comprehension and coping do become apparent in different behaviors, which the 
researcher recognizes and hence also recognizes that the culture model cited by Hofstede (1980) 
is not appropriate to be applied at the individual level. 
Definition of Terms 
 
Although there are multiple definitions of innovation, the central theme for innovation 
describes innovation as a new or unique product or service (Baregheh et al., 2009). Zhuang 
(1995), Zhuang, Williamson, and Carter (1999), and Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012, p. 554), 
further clarified the definition of innovation to be an invention or creating something new, an 
improvement or refinement, and/ or diffusion or adoption of innovation that may have been 
developed elsewhere.  Innovation may be broadly defined into new, improved or change 
innovation, where new and improved innovations may fall under the category of incremental 
innovations. Change is more in line with radical innovation. This study does not include any 
other specific or unique terms. All acronyms are completely spelled out when first used.      
Assumptions and Limitations 
Assumptions 
By extending the research of  Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012), and leveraging the 
revised associated questionnaire as a survey instrument, this quantitative study incorporated and 
used a random sample approach. The researcher assumed that the validity of the survey 
instrument that was previously established, would not change, even though the cultural group’s 

13 
participation in this study were different from the previous group. An assumption the researcher 
made is that there would be at least 100 complete responses with sufficient density in different 
genders and multiple professions/ verticals/ organizational layers to allow meaningful 
interpretation and comparison. The researcher further assumed that respondents would be honest 
and objective in their responses and would truly represent the population. The researcher ensured 
that no bias or researcher error was introduced; minimized risks to participants; conducted this 
study in an ethical and controlled manner to ensure the credibility of the results and maintain 
privacy, confidentiality and data security.  
Limitation 
 
Given the focus of the study and expected number of responses the study had a number of 
limitations. Because of the focus of the study on one cultural group, and the small sample size, 
the study itself did not allow any room for portability or transferability of the results to other 
groups. Further research and additional data analysis would be beneficial in larger groups of 
Indian-Americans (non-immigrants) and Indian-American (naturally born American-Indian) 
professionals. A larger group and sample would also lend to comparison and validation of the 
findings of this study. Secondly, variation in cultural backgrounds and sub-set groups may not 
provide for sufficient respondents, which ultimately lead to development of conclusions. Thirdly, 
responses from male and female gender groups may not be substantial to develop meaningful 
and authoritative conclusions about how Indian females understand innovation compared to 
Indian males in the United States. 
Although a previously validated and reliable survey instrument was used by the 
researcher, it is possible that the characteristics of the respondents could very well affect the 
reliability and validity if the instrument. Time constraints on the researcher mandated by the 

14 
dissertation process, sampling strategies, and methodical constraints in terms of conducting the 
research and gathering information, as well as limited experience of the researched with 
conducting such research may limit the usefulness of the results. Last but not the least, inability 
to use the results as confirmation of information, coupled with inexact nature of sociological 
research in a diverse environment may limit the certainty of this research.  
Theoretical Framework 
 
All cultures are different from one another. And hence the variation as a result of having 
diverse culture on an innovation team will also vary at an organizational level, team level and at 
an individual level. However, there are certain aspects and attributes to people that are shared or 
common amongst cultures. As an example, a common platform of communication amongst 
people from multiple national cultures might be Facebook. In either case, even though there are 
significant differences between cultures, it is not possible to ascertain if one culture finds greater 
financial success over another and hence innovation needs to be understood at an organizational 
level to have a common understanding and to overcome cultural barriers. Initial research by 
Hofstede (1980) and, Hofstede and Bond (1988) lead to the identification of four cultural 
dimensions: power distance index, individualism vs. collectivism, uncertainty and masculinity 
versus femininity. The four dimensions, identified how members from each culture gravitated 
towards, power circles, staying individualists versus integrating into a collective grouping, how 
averse are acceptable were the individuals and culture to uncertainty and ambiguity and finally 
how did the genders in each culture vary in their perceptions.  Hofstede and Minkov (2010) 
identified two more cultural dimensions from a global study that highlighted long-term 
orientation or Confucian Dynamism and indulgence versus restraint.  

15 
 
Baregheh et al. (2009) identified three types of innovation as new, improved and change, 
and as applied to a product, service or process, while trying to formulate a single definition for 
innovation that could apply to multiple scenarios. Further, definitions of innovation, do not 
necessarily identify or elaborate on the process and elaborate on hoe culture influences the 
perception of innovation. However, the research adds minimal clarity on how perception of 
innovations is impacted or influenced by specific cultures or ethnicity.  
 
Integrating the concepts of cultural dimensions as identified by Hofstede (1980) and, 
Hofstede and Bond (1988), along with types of innovation identified by Baregheh et al. (2009), 
Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) furthered and explored the relationship between independent 
variables of gender, job, and age and the dependent variables of innovation defined as new, 
improved, and change, using the survey instrument and advancing the research conducted by 
Zhuang (1995,1998). Although there were minor differences between gender, the independent 
variable, and perception of innovation, the dependent variable, the research highlighted that there 
is a variation in the perception of innovation depending on the job (technical versus non-
technical) and generational cohort. 
Collective behaviors, defined as national and organizational cultures are stimulated by the 
transference of perceptions as explicit and tacit knowledge via formal, informal and experimental 
learning (Hofstede, 1980).  Pictorially, figure 1, shows the flow of such stimulus reaction. 

16 
 
Figure 1. Chain of Stimuli and Influence. 
 
The starting point seems to be perception for comprehension and interpretation of experiences, 
which varies from individual to individual and culture to culture. The unclear part is as to what is 
the precursor to perception. Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) noted that perception of 
innovation varied when demographics of gender, age and job function were selected. Integrating 
the concepts, the chain of stimuli and influence may be modified to that shown in Figure 2.     
 

17 
Figure 2. Reduced Chain of Stimuli and Influence. 
 
The theoretical model illustrated by Caraballo’s and McLaughlin’s (2012) comprising of gender, 
age, job as independent variables of the selected demography, Indian Americans, and the 
dependent variable of perception of innovation, whether news, change or improved forms the 
basis of this study. 
Organization of the Remainder of the Study 
 
Chapter 2 of this dissertation includes a literature review, examining the impact on 
innovation from a cultural perspective as it pertains to nationality, organizational culture, and 
sustenance of competitive advantage. A detailed description of research along with research 
design is covered in Chapter 3; the study’s findings are presented in Chapter 4, and finally 
Chapter 5 concludes with interpretations, recommendations and implications as a result and 
measure of the findings.  

18 
 
 
CHAPTER 2.  LITERATURE REVIEW 
Introduction 
 
Innovation is a broad topic and applies to a myriad of scenarios. Hence, articulating one 
specific definition for innovation that applies in all cases is not possible. Baregheh et al. (2009) 
identified numerous definitions, approximately 60 definitions over 7 different disciplines, as part 
of their literature review on the topic of innovation, spanning the time period of 1934 to 2007. 
Even after such a comprehensive study, Baregheh et al. (2009) provided a general definition for 
innovation that could potentially be applied in various instances. New, improved and change, 
were the most frequently use descriptors for innovation and the outcome of innovation was 
mostly general as opposed  being limited or restricted to a process or product or service. 
In order to understand perception of innovation among Indian Americans, the context of 
individual perceptions with an understanding of information, knowledge, and the 
interconnectivity among individuals to identify with or agree on types of innovation needs to be 
understood.  Throughout this chapter the literature covers the domains of knowledge 
management with an understanding of knowledge management, and perceptions of how 
individuals perceive change or improvement and how individuals associate such change with 
innovation. The Baregheh et al. (2009) research provided various components of innovation, 
although associating with a general definition, providing the researcher to track a progress 
further with the research on perception of innovations and afford a platform for analysis of the 
various components to comprehend as to how culture impacts and influences perceptions of 
innovation and how outcomes are impacted at a team and an organizational level. Beginning 

19 
with idea generation, knowledge management and boundary spanning, both impacted by culture 
and beliefs, become key section of the value chain that forms the innovation process. The study 
is an extension of the research conducted by Zhuang (Zhuang, 1995 & Zhuang et al., 1999) and 
Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012), while applied to the specific segment of Indian-Americans in 
the United Sates. Hence, this chapter will introduce the works of by Zhuang (Zhuang, 1995 & 
Zhuang et al., 1999) and Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012), in an effort to provide the 
background, context and follow-up with a discussion of the innovation process and the impact of 
culture on the perceptions of innovation and impact on the process. 
Previous Research 
Zhuang 
 
In researching the innovation process, Zhuang (Zhuang, 1995; Zhuang et al., 1999) 
conducted two studies. The first research (Zhuang, 1995) was a pilot study that involved 
managers in small and medium business in England and the pilot study tested surveys on attitude 
and activity as it pertained to innovation. According to Zhuang (1995), in a broader and holistic 
view of the innovation process, there were three components that made up the innovation 
process: individual creativity, organizational processes/ procedures, and output. Thus, inferring a 
critical role for the individual as part of the creativity process, and the responsibility of the 
organization to organize and manage people, process and procedures in an effective manner. 
After all, creativity only breeds if the individual is allowed to be creative and if the 
organization’s DNA has the appetite and fortitude to experiment and foster creativity.    
 
Innovation has a broad definition as it applies to products, services, processes and 
procedures (Zhuang, 1995). The definition for innovation formulated by Zhuang (1995) in the 
broad sense incorporated processes and procedure in the verticals of manufacturing and 

20 
management. Zhuang’s (1995) comprehension of innovation was that the innovation process is 
not linear and that the innovation process needed to incorporate change, creativity and 
innovation. Individuals bring knowledge, skills, and attitudes to the organization and job at hand, 
thereby making creativity an intangible that is inherent in the individual and made up of the 
individuals knowledge, skills and attitude (Zhuang, 1995). Amongst knowledge, skills and 
attitudes, the former two are required and mandated by the job duties and deemed as the 
minimum requirements for the individual to be in the job that the individual is in. And hence, 
knowledge and skills can be learnt and trained and may not be unique to the individual, however, 
attitude is unique to the individual that cannot be repeated. Hence, the relationship of creativity 
depending on independent attitudes. Zhuang (1995) established the relationship between 
creativity and attitudes, with the former becoming the dependent variable and the latter being the 
independent variable.  
 
Although creativity sources from the individual, the innovation process is in fact a 
collective activity. Zhuang (1995) developed an attitude survey consisting of 28 quantitative 
questions that focus on identifying the individual, his creativity level from a self-assessment 
perspective, the individual’s comprehension of the concepts of innovation, and identify the 
factors necessary to maximize the innovation potential of the individual. Zhuang’s (1995) study 
tried to correlate measures of creativity and the organizations achievement of innovative 
outcomes.  In addressing and capturing innovation in the product, process and management 
areas, Zhuang (1995) developed a 31 question survey that included qualitative and quantitative 
questions. 
 
The survey results, from both businesses surveyed in the initial study by Zhuang (1995), 
were inconclusive and contradictory. From the survey results, it looked like males between the 

21 
ages of 21 to 30 had a better comprehension of creativity as compared to older males, females 
and individuals in non-management roles. Although, inconsistency existed in age groups when 
comparing the two businesses.  There was a lack of understanding about innovation in a general 
and universal sense, but respondents to the surveys did think of innovation from different 
perspectives of making existing products better, which is included as part of the broader 
definition of innovation. Answers to questions on the innovation process revealed inconsistency 
in understanding of responsibilities for creation and implementation (Zhuang, 1995). The results 
also indicated the need to further refine the survey instrument. 
With a modified survey instrument, Zhuang et al. (1999), conducted the second research 
that studied as to how managers defined innovation and also to identify how mangers applied 
their comprehension of innovation in a pragmatic setting. As part of this study and to set the 
background, Zhuang et al. (1999), defined innovation as something new, or improvement of an 
existing product or service, and/ or adoption of an innovation in  a new environment or scenario, 
which would also constitute diffusion of innovation. Zhuang et al. (1999) provided further 
clarification on the perspective of the innovation process and included input, process, and 
outcome as part of the innovation process. Zhuang et al. (1999) achieved this change by 
combining the survey instrument with a corporate modeling survey instrument, although, this did 
negatively impact the response rate. The respondents in this study were students of the 
Staffordshire University Business School and the methodology for collection of responses 
included a questionnaire, which had a 60% response rate, and then followed by an in-depth 
telephone interview, for which 27 individuals were willing to participate. 
Zhuang et al. (1999) applied various statistical techniques such as descriptive statistics, 
cross-tabulation, ranking, correlational analysis, and selected statistical testing, etc. for analyzing 

22 
the results. The demographic break-up of respondents in terms of gender was 51% male and 49% 
female. In terms of generational cohort or age groups, the respondents fell into three categories: 
15% under the age of 25, 35% between the ages of 26 and 35, and 35% over the age of 36. From 
a managerial versus non-managerial standpoint, the group constituted of 75% managers and 25% 
non-managers. Respondents came from medium to large enterprises, and from both public and 
private entities. The industries included manufacturing and service vertical which covered 
products and services.  
The second research by Zhuang et al. (1999) resulted in mixed results that in some cases 
went against some assumptions. For instance, Zhuang et al. (1999) assumed a positive co-
relation between creativity and mastery and non-conformity. However, the results showed 
opposing correlation relative to creativity of engineers relative to mastery and non-conformity. 
Perception of different job groups was found to be inconsistent while viewing fellow colleagues 
and creativity was negatively correlated with administrative jobs. Zhuang et al. (1999) noted that 
middle managers seemed more knowledgeable and had implemented or used some of the 
innovation techniques as opposed to most respondents who were not even familiar with proper 
names for the innovation techniques.  
Practices that foster an innovative culture and organizational policies, were two aspects 
researched as part of organizational culture that influenced innovation. Overall the questions 
targeted policies as they pertained to improvement of products and services, sales and 
productivity (Zhuang et al., 1999). Two-thirds or 66.7% of the respondents to the surveys 
responded favorably towards organizational policies towards improving productivity and 
improvement of products/ services offered by the organization. However, less than 50% of the 
respondents could identify policies that would increase sales (Zhuang et al., 1999).  Although, 

23 
the results showed inconsistency, of the 26% of the public sector organizations represented in the 
sample, 81% of the respondents in this category indicated that they did not have a sales oriented 
policy, while respondents from the service industry indicated that they had policies for increasing 
sales or policies that were sales oriented. In fact, the service industry was the industry with more 
organizations that had a policies for ideation that would encourage sales (Zhuang et al., 1999).   
As part of researching organizational culture, respondents were asked to identify, of the 
10 statements about creativity and productivity, which were important to them as individuals and 
which of those were emphasized by their respective organizations (Zhuang et al., 1999). The one 
item that was most valued by individuals and thought to be most valued by respective 
organizations was “recognition and appreciation”, which speaks to the social needs of the 
individual in those organizations. At the individual level, positive correlation was found between 
mastery and the opportunity for solo work and, mastery and freedom on what to work as it 
pertained to working on areas of individual’s greatest interest, although non-conformity 
negatively correlated with opportunity for solo work and freedom on what to work (Zhuang et 
al., 1999). Contrary to the traditional conception of highly creative people to work in solo, a 
positive correlation was found between creativity and a stimulating environment, indicating that 
highly creative individuals fostered a highly stimulating environment. Another positive 
correlation was between creativity and risk-tolerance. On all of these statements, respondents 
scored their organizations lower. 
Although there was no standard template, the study found that idea generation existed in 
all organizations (Zhuang et al., 1999). The research conducted by Zhuang et al. (1999) reached 
a variety of conclusions that differed. The research also found that innovation was driven by 
dynamic environments despite inconsistence of clear policies in innovation. Hence, even though 

24 
clear policies on innovation were not present, dynamic environments were found to be driving 
innovation (Zhuang et al., 1999). The research found that highly creative employees perceived 
their organizational cultures to be non-supportive. Finally, the research concluded that managers 
lacked a clear understanding of idea generation techniques. This further contributed to the 
negative value associated with creativity training programs (Zhuang et al., 1999).  
Both studies, Zhuang (1995) and Zhuang et al. (1999), had agreement on the definition of 
innovation in general and agreed on the concepts of innovation. However, the results were found 
to be inconsistent as applied to individual perceptions of creativity and innovation. In addition, a 
lack of clear understanding on the concept of innovation emerged, in association with the 
unknown of who was most responsible for the same. Respondents did not perceive that all 
professions were equally creative, although they believed that creative individuals were present 
in all organizations. Even though a positive correlation existed between creativity and 
stimulating environments, creativity training was found to be inconsistently values and 
techniques to increase idea generation were no well-known. The studies clearly emerged the lack 
sufficient integration of processes, procedures and structures at an organizational level to support 
innovation.  
Individual creativity composed of knowledge, skills and attitudes, an assumption made in 
the original study by Zhuang (1995). Knowledge and skills are directly related to the job. These 
are attributes that one must possess or be trained on in order to perform their job duties or be 
hired into the job that the individual is in. And hence those attributes may not be unique to the 
individual. However, attitude is unique to the individual and hence viewed as an independent 
variable and precursor to creativity as a dependent variable. Further extending, the researcher, 
Zhuang (1995), viewed creativity as the independent variable to output as the dependent 

25 
variable. Juxtaposing, individual attitudes seem to be the independent variables to outcome as the 
dependent variable. The results identified that younger individuals, aged 21 to 30 years, who 
were males and, managers appeared to be most creative, although age was not consistent.  
 Zhuang et al. (1999), the following study to Zhuang (1995) described the innovation 
process as input, process, and output, with individual creativity as one of several inputs to the 
innovation process. The assumption made was that mastery and non-conformity were the 
precursors to creativity and ultimately productivity. The results showed the assumption to be 
contradictory. Further identifying the inputs, high risk tolerance and a stimulating work 
environments seemed to be the precursors to creativity. With creativity as the dependent 
variable, the job group emerged to function as the independent variable. This, paving the 
transformation-path from individual level to the organizational level. For innovation output as 
the dependent variable, organizational policies and procedures formed the independent variable 
as they related to innovation output.  
The research and studies conducted by Zhuang (1995) and Zhuang et al. (1999) provided 
interesting conclusions, especially in regards to creativity at the individual level and also 
provided conclusions and the template to further explore perception of innovation at the 
individual and organizational level. Innovation in an organization is driven by a dynamic and 
stimulating environment, and it is the organization’s responsibility to create such an 
environment. Secondly, even though skills and knowledge are variables between individuals and 
are precursors to creativity, they tend to be job related. Left alone, or singled out, the attributes 
do not explain the differences in creativity amongst individuals. Thirdly, individual creativity is a 
dependent variable and affected by age, gender and job groups, that are independent variables. 
Last but not the least, the attitude to high risk tolerance environments seemed necessary and a 

26 
precursor to increase individuals’ creativity. The aforementioned indicate a coalesced and linked 
role for individual and he organization to identify the precursors to creativity and weave them 
into the organizations culture, so as to maximize innovation output. The results from these 
studies proved inconclusive when analyzed using statistical analysis, but the studies provided the 
grounding to further the research on innovation by providing a framework, model and instrument 
to carry out further exploratory research.  
Caraballo and McLaughlin 
 
The research of Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) sought to comprehend how 
perceptions of innovation varied at the individual level within a single, homogeneous cultural 
group.  Starting at the individual level, innovation happens when individuals use creative 
processes to solve problems. This was the foundation that premised the study by Caraballo and 
McLaughlin (2012) that was built on previous research (Baregheh et al., 2009; Zhuang, 1995; 
Zhuang et al., 1999). In performing the research, Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) leveraged 
the definition of innovation as something new, improved/ changed or adoption. Diffusion in new 
scenarios, circumstances or contexts (Zhuang et al., 1999) and Baregheh et al’s. (2009) 
identification that the precursor to the outcome is the perception of innovation at the individual 
level. 
Caraballo and McLaughlin’s (2012) research focused on the Information Technology 
industry vertical and specifically on the Latino Americans working in the Information 
Technology industry. Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) collected data using the 10-question 
survey from Zhuang (1995), which garnered comprehension of innovation at the individual level. 
Using a 5-point Likert scale, respondents recorded their level of agreement or disagreement. For 
statistical analysis, Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) technique was used at the 95% confidence 

27 
level. In the different meaning of innovation, Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) identified 
statistically significant differences, which was different from the Zhuang (1995) study.  
Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) noted that some of the differences may have been due to 
outliers. However, Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) noted that the Levels statistic of 14.188 
supported the conclusion of variation difference for different questions. In order to determine the 
validity and reliability of the Zhuang (1995) instrument, Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) 
performed factor analysis, extending study of the results.   Requirements of factor analysis were 
met by the data, which was normal, linear and had conceptual linkages. Three constructs 
(independent factors) describing 57% of the total explained variation emerged from the 781 
responses (Caraballo & McLaughlin, 2012). The data variation of 57% met the requirement for 
social scientific research, less than 60%, even though some differences in naming conventions 
existed.  
Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) performed “Q factor analysis” to examine the 
demographic characteristics as a precursor of perceptions of innovation. Gender, age group and 
job function were identified by Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) as specific demographic 
variables. Gender and perception of innovation did not carry statistically significant differences 
between them.  
Technical and non-technical respondents and gender delineated job function. Using 
ANOVA analysis at 95% confidence level, Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) studied female 
technical and non-technical respondents perception of innovation.  The results did not yield to 
identify statistically significant differences. However, similar analysis of male respondents using 
the exact technique produced results that were significantly different. The male (gender) and 
technical respondents perceived innovation as “identifying the best new ideas and/or best 

28 
people” ” (Caraballo & McLaughlin, 2012, p. 559). On the other hand, the male non-technical 
respondents perceived innovation as related to “attract[ing] the best people or improve those that 
are available internally” (Caraballo & McLaughlin, 2012, p. 559). The results suggest differences 
of perception of innovation to be dependent on demographic factors.  
Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) categorized the age groups into three categories: ages 
between 18 and 30 years old were Generation Y, ages 31 to 44 were Generation X and ages 45 
and older were the baby Boomers. With the 10-question survey as the dependent variable and 
gender, age group and job function as independent variables, Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) 
tested a three-way interaction between the dependent and independent variables. This was done 
prior to testing age as a separate factor. Analysis using the multivariate ANOVA analysis of 
these variables tested as significant at the 95% confidence level. Caraballo and McLaughlin 
(2012) noted that different groups can share similar perception, although perceptions of 
innovation may vary from individual to individual. Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) identified 
that older groups seemed to accept all three perceptions of innovation, while respondents in Gen 
Y were found to have a narrower perception of innovation as improvements or changes being 
interchangeable with new innovations.  
Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) confirmed and noted that restrictive definitions of 
innovation could have a negative effect on creativity and competitive advantage, while 
individual perceptions of innovation vary distinctly. Rather than directing a process, because 
perceptions of innovation vary at the individual level, organization have a need to manage the 
innovation process by people and perceptions or in other words aligning the appropriate 
combination of employees with the required perception. In such a scenario, managing the 
innovation process might require a tactical approach, both at the individual and team level, that 

29 
stimulates, focuses and catalyzes activity that would support the organizations  overall strategic 
plan. If that be the case, the final state may be one of constant realignment and change rather 
than a static structure.  
Caraballo and McLaughlin’s (2012) exploratory research was groundbreaking and 
extremely valuable as the work done provides the transformation roadmap for moving the 
research forward as well as validating prior works. With the cultural impact on the perception of 
innovation, Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) recommended additional research with other 
distinct groups to further validate the findings, develop and acquire greater responses from other 
sub-groups to clarify findings and make some modifications to the survey instrument to increase 
its precision.  This dissertation furthers the work of Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) by 
applying their survey to a different, homogenous group, Indian Americans in the United States.               
Innovation Process 
 
The general definition of innovation is derived from multiple perspectives of the 
innovation process and applies to multiple scenarios. Thus making a single definition of 
innovation to gain wide acceptance. The following section further examines creativity, factors 
that enable knowledge management and boundary spanning and the impact of multiple levels of 
culture, while maintaining the description of the innovation process to include individual 
creativity in association with policies, procedures and processes at the organizational level, 
leading to innovative output (Zhuang et al., 1999).  
Stages of Innovation 
 
The innovation process is a multi-stage process, which comprises of at least two steps/ 
stages, generally idea generation and idea implementation, and symbolically and pragmatically 
characterized as a cyclical process of creation and destruction (Denning, 2012; Kaasa & Vadi, 

30 
2008; Leavy, 2011; Roberts, 2007; Williams & McGuire, 2010; Jucevicius, 2010). Baregheh, et 
al. (2009) noted innovation’s definition to be one of a multi stage process.  
According to Zhuang (1995), the innovation process is made up of three components: 
individual creativity, organizational processes and procedures, and output. In the follow-up 
study, Zhuang et al. (1999), further broadened the definition to include input, process and output. 
Although a specific definition that covers all aspects is yet to be found, research and studies 
identify innovation process to include iterative individual and collective actions, being split 
between idea generation and idea implementation and the pragmatically cyclical creation and 
destruction. The final product, service or process is the result of the collective actions at the 
organizational level, which are in turn driven by creativity at the individual level. Transforming 
ideas to deeds needs resources, time and commitment. Since no organization has an unlimited 
supply of resources and since resources are limited, only certain ideas that are generated may be 
selected and found worthy for implementation resulting in a new or improved product service or 
process. Hence, the need for a screening/ filtering or vetting or prioritization process. In this 
context, Figure 3 illustrates the basic innovation process.  
      

31 
 
Figure 3. Basic Innovation Process. 
 
The organizations’ infrastructure, policies, procedures, structures, perception of innovation and 
strategy influence across the phases and especially as a feeder and outcome to screening process, 
which is also influenced by external factors such as the market environment.  
Creativity.  In the innovation process, the individual and the organization collectively 
have a role to play and creativity becomes a vital and critical component at the individual level 
(Zhuang, 1995). Collectively, creativity at the employee’s individual level and the degree of 
interactions amongst employees form the feed and/ or precursor to innovation (Amabile, 1987; 
Dobni, 2008; Dobni, 2010; Zhuang, 1995). With creativity playing a key role at the individual 
level, at one end of the value chain, creativity by itself has multiple sources. Hence, if creativity 
can be seen as a dependent variable that is dependent on multiple independent variables such as 
motivation, skills, knowledge, perceptions, and attitudes (Amabile, 1987; Dobni, 2008; Zhuang, 
1995; Caraballo & McLaughlin, 2012).  According to Amabile (1987), creativity does not carry 
an absolute value, instead creativity is a continuum, which is influenced and driven by individual 

32 
motivations, skills, knowledge, and experience. Thus, increasing an individual’s knowledge and 
experience, either by tacit or explicit knowledge, training or experience, has a positive impact on 
creativity (Dobni, 2010). According to Zhuang (1995), creativity is a dependent variable that is 
influenced by various independent variables and factors such as: a stimulating environment, high 
risk-tolerance, knowledge, skills, attitude, age, gender and job function. Sorting out the 
commonalities of knowledge and skills, identified in the research by both Zhuang (1995) and 
Amabile (1987), both author’s research differs on the independent variables motivations versus 
attitude and high-risk tolerance at the level of the individual.  
As Amabile (1987) noted, expertise is one of the precursors or influencers to creativity 
and hence, domain related expertise that is specific to a certain domain and gained via 
knowledge from trainings or experience could influence expertise and thereby influence 
creativity. Knowledge could be tacit or explicit and hence expertise could be composed of both 
tacit and explicit knowledge. Explicit knowledge is codified in nature and hence can be easily 
transferred, however tacit knowledge is gained by the individual as result of action, experience, 
etc. and hence becomes unique to the individual. The primary feeders for tacit knowledge are 
experience and application of explicit knowledge to situations that are rather challenging or 
unique as they come by. As a result, codifying tacit knowledge is a challenging and difficult task. 
In applying heuristic approaches to problem solving, with the direct proportionality between 
increase in diversity and increase in knowledge (Shin et al., 2012), adding diversity could lead to 
increasing creativity.  
While creating workgroups or teams as part of the iterative creative process increases 
diversity. The iterative nature of the creative process make it necessary to be reviewed and 
monitored periodically by an individual or a group or a team of individuals (Amabile, 1999; 

33 
Zhuang, 1995). Diversity in workgroups brings variety to the knowledge pool and quantity of the 
knowledge at hand, thereby benefiting the iterative creative process by providing multiple 
perspectives from various standpoints/ perceptions that may be unique from members of the 
teams and vary by diversity in terms of culture, gender, experience, etc. An increase in diversity 
could led to interpersonal conflict, and such conflict could negatively impact creativity. 
However, such conflict could be mitigated with a clear understanding of the goals, purpose and 
vision and the conflict may be decreased by increasing the cognitive diversity, which increases 
task-conflict and there by reduces negative effects of diversity and increases creativity (Shin et 
al., 2012).  In rowing a boat, all members of the rowing team have to row in the same direction 
with a clear understating of the direction and goals. Similar, in high performance teams, clear 
understanding of the team members in terms of the direction, purpose and goals is crucial. Such 
understanding is gained by clear focus and crystal clear communications (Sadri & Condia, 2012). 
A free-flowing and unstructured business or organizational structure, in some cases breeds and 
most definitely doesn’t help in alleviating the negative impacts of diversity and hence shunts 
creativity.  Thus, in attempting to tactically manage and mitigate the negative effects of increased 
diversity, formal structures are needed, along with leadership that carries intestinal fortitude and 
transformational attitude, with strategic foresight to create and sustain positive and stimulating 
work environments that feed on and value cognitive diversity and collectively help attenuate the 
negative effects of demographic diversity (Sadri & Condia, 2012; Shin et al., 2012).  
The aforementioned research saw a role for the organization in influencing the drive for 
innovation, in addition to the individual’s role on creativity. However, the authors of these 
studies differed on the importance and specific responsibilities of the organization as it applied to 
respective roles towards innovation. According to Amabile (1987), the organization played a 

34 
crucial role in collaging, organizing and making knowledge in a codified, accessible and user-
friendly manner. The organizations role also included, ensuring the maintenance of a positive 
work environment that increased and positively influenced creativity for individuals in a team 
and also predicting the types of innovations the organizations would deliver as an outcome 
Amabile (1987). On the other hand, Zhuang’s (1995) research pointed towards the organizations 
role to be critical and focused on creating policies and procedures that would enhance and help 
improve products/ services, productivity, and sales, by contributing towards a stimulating work 
environment that has high-risk tolerance, while ensuring that such policies and procedures align 
with a positively impact and motivate individuals and their behaviors. In addition, Zhuang 
(1995) and, Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) saw creative output to be dependent on how 
individuals perceived innovation.  
Carrying, transforming and realizing ideas to deeds requires the organizations to have the 
ability to manage creativity and the outcomes as of successful creativity outputs, which 
ultimately influence and grow innovation. Every organization has to manage tensions, and the 
key to manage the right tensions, while balancing profitability and growth, short-term and long-
term goals, and looking for synergy across the organizations or focusing on specific teams alone 
(Dodd & Favaro, 2006). In assessment, such factors suggest the organizations culture on 
openness and flexibility to deal with progressive, yet dynamic and ambiguous environments. For 
creativity o flourish, sustain and grow, in addition to various organizational and individual 
factors, a supportive and integrative environment and infrastructure are needed. Although, the 
organization needs to play a key role in attracting, retaining and managing the organizations 
human capital; support, thought and pragmatic action are needed to ensure and incentivize 
desired creative and collective innovation behaviors that are supported via an infrastructure of 

35 
policies, procedures and organizational structures, which while providing support, also capture 
and incorporate newly discovered knowledge (Amabile, 1987; Zhuang, 1995). In the efforts 
towards acquiring and updating existing knowledge, organizations can follow multiple strategies, 
such as hiring new talent, mergers and acquisitions, collaborative alliances and partnerships with 
multiple sources for knowledge sharing, and investing in research and development facilities 
(Díaz-Díaz & De Saá-Pérez, 2012; Jusko, 2008; Sebestova & Rylkova, 2011; Wilson & Doz, 
2011). The tactical approach for strategic knowledge acquisition depends on the organizations. 
Overall strategic goals, culture, the specific type of knowledge being sought, and most 
importantly, the organizations appetite to assimilate such knowledge.   
Knowledge Management 
Data are a collection of discrete facts that when put in context and analyzed translate to 
information (Hoe, 2006). A higher level of comprehension of information is knowledge 
(Davenport & Volpel, 2001).  In determining the dichotomy between knowledge and 
information, Nonaka and Takeuchi (1995) noted that knowledge is about beliefs, commitment 
and perception, and is valuable towards achieving an end. Information on the other hand is a 
simpler form of knowledge. Since, knowledge is about perceptions and beliefs, there is 
variability in comprehension of knowledge at the individual level. According to Bierly, Kessler, 
and Christensen (2000), individuals vary in their ability to effectively choose and apply 
knowledge in a given context or situation. Individuals are unique in their respective abilities and 
approaches to solve problems (Haapasalo & Kess, 2001). How a person defines a problem drives 
the approach to solve the problems and hence the direct correlation with creativity and 
relationship to innovation. Individuals derive solutions to problems using their experience and 
knowledge, which might be tacit or explicitly acquired. Nonaka and Takeuchi (1995) presented 

36 
the SECI model on knowledge management that identifies four core processes, namely 
socialization, externalization, combination and internalization. The greater the experience, wider 
the toolset of knowledge and hence greater the alternatives solutions. Hence, an individual with 
greater experience could potentially be more creative as compared to someone with lesser 
experience and exposure with problem solving. According to Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012), 
perceptions of innovation vary in individuals. Depending on perceptions of innovation, 
individual’s creativity may be impacted from experiences in an accept or reject form of decision, 
which in turn may act as a differentiator or a filter that either enhances or impedes creativity, and 
thereby impact the outcome of innovation.  
Knowledge Management’s Need 
By combining and leveraging the synergies that emerge out of the combination of data, 
information processing and individual creativity, organizational processes formulate and feed 
into knowledge management and manage risk in an efficient manner in dynamic and ever 
changing environments (Haapasalo & Kess, 2001).  According to Haapasalo and Kess, (2001), 
an interactive translation and capturing undergoes between explicit and tacit knowledge as 
business process help create, disseminate, renew and apply knowledge (Haapasalo & Kess, 
2001). Although unique to the individual, tacit knowledge, by it interaction with explicit 
knowledge in an interactive manner could be captured and translated to explicit knowledge over 
a period (Haapasalo & Kess, 2001). Due to increased uncertainty in the value chain, and in order 
to manage uncertainty in a flexible manner, organizations shifted from and information-based to 
a knowledge-based operational style and basis for respective value chains (Haapasalo & Kess, 
2001). An action that can be repeated to solve a problem that is recursive, could use explicit 
knowledge but such an environment is dependent on certainty factor. In an increasing dynamic 

37 
environmental and ecosystem, certainty shifts to uncertainty and hence, instead of approaching 
problems an actions with best practices, the focus is shifted to enhancing creativity. Despite the 
study conducted by Haapasalo and Kess (2001), the authors did not connect their conclusion to 
any specific type of innovation. 
According to Senge (1990), there are five characteristics that a learning organization 
exhibits: systems thinking, personal mastery, mental models, shared vision, and team learning. 
Senge (1990) noted that learning organizations needed to foster a connected environment to 
facilitate interconnected mediums of thinking. Greater commitment from individuals, as 
employees, results in stronger communities in the organizations and allowing for accelerated 
organizational learning. Systemic interrelationships run deep in organizations and the 
acceptability and level of organizational learning has the roots set at the individual level, thereby 
making the case to ensure a shared vision and inclusive team or community engagement occurs 
for enabling organizational learning. The organization needs to align knowledge management 
with the overall strategy tom achieve strategic goals in achievement of the vision and execution 
of the mission of the organization. Socialization and internalization processes of the Nonaka and 
Takeuchi’s SECI model directly connect with informal knowledge processes of an organization 
(Hoe, 2006). Because of the codified nature of explicit knowledge, a knowledge management 
system within an organization, make it possible for the organization to capture, impart and 
update explicit knowledge. As a result, organizational learning focuses on recording, acquiring, 
assimilating and integrating tacit knowledge into explicit knowledge and ultimately into the 
organizations existing knowledgebase (Haapasalo & Kess, 2001; Mohanty & Kar, 2012). Overall 
organizational learning is dependent on various techniques and processes for information 
acquisition, such as experimentation, observation, research and development (Mohanty & Kar, 

38 
2012; Sirmon, Hitt, & Ireland, 2007). Factors such as the type of knowledge sought, 
management of the tensions between profitability and growth, short-term versus long-term, 
organizational versus silo (Dodd & Favaro, 2006), the organization appetite to handle, accept and 
assimilate new knowledge, and the organizational overall strategy, all collectively impact the 
specific techniques and tactics to acquire and assimilate new knowledge. Transforming 
information to knowledge, in order to increase flexibility and improve the organizations 
competitive stance in the market, also feed into the process of acquisition and dissemination of 
knowledge (Mohanty & Kar, 2012; Sirmon et al., 2007). According to Argyris (1998), 
organization could sustain or improve their operating status as it stands by leveraging 
organizational learning. Argyris (1998) noted that organizational could use single loop learning 
to introduce and assimilate innovations that are new or improvements, while the double loop 
learning would be most suited for change innovations that would translate to diffusion or 
adoption of innovations (Argyris, 1998). Single loop learning is used to maintain, while double 
loop is used to improve current operations, products or services. Individuals, via their job 
function, which is driven by or enhanced by their knowledge and experience, drive creativity, 
which in a collective and interactive environment enhances innovation, and the perceptions of 
innovation, as defined psychologically by the individual and influenced by the policies and 
procedures of the organizations, collectively direct to the innovation outcome that furthers the 
organization’s strategy to sustain operations and remain competitive in the market.  
How individuals define innovation seems to affect the learning processes and structures 
that collectively support and enhance a firm’s overall strategy and competitive position (Argyris, 
1998, Zhuang et al., 1999, Caraballo & McLaughlin, 2012).          
Types of Knowledge 

39 
According to Wilson and Doz (2011), explicit knowledge, embedded knowledge and 
existential knowledge were the three types of knowledge that were identified to be maintained 
and the acquisition, processing and transmission depended on the type of knowledge. Wilson and 
Doz (2011) defined, explicit knowledge to be knowledge that can be codified, defined and 
transferred via common languages and processes (Wilson & Doz, 2011). Knowledge that is 
context-related, observable, loosely defined and can only be accessed when seen through 
different eyes was embedded knowledge (Wilson & Doz, 2011). Finally, knowledge that is 
context dependent, systemic, exists in behavior and norms, and the only way to learn is by doing 
was categorized as existential knowledge context dependent, systemic, exists in behavior and 
norms, and can only be learned by doing (Wilson & Doz, 2011). Embedded and existential 
knowledge collectively formulate tacit knowledge, where in embedded knowledge is partially 
tacit, while existential knowledge seems to be tacit (Wilson & Doz, 2011). Due to the codified 
nature of explicit knowledge, such knowledge can be transmitted and translated using existing, 
common language systems and thus has a common basis of understanding. On the other hand, 
tacit knowledge is context and individual driven, and because contexts and individuals are 
unique from a comprehension and perception standpoint, tacit knowledge requires greater effort 
for understanding and hence is challenging to be captured and synthesized using existing 
common knowledge system (Wilson & Doz, 2011). Attracting, foraying and experiencing are 
three techniques to access knowledge and each is applied to a varying degree depending on the 
type of knowledge desired (Wilson & Doz, 2011). 
  Transmission speed and quality of new information are impacted by a number of factors 
(Díaz-Díaz & De Saá-Pérez, 2012). Most factors would be categorized into two section: 
perceptions and culture. From the perception standpoint, uncertainty that involves validity and 

40 
reliability, and lack of perceived need for new knowledge or to ensure the maintenance of status-
quo, are one set of factors that impact the transmission and quality of new information. Another 
major set of factors are culture driven and dependent on the willingness to accept externally 
sourced knowledge (Díaz-Díaz & De Saá-Pérez, 2012; Birtchnell, 2011). For instance, in rural 
India, due to cultural disbelief and a tendency to maintain status-quo, external multi-national 
markets, find it challenging to penetrate the market, even though there is a gap that could be 
filled. Mergers, acquisition, and or joint ventures, afford organizations the opportunity to 
purchase new knowledge, which may be perceived as positive by the organization’s 
management, as the knowledge asset become an internal entity. Although perceived as positive 
by the organization’s management, internal and prior organizational culture might demonstrate 
resistance and cause challenges to the newly acquired information from external sources (Díaz-
Díaz & De Saá-Pérez, 2012). This becomes especially true in the case of tacit knowledge and 
perceptions being diverse and varied, without a common group open the knowledge up for 
discussion.  In addition, the complexity or the need to integrate the newly acquired knowledge 
into and existing system or knowledgebase might need time and further effort (Díaz-Díaz & De 
Saá-Pérez, 2012).  
 In addition to being crucial for innovation, idea generation is particularly enhanced as a 
result of knowledge sharing (Naranjo-Valencia, Jimenez-Jimenez, & Sanz-Valle, 2011). During 
the idea generation phase, when exploring new areas and contexts, there is particularly an 
enhanced sense of uncertainty. Exploration does not flourish while staying within structures, and 
hence formal rules and structures tend to inhibit ideation, whereas fully free and unstructured 
session lead to ideas that may not be of value to the organization within the current strategy and 
vision.  

41 
The most effective access mode for accessing knowledge depends on the type of 
knowledge, which along with existing knowledgebase, organizational culture and structures of 
the acquiring fr0m will drive absorption of the knowledge (Díaz-Díaz & De Saá-Pérez, 2012). 
Given the uncertainty and dynamism in the value chain, knowledge acquisition strategies seem to 
have shifted from historical content-based system to one of flexible content-based systems 
(Haapasalo & Kess, 2001).   Although existing resources in knowledge management systems of 
an organization might provide sufficient information for the organization to operate with the 
knowledge needed for new or improved innovation, the increased level of uncertainty and 
constantly changing technology along with rapidly transforming innovation, necessitate the 
organization to look for acquiring knowledge from the outside (Díaz-Díaz & De Saá-Pérez, 
2012). Given the focus on tacit knowledge to deal with increased uncertainties, changes to the 
type of knowledge seem to receive greater importance weighted on the human resource capital as 
opposed to technology, although technology is the platform to carry, synthesize and port such 
knowledge, while the source of such knowledge is maintained from human resources. In doing 
so, the wider definition of the type of knowledge that covers perceptions and culture, provides 
for definitions that closely align with specific definitions of innovation.   
Acquisition of Knowledge 
Globalization provided a global platform and in a sense a flattening of the earth, as result 
there is an increase in dispersion and diversity of sources for various knowledge, which does 
increase the challenges from a perception, culture and acceptance standpoint, while providing a 
much broader and deeper variety of solutions for innovation outcomes. The precursors to idea 
implementation, with the existence and sequencing of the idea generation, themselves provide 

42 
for at least two different environments with different characteristics that drive innovation 
(Bouncken, 2009).  
According to Sebestova and Rylkova (2011), a strong link exists between innovation and 
creativity and non-traditional thinking. If non-traditional thinking is attributed to out-of-the-box 
thinking, then this would fall under the category unique attitude that an individual would bring ti 
enhance creativity. The easier knowledge is to transmit, absorb and assimilate, the quicker is the 
adoption by individuals in an organization. Building on this platform, Sebestova and Rylkova 
(2011) noted that knowledge enhancement at an organizational level starts with focusing and 
ensuring, increased facilitation of ease of knowledge transmission and assimilation. 
Acknowledgment and acceptance are different from one another. Sebestova and Rylkova (2011), 
noted that willingness to change was more important than the learning process, although 
organizational learning was key, because lack of willingness will not provide the organizational 
momentum to adopt and change using the newly acquired knowledge. Hence, a formal process 
may be justified for knowledge acquisition and management in order to facilitate the use of 
knowledge and adoption of the knowledge by the organization, as required by the need for 
organizational learning and willingness to change.  
According to Sebestova and Rylkova (2011), the occurrence of learning takes place at all 
levels of the organization structure within the organization, maintaining a reinforcing 
relationship between learning and knowledge management. Although, organizational learning is 
identified as a need to sustain and increase the organization ability to innovation, and ensure 
competitive advantage for the organization, there lacks a consistent correlation between learning 
and successful innovation.  This lack of a consistent correlation further reinforces the need for a 
strong relationship between the organization’s business model and strategy. Thereby suggesting 

43 
that organizations with effective learning techniques and adoption need effective management 
processes, policies and structures to transform innovations in services and products to marketable 
services and products (Erwin, 2002).  
Boundary-Spanning Activities 
The sources of information, internal or external, and the information needed, depend on 
the how the organization and/ or the individual define innovation, new, improved, or change, and 
what their perception is of innovation. The definition and perception of innovation for 
organizations that consider themselves to be leaders or disruptors is different from the perception 
of innovation by organizations that think of themselves as the fast second or follower or 
imitators.  
Alignment with external organizations or across organizational boundaries with t=in the 
organization involving various activities of representation, coordination, sharing, and searching 
that focusses towards different audiences and purposes encompasses boundary spanning 
(Marrone, 2010).  
In environments that are stable and seeking collaboration with groups that are more 
powerful or knowledgeable, representation is found to be useful. Thus, making representation a 
viable technique for spanning explicit knowledge (Björk, 2012); Marrone, 2010; Gurbani, 
Garvert, & Herbsleb, 2010). While seeking tacit knowledge, searching is beneficial and hence, 
searching is a viable technique to be used in environments that are unstable, dynamic and volatile 
(Cummings & Pletcher, 2011; Tuulenmaki & Valikangas, 2011). Coordination activities finds it 
position to be a balance between representation and searching (Marrone, 2010). Critical 
decisions in boundary spanning involve decisions around resource allocation, team formulation, 
leadership on teams, and network infrastructure and platforms for seamless information t6ransfer 

44 
and exchange (Marrone, 2010). The efficiency of boundary spanning as applied to the 
enhancement of information transfer and improvement of innovation depends and falls on the 
team and the individuals who make up the team, their respective behaviors and the effectiveness 
of the network (Marrone, 2010). Ultimately, the need for efficiencies is driven by the 
understanding and perceptions of innovation the individuals and teams, which influences 
behaviors at the individual level (Marrone, 2010; Caraballo & McLaughlin, 2012.  
A correlation exists between the rate of innovation and the degree of external 
collaboration (Kang & Kang, 2009; Sawang & Matthews, 2010). Prior research shows that open 
alliances, informal networks, research and development (R&D) collaboration, and technology 
acquisition, provided stimulus for activities for external  innovation (Boudreau & Lakhani, 2009; 
Chesbrough & Garman, 2009; Kang & Kang, 2009). In addition to innovation, other factors such 
as focusing on the core business, transitioning R&D efforts to move external, lowering 
operational costs, etc., were also dominant drives for such alliances and actions. From the 
strategic perspective, managing the right tensions between profitability and growth, short-term 
versus long-term goals, organizational versus silo or team focus were the primary drivers and 
motivations.  (Dodd & Favaro, 2006). 
Innovation does not follow a pattern and can be of complex and non-routine in nature, 
encompassing individuals, teams, product leads, pilots, experiments and external sources from 
other organizations, customers, stakeholders, etc. and hence the need for flexible approaches 
when dealing with risk and uncertainty (Cummings & Pletcher , 2011; Gurbani et al., 2010; 
Tuulenmaki & Valikangas, 2011). Although the researchers agreed on the commonality that such 
characteristics and techniques were leveraged in development of new products or services, new 
business models, and off-the shelf products, they all disagreed and differed on which of those 

45 
characteristics were most important. What is unclear is if such variation is due to or driven by the 
type of innovation or a result of the organization and its culture. According to Gurbani, et al. 
(2010), management’s role in establishing and clearly articulating and communicating the idea 
implementation criteria is a significant innovation driver.  
Alliances 
Innovation alliances are of two types: open innovations and clusters of innovation. 
According to Sebestova and Rylkova (2011), a correlation and synergy effect exists between 
clusters of businesses that share knowledge and qualitative variables unique to each organization 
that drive as to how well knowledge is assimilated and applied. Knowledge networks and 
ecosystems came about as a result of alliances that were formed by informal relationships 
(Sebestova & Rylkova, 2011). As part of the research, Sebestova and Rylkova (2011) developed 
a five-step competency model that could be used for sharing knowledge and provided a 
framework for successful alliances: care, competitiveness, communications, culture, and clarity 
on the relationship. This competency model maintains that alliances are formed over a period 
and, develop and progress depending on strengths, weaknesses and needs of one another. As the 
variety and diversity of the ideas widens, so does the diversity and size of the alliances, thus 
suggesting a direct relationship between exposure to ideas, and size and diversity. Since the 
alliances develop over a period, the alliances also develop a mutual understanding of trust and 
comprehension of context, thus resulting in smoother transference of tacit knowledge as the 
alliance or relationship matures (Brettel, Heinemann, Engelen, & Neubauer, 2011).  
Large organizations and high technology forms prefer open alliances, largely because 
most of the common base of knowledge already exists in the form of standards and hence, 
protecting core competencies or core technologies is not an issues, whereas, small organizations 

46 
and low technology organizations prefer mergers and acquisitions, just to ensure the core 
competency is protected and governance is not an issue (Hagedoorn & Duysters, 2002; Han, Oh, 
Im, Oh, Pinsonneault, & Chang, 2012). Hence the two key factors that influence alliance 
decisions are governance and protection of existing capabilities or technologies. Expansion of 
open alliances results in issues with governance and make it challenging to protect the core 
capabilities, thus negatively impacting the organizations innovation alliances.     
Open Innovations 
An innovation alliance that involves multiple external partners and is used to decrease the 
development time or cost of the new product (Brettel et al., 2011), and share knowledge and 
improve innovation by accessing and transferring information from a diverse and wide array of 
sources is called open innovation (Jusko, 2008; Lasagni, 2012). An example of such collaborate 
open innovation is Tata Nano (The Economist, 2009), the cheapest car in the world (Ray & Ray, 
2011). In developing the Nano, an innovative modular design was developed following the open 
innovation alliance between the Tata Motors groups and suppliers of parts and service (Ray & 
Ray, 2011). Through a diverse array of modalities, open innovation might also encompass 
informal alliances, clusters of innovation, and customer involvement, although these are not 
venues that most firms would pursue or are ready to be involved. At the benefit of not having to 
reinvent the wheel, affiliations with external sources can afford a wider array of knowledge at a 
lower cost. However, the trade-off comes in the form of an increased possibility of losing 
intellectual rights and challenges with accepting and adopting tacit knowledge (Lasagni, 2012). 
Policies, procedures and structures are required as part of boundary spanning as the individual 
sources at some point will need to transfer information to other participants or team members, 
internal or external, in order for the idea to transform to a deed or to enhance the innovation via 

47 
alliance (Hoegland, Lichtenthaler, & Muethel, 2011). This is the transfer point when individual 
perceptions come into effect and could dramatically progress execution of the strategy or turn 
into an obstacle or roadblock hindering further progress on the innovation.  
According to Rufat-Latre, Muller and Jones (2010), there are two components to open 
innovation as applied at the organizational level: gap analysis to identify the delta between the 
current capabilities of the organization versus potential growth areas and shifting focus to 
enhancing the core capabilities as opposed to focusing on the market-share.  Gap analysis affords 
the organization to become effective and efficient and strengthen the core, even though such 
analysis may not lead to any strategic changes or value. However, such an analysis and 
implementation can expose hidden or un-tapped talent, knowledge or capabilities that the 
organization can deliver on. Such analysis helps with changing existing beliefs, mindsets and 
internal structures or hierarchy (Henttonen, Pussinen, & Koivumäki, 2012). Changing culture if 
the most challenging and the accepted norm of bringing change is by starting with changing 
policies, followed by procedures then beliefs and then culture (Christensen & Overdorf, 2000). 
As Christensen and Overdorf (2000) noted changing the culture is the most challenging and time 
taking task that is also disruptive in nature. In such scenarios, gap analysis can help with setting 
in incremental changes that would start with scanning and identifying the gaps and incrementally 
making changes to shift the culture. Gap analysis helps identify potential growth areas where as 
shifting the focus from market share to core enhancements helps increase the possibilities for 
delivering change innovations. Alignment of the organization’s structure, processes, beliefs and 
culture with the company strategy is a requirements in both cases. Rufat-Latre et al. (2010) noted 
that innovation is a process and though open innovation evolves and matures over time, the 
extent of the organization’s participation in an alliance and the level of innovations depend on 

48 
the organization’s culture and comfort level with the uncertainty and risk, willingness of the 
organization to change its process, structures, strategies, which in turn drives the benefits that 
can be derived (Srivastava & Banaji, 2011). 
According to Wilson and Doz (2011), alliances had the potential for greater success and 
acceptance in instances where the companies were equals in areas that were separate from the 
purpose or goals of the alliance. Open innovation is part of a holistic and broader perspective that 
may be formed by dynamic business models, adopted or dissolved in reaction to market 
demands, need for knowledge creation and the core need for innovation (Wilson & Doz, 2011). 
Alliances may be viewed as dynamic in the sense that both partners need to bring to the 
relationship some form of an asset that is unique to their respective organizations and seek each 
other out form a symbiotic relationship that builds on the target organizations platform, 
ultimately both organizations emerging to be stronger and more competitive.  
Customer Involvement 
 
In search of knowledge and solutions, boundary spanning could also involve customers, 
which can participate via feedback and pilots towards devising solutions. Involving customers I 
the design process allows for innovations that help with reducing costs, meeting the exact needs 
of the customers, reduction in cycle time, and reduced risk; although, the same exposure could 
lead to instability and high risk due to exposure and changing technology, while at the same time 
setting a perception that the organizations is catering to the needs of current customers with new 
and improve innovations, but not to focusing on the un-tapped potential of new customers and 
new markets that might need radical or change innovations (Bower & Christensen, 1995).  First 
movers with market orientation receive an upper hand and a competitive advantage over fast-
second or slow followers, however, such an advantage is short-lived due ti the repeatable nature 

49 
of explicit knowledge that delivers new and improved innovations (Kumar, Jones, Venkatesan, 
& Leone, 2011; Sandmeier, Morrison, & Gassmann, 2010). Identifying lead users helps refine 
the product but at the same time sheds and limits a laser focus on development of the product or 
service that may not be inclusive of all the needs of a wide customer base, thereby making the 
product or service to be geared towards a niche market (Sandmeier, Morrison, & Gassmann, 
2010). Market orientation cannot be sort term and must be maintained as a long-term goals, 
much more in terms of cost of doing and staying in business as opposed to the need for 
competitiveness (Kumar, Jones, Venkatesan, & Leone, 2011). 
 
 Two information gathering methods, on-line competitions (open approach) and focus 
groups (closed approach), are used to involve customers as part of the boundary spanning 
process and to gather knowledge for the innovation process. Each methodology has its own pros 
and cons, along with general applicability and customized use for specific phases of the 
innovation process (Schweitzer, Buchinger, Gassmann, & Obrist, 2012). Because new and 
improved innovations directly relate to existing products or services, a closed approach is 
recommended (Schweitzer, Buchinger, Gassmann, & Obrist, 2012). As for radical innovation a 
combination of closed and open approach is recommended, with the idea generation phase going 
through a closed approach and open approach for the later phases, given the level of uncertainty 
and risk involved in radical innovations. In addition, online competitions as applied to radical 
innovations help ensure a lower cost, wider diversity and higher levels of creativity.  
 
The two most noted reasons for the degree of participation in an alliance are protection of 
intellectual property and governance. The risk and associated concerns apply to all organizations, 
while external boundary scanning can involve multiple partners and take various forms 
(Abuhamad & Shaltoni, 2013).  Even though risks exist, new knowledge is a requirement for 

50 
innovation and without innovation, the organizational cannot sustain in a market or continue to 
stay in business. Thus, the need for every organization to balance the risks (Brown, 2010) and 
attempt to acquire and disperse new knowledge. While there is a risk due to the voluntary nature 
of alliances and motivations of participants, there is also a risk from the knowledge that is 
transferred or acquired as part of mergers or acquisitions. The uncertainty of the organizational 
culture and its influence on the will to act on the newly found knowledge adds to the uncertainty 
and predicament of gaining new knowledge. The state of affairs, resource availability and 
uncertainty of the environment may limit the available options, final decision must be dependent 
on ensuring the alignment of culture, processes, company strategy and infrastructure with the 
perception of innovation at the organizational and individual level (Rothaermel, & Hess 2010).  
Clusters of Innovation 
Engel and del-Palacio (2011) identified, as part of a theoretical model of clusters of 
innovation (COI), emphasis on international perspective, entrepreneurial activities, and 
symbiotic relationships as key to the success of an organization. Depending on the strength and 
trust of the relationship and interdependence, behavior and commitments of participants varied 
along with complexity of the relationships, which translated associations over a range wherein 
the clusters of innovation varied from network clusters to super clusters. COIs require a level of 
trust and startups can be the greatest beneficiaries of COIs as a result of the network and access 
to knowledge, although organizations of different and varying sizes and maturity levels might 
enter into partnership (Engel & del-Palacio, 2011). Even though the COI theory seems to 
embody the organic nature of relationships and shows uncertainty from innovation. There is lack 
of clarity in terms of how the model operates and how and to what extent knowledge sharing 
takes place while protecting intellectual knowledge. In COIs, while respecting competitive 

51 
advantage and conflict of interest, given the risk to intellectual property, mutual interdependence 
is pervasive with explicit knowledge with low and restricted access to tacit knowledge (Audi, 
2011). The likelihood of forming innovation alliances is greater during times of uncertainty and 
idea exploration as opposed to stable and idea exploitation phases (Audi, 2011). According to 
Audi (2011), financial resources and strategic objectives were some of the dominant factors in 
forming geographic clusters, in addition to knowledge transfer as a primary motivation. The 
degree of variation in alliances suggests that searches for explicit knowledge become the 
dominant need as part of the collaboration facilitation, although welcome, tacit knowledge may 
be viewed in a less favorable sense due to the increased levels of uncertainty and turbulence. 
More than geographic proximity, technological proximity influenced to a greater extent the 
formation of clusters of innovation (Audi, 2011). Given the redundancies of information sharing 
within a locale, Audi (2011) identified the existence of a ceiling point or upper limit on the 
number of organizations that formed COI, thereby suggesting a tipping point beyond which the 
COI sees a decrease in density. The study by Audi (2011) also identified that the tipping point at 
which local memberships decline, there is an increase in international memberships, hence 
suggesting that the tipping point is the point of departure for increase in international alliances, 
which also points to the possibility of knowledge saturation, lack of diversity or need for greater 
sophistication in the locale or increased growth of the organization causing the search of new 
knowledge from other diverse sources beyond the local region (Audi, 2011). Alternatively the 
search may be driven as a result of dissatisfaction from an existing COI.   
 
 
 

52 
Culture 
 
Culture is formed as a result of combination of perceptions, beliefs, interactions and 
societies that people inherit, develop and sustain over time. Assumptions, trust, beliefs and 
values are created amongst the individuals in a culture as a result of coming together to solve 
problems and overcome challenges. Functioning at the national, organization an individual level, 
culture, becomes visible thru the actions, institutions and structures that individuals build, accept 
and adopt. In creating a value system on shared assumptions, culture helps identify behaviors and 
beliefs that re desirable, supportive of the surroundings and environment that individuals are in 
and attracts new members into the society via the socialization vehicle.  
Culture at the National Level 
Culture can either consume strategy and be the impregnable roadblock or be the unifying 
force that empowers decision making by situating the individuals in context to act in the habitual 
traditional way or the innovative, out of the box manner to solve and deal with challenging 
situations (Kaasa & Vadi, 2008; Scroggins, 2006). Individuals work within the policies, 
procedures and structures that organizations and society put in place and hence the environment 
needs to be stimulating to foster creativity and to propel innovation. Culture can help tune and 
condition attitudes and behaviors via the affiliation and leverage of risk and rewards, thereby 
directly impact innovation (Kaasa & Vadi, 2008; Williams & McGuire, 2010).  
Societies are made up of subgroups and culture is a characteristic that differentiates one 
sub group from the other within the larger construct of the society (Hofstede, 1980a). Although 
the subgroups via their unique characteristics could be differentiated from one another, the 
society, that includes all the subgroups has characteristics that permeate and are common through 
all the sub groups within the society (Hofstede, 1980a; Williams & McGuire, 2010). Culture is 

53 
formed as a result of formal and informal learning by individuals and sub-groups with common 
beliefs, a system of trust, common traits, and commonalities in terms of approaching problem 
solving and conducting business (Hofstede, 1980; Kaasa & Vadi, 2008).  . Culture affords 
predictability of behavior, however, culture by itself, is not tangible and could be measured as a 
tangible only via the behaviors, institutions, structures and systems that the individuals and 
subgroups in that culture exhibit (Hofstede, 1980a; Williams & McGuire, 2010).  
 
The process of innovation involves creating and devising something that is new, 
improved or a change, in order to solve an existing or new problem or to fill a gap that has been 
identified. And if culture can help characterize or predict behaviors of individuals and subgroups 
in how they approach problem solving, then there is a direct relationship between culture and 
perception of innovation, with culture directly influencing innovation. The initial research 
conducted by Hofstede (1983) identified power distance, uncertainty avoidance, masculinity-
femininity (gender), and individualism-collectivism, as the four cultural dimension at the 
national level, which later saw long-term orientation added to the list (Hofstede & Bond, 1988).  
The economic growth in the Asian countries (tiger economies), followed the identified 
characteristics of high power, high uncertainty avoidance, masculinity, high collectivism and 
long term orientation, on the other hand, the opposite trends  were favored innovation in the 
western countries (Franke, Hofstede, & Bond, 1991; Hofstede & Bond, 1988; Kaasa & Vadi, 
2008).  Such differentiation points out to the existence of additional factors that may be at play.    
Organizational Culture 
An integrated and intertwined relationship exists between the national and organizational 
cultures, both of which carry one another traits to varying degrees with factors of commonalities, 
common beliefs, types of ownership industry, competitiveness, purpose and diversity (Leung, 

54 
Bhagat, Buchan, Erez, & Gibson, 2005; Yim-Yu & Nicholson, 2008). Increasing complexity of 
organizations and technological advancement leads to increase in the organization’s 
susceptibility of accidents, thereby impacting reliability (Weick, 1987).  Similar to national 
cultures, organizational cultures also carry similarities in terms of the function that ensure 
stability, continuous operation, competitiveness and identification of acceptable behaviors, 
beliefs and thought processes (James, 2005). Weick (1987) suggested examples of 
communication deficiens in pilots training on new planes and communication systems at NASA, 
where the individual, while learning via simulation or training adapts to new processes, but 
errors or susceptibility to accidents arises not just in the manner in which such knowledge is 
acquired but also from perceptions and habitual behaviors that’s see the new process or 
innovation as a change from an individual perspective. As in the innovation continuum, 
consistent behaviors vary and drift between opposite poles of tradition and innovation, while 
encouragement and empowerment of creativity becomes part of the organizational culture 
(Kenny & Reedy, 2006). Thereby, the innovation strategy of the organization is greatly 
influenced by the organizational culture (Naranjo-Valencia et al., 2011).  
 
Stability or instability are characteristics that are experienced by all cultures and as such 
are influenced by severity and duration as the dominant characteristics, which in turn can help 
influence and predict the approach to be traditional or innovative when solving problems and 
also identify which of the approaches is most successful. The exact similarity may also be found 
in economic environments as it applies to stability. For instance, economic environments that are 
stable tend to be low risk-taking, are usually reactive, emphasize on efficiency, identifying the 
gaps and getting more and more efficient, without disturbing stability. On the other hand, 
unstable environments are high risk-taking, proactive, willing to try radical changes with high 

55 
risk tolerance (Leung et al., 2005). Hence, new and improved innovations seem to flourish in 
stable environments, whereas change and radical/ disruptive innovation seem to flourish in 
unstable and high-risk tolerant environments. In this context, it is important to note that every 
product and service has a shelf-life and the process of evolution, maturity and market focus never 
stay constant and are constantly changing. Hence for an organization to be successful, always 
operating in a stable or only operating in an unstable environment may not be conducive and a 
balanced approach of coalescing stable and unstable environment would be a more pragmatic 
and beneficial strategy to a sustained competitive advantage.  
The Role of Organizational Culture 
Resource utilization could be maximized as a result of operating in a dynamic 
environment, with agile deployment of products and services, instant dispersion of knowledge 
and information, and flexible knowledge acquisition and execution strategies (Wilson & Doz, 
2011). The key in these characteristics from the culture is the organizational ability and 
willingness to execute, accept and assimilate new knowledge, which by far, transforms an idea to 
a deed. According to Wilson and Doz (2011), structural and cultural changes within an 
organization can help achieve the combination of both the acquisition of new knowledge and 
new innovations along with executing and accepting on the new knowledge. The research 
conducted by both, Sebestova and Rylkova (2011) and Wilson and Doz (2011), identified the 
importance and criticality on the willingness to act, accept and execute, however, Wilson and 
Doz (2011), seemed to provide a holistic image on the approach to organizational learning and 
knowledge management as applied to innovation competencies and perceptions.  
The policies, procedures and structures in place at an organization are to an extent driven 
by the organizational culture and, do require adjustment to execute on the organization’s 

56 
strategy. Hence making cultural and strategic modifications, is necessary to shift and condition 
the internal processes of the organization and such actions can be influenced and managed by 
implementation of effective knowledge management and acquisition of knowledge from external 
alliances or open innovation. However, such structures and changes with diverse knowledge are 
only effective if there is the willing ness to accept, change and execute on the new knowledge, 
while maintaining a clear focus on the market (Wilson & Doz, 2011; Sebestova & Rylkova, 
2011). Hence, the “how” on achieve such change recommends the need for the organizational 
culture to be flexible and accepting to the extent possible.  
Uncertainty and Its Impact 
 
In determining the success of the innovation process, organizational culture plays a 
crucial and critical role, in addition to external factors such as market and customer demands, 
changes in customer trends and needs, which is extremely prevalent on the rural small and 
medium businesses (Kenny & Reedy, 2006; Lin, Chuang, Chang, & Yeh, 2012; Tellis et al., 
2009). For instance, in catering to the needs of customers at the bottom of the pyramid in rural 
India, the key to provide products in inexpensive and small portions for consumption by a large 
group of customers. Following the trend, companies had to change their processes, packaging 
and marketing techniques to suit this need (Birtchnell, 2011; Ray & Ray, 2011). For radical 
innovation to take place, organizations need a stimulating, high-risk tolerance environment, 
while at the same time organizationally, the systems and structures should be clear about the 
uncertainty and high-risk factors. Absent such an environment and infrastructure, creativity 
cannot be sustained, which directly influences innovation. Often time, instead of seeing 
innovation as a holistic and all-organization practice, innovation is seen as the duty or job of a 
specific unit or department, R&D or just text slow and low-risk innovations in the mainstream 

57 
(Jamrog, Vickers, & Bear, 2006). It is valuable to separate the risks from day to day stable 
operations and test innovations in a sandbox, but the integrated infrastructure needs to be in place 
from an organizational standpoint to assimilate and absorb successful innovations. With diversity 
at the workplace and organizations operating globally, organizational culture plays a dominant 
role on the innovation process as compared to the national innovation with essentially becomes a 
degree of influence in the broader schema of factors that influence perception of innovation.  
Change and Risk 
 
The extent to which change is accepted or rejected is directly influenced by culture 
(Kenny & Reedy, 2006; Leung, et al., 2005). Change is not always welcome, in fact change is 
one such factor that can cause angst in individuals, disrupt the office harmony, increase 
uncertainty, cause instability issues, and shift power (Leung et al., 2005). Changing culture is the 
most difficult and needs to start with changing processes, behaviors, values, and beliefs 
(Hofstede, 1980; Christensen, & Overdorf, 2000; Leung et al., 2005). According to Hofstede 
(1980), behavior is influenced by the perception of what is acceptable. Existing thoughts and 
beliefs take an inordinate amount of time to change and hence, appropriate incentives could be 
leveraged to produce desired behaviors and changing values, which are reflected via the cultural 
influence and directly impact perception of innovation and acceptability.  
 
Innovations and the process of innovation requires formal processes and structures that 
foster innovation Jucevicius (2010).  According to Jucevicius (2010), a positive correlation exists 
between innovations, tolerance for risk, change, flexibility, learning at all levels of the 
organizational structure. And for improving trust driven boundary spanning. In resource 
constrained organizations, the resources needed for the innovation process are the same 
resources that maintain and sustain day to day operations. Hence, as a result of limited resources, 

58 
the burden is on the organization to judiciously use the limited resources available. In this 
context, while maintaining that innovation thrives in high-risk environments, Jucevicius (2010) 
notes that formal strictures and processes in the innovation process would actually ensure 
resources are used judiciously as opposed to the thought process that innovation need to happen 
in an unstructured manner. The process of innovation involves risk, uncertainty and explorations 
of those facets that have previously not been discovered and hence, having a formal structure and 
process ensures proper utilizations of resources while also capturing the lessons learned as part 
of the innovation process, which might fall under the category of tacit knowledge. In doing so, 
given the extent of uncertainty and risk, it may be advisable to maintain a separation in the 
resources used for sustain operations versus those dedicated for exploration. Change becomes 
much more manageable in unstable environments for these organizations that adopt the model 
suggested by Jucevicius (2010).  National cultures take time to change as the decision making 
process depends on traditional approaches and, historic and habitual knowledge. Thus, countries 
cannot increase their risk in an unstable environment and be quick to adopt a change or afford a 
turbulent environment (Hofstede & Bond, 1988; Franke, Hofstede, & Bond, 1991; Jucevicius, 
2010). If organizations can change rapidly is debatable and largely depends on the culture of the 
organization and level of creativity of the individuals, although the quickest change can be set-in 
at a time when the organization is facing a crisis, which provides the necessary stimuli and 
openness to adapt and adopt to new knowledge and practices.  
 
National and organizational cultures impact and influence the individual while also 
influencing one another. An organization can be diverse with individuals from multiple nations 
and thus perceptions from a national culture standpoint, while at the same time national culture 

59 
can be made up of multiple organizational cultures. Thus, it is possible that creativity, innovation 
and economic success are influenced by factors, in addition to those noted above.  
Discussion 
 
Competitive advantage (CA) is different from sustained competitive advantage (SCA). 
Barney (1991) took a broad view of resources and brought about the differentiation between CA 
and SCA in the Resource Based View (RBV) model. CA provides with competitive advantage 
for the day to day operations, while SCA provides competitive advantage from a strategic 
perspective. According to Barney’s (1991) view, SCA should be such that others/ competitors 
should not be able to copy or duplicate the resource and must be beneficial at the tactical level. 
Being unable to duplicate, provides the organization with long-term advantages. In assessing 
perspectives of innovation, the characteristic of being inimitable, identifies SCA as a criteria.  

60 
  
National Culture 
Innovation is not unique to a specific national culture and innovation exists and flourishes 
in multiple cultures. In addition, innovation is dependent on condition of resource availability, 
geography, governmental policies and structures, etc. Being part of the same culture does not 
imply that an organization is successful. If innovation exists under such varying conditions, it is 
not possible to identify a single culture as the best or most appropriate culture for innovation. 
Even though national culture is a source for CA and SCA, the aforementioned arguments seem to 
ignore these factors.  
Organizational Culture and Innovation 
Culture is an amalgamation of interaction patterns of people, their beliefs, behaviors, 
practices assumptions and values. These are the factors that form the base and foundation of 
culture. With commonalities such as socialization and incentivization for desired behaviors, 
organizational culture and national culture share many of the common functions. The common 
beliefs, values and assumptions are visible in the policies, procedures and structures of 
organizational cultures. Hence, desirable behaviors and the creation of and organizational 
environment that incentivizes desirable behaviors are all identified by organizational culture. A 
critical component of creativity is the individual’s task motivation, which is determined by the 
organizational culture that in essence established which type of creativity is permissible, 
incentivized, and accepted. Creativity on the other hand is crucial for innovation.  
Socialization and collectivism aspects of the organizational culture work as a force of 
attraction and invitation for new members who share similar beliefs and values, exhibit similar 
behaviors, which in turn translates to shared assumptions on creativity and perception of I 

61 
innovation. For an organization to be successful, and because beliefs and assumption form the 
foundational baseline for organizational culture, the idea generation and idea exploitation aspects 
of the business need to be alignment, while knowing that idea generation happens at the 
individual level and idea exploitation is a collective process. Hence, we can conclude that 
organizational culture influences individual behaviors and their ability to be creative, which in 
turn influences the perception of innovation and impacts the strategy used for the innovation 
process.  
Creativity can foster and flourish at the individual level provided the organization 
provides for the support infrastructure to support and permit creativity. According to McLean 
(2005), most research focused on creativity at the individual level, with little linkage to the 
broader organizational perspective. With creativity having the outcome of delivering something 
new and different is bound to introduce a change at the organizational level, there by suggesting 
a strong relationship between  creativity at the individual level (idea generation) with innovation 
at the organizational level (idea exploitation). Hence the organizational culture could potentially 
hinder or be a catalyst for creativity or idea generation, and for innovation or idea exploration at 
the organizational level (Bouncken, 2009).  
Socialization conditions and influences individual behaviors to be desired or undesired, 
while coordination enables those desired behaviors to execute at the organizational level with the 
policies , procedures and structures put in place by the organization. At the individual level, 
shared values, beliefs and assumptions show as the precursor and culture that influence the 
behavior of the individual, while policies, procedures an structures established by the 
organization apply towards the collective practices that are driven by culture at the 
organizational level (Donate & Guadamillas, 2010). The organizational culture, both, establishes 

62 
boundaries and incentivizes acceptable individual behaviors (McLean, 2005; Donate & 
Guadamillas, 2010). Thus, organizational culture can influence innovation with the coupled 
approach of socializing desired behaviors for idea generation and coordination of idea 
exploitation or acceptable activities as part of the organizational innovation process, leveraging 
the policies, procedures and structures established by the organization (Naranjo-Valencia et al., 
2011; Tellis et al., 2009).  
A multi-national study conducted by Tellis et al. (2009) on 700 firms identified a positive 
relationship between organizational culture and radical innovation. Of specific interest the 
researchers found that high-risk tolerance and shared values of flexibility were needed to 
influence and drive radical innovation, which as identified as a strategic goal.  Naranjo-Valencia 
et al. (2011) conducted a similar research on 450 Spanish companies, using Cameron’s and 
Quinn’s (1999) Competing Values Framework (CVF), in an effort to identify the prevalent 
characteristics of the organizational culture’s competitive strategies and study the relationship 
between innovation versus imitation. Organizations that executed on innovation strategies 
seemed to follow the adhocracy characteristic as opposed to hierarchy, which was dominant in 
organizations that followed imitation (Naranjo-Valencia et al., 2011). Adhocracy and hierarchy 
form opposite sides of the continuum, whereby adhocracy empowers flexibly and high-risk 
tolerance environments with an external focus and hierarchy, with the structural and protocol 
oriented characteristic is mostly suitable for low-risk stable environments. Hence, adhocracy is 
dominant in cultures hat foster radical innovations and hierarchy is dominant in cultures that 
follow new and improved innovations. Exploration, uncertainty and high-risk stimulating 
environments drive radical innovation, while low-risk, incremental product and service 
extensions drive new and improved innovations, which in essence are tested and repeatable 

63 
practices and hence are leveraged by companies that follow an imitation strategy as opposed to 
companies that introduce disruptive innovation by leveraging radical changes. In either case, 
there is clear indication that organizational culture, which encompasses the shared beliefs, values 
assumptions along with the policies, procedures and structures, drives the strategy for desired 
type of innovation. Culture has its foundation built on common and shared beliefs, values and 
assumptions of individuals, who collectively form the organization. Hence, aligning the shared 
values of individuals towards risk, uncertainty, behaviors, policies, processes and structures 
within the respective organization is key to ensuring successful execution of the organizational 
holistic strategy.  
Each organizational culture has varying degrees of various characteristics that manifest in 
terms of policies, procedures and structures that differentiate the organizational culture’s 
approach to innovation. With such a variation at the collective level of the organization amongst 
organizational cultures, the variation has to be prevalent at the individual level also, because 
organizations are made up of individuals and the organizational culture is a manifestation of the 
shared values and beliefs of the individual in respective cultures.  Hence, as varying 
organizational strategies illustrate varying definitions of innovation at the collective level, it is 
logical to assume that perspective of innovation must vary at the individual level as well. For an 
organization to be successful, the company needs to align the organizational culture along with 
the individual perspectives of innovation as part of the overall organizational strategy.  
Individuals’ perceptions influence the organizational culture and also define innovation 
depending on perception of innovation at the individual level. Hence, individual perception of 
innovation becomes the root for sustained competitive advantage for the entire organization.  

64 
Innovation must be new and useful and while there is a linkage between intrinsic 
motivations and creativity at the individual level, intrinsic innovation seem to lead to new ideas 
or idea generation but not necessarily beneficial or pragmatic in all cases (Grant & Berry, 2011). 
According to Grant and Berry (2011), intrinsic motivations could lead to novel ideas generated 
by curiosity, exploration and risk taking, however, the actions on those ideas are influence by the 
collective will and force of the overall organizational culture.  Hence only those ideas that are 
influenced by the organizational culture move to idea exploitation and implementations phases. 
Hence, even though individuals may have creative and novel ideas, it does not mean every idea 
will transform into a deed and as such the process is, in essence, moderated and influenced by 
the organizational culture. Hence, an individual who aligns perception of innovation from an 
organizational standpoint and from their creativity standpoint, will find positive reinforce and 
feed back in moving ideas to deeds. Thus making the organizational culture the collective and 
cohesive force to identify, prioritize, socialize and coordinate the identification of novel ideas 
that would deliver useful innovation from an organizational standpoint, while originating at an 
individual level.  
Research conducted by Donate and Guadamillas (2010) on Spanish industrial 
organizations showed that the process versus product innovation outcomes had a positive 
relationship with cultural emphasis on cost control as opposed to socialization. Type of 
knowledge and their acquisition strategies, acceptance, transmission and assimilation techniques 
are identified by organizational cultures. In addition, organizational cultures identify the type of 
knowledge and mechanisms of knowledge dispersion by aligning with other companies that were 
different in respective innovation strategies as applied to cost control versus differentiation in the 
product or service. Thereby resulting in further confirmation that innovation is viewed 

65 
differently by different organizational cultures, which align with the overall company strategy by 
establishing the requisite policies, procedures and internal structures.  
Individual Creativity 
 
Individual factors such as gender, job function, age, and attitude were identified as factors 
that influence perception of innovation and different types of innovation (new, improved or 
change) at the individual level (Caraballo & McLaughlin, 2012; Zhuang, 1995; Zhuang et al., 
1999). I addition to the above mentioned factors the research conducted by Caraballo and 
McLaughlin (2012), Zhuang (1995) and Zhuang et al. (1999), also identified  high risk tolerance 
at individual and organizational level and stimulating work environment with the necessary 
policies, procedures and structures, supported by the organizational culture as the forerunners for 
innovation. The literature suggest risk tolerance as a cultural characteristic at the collective level, 
however, the same risk-tolerance, in varying degrees, also persists at the individual level. 
Cultures that exhibit extended periods of instability or turbulence may have the capacity to 
endure higher levels of risk and there by fostering a culture of creativity that leads to change 
innovations as opposed to just new or improved innovations.  
 
Boundary spanning techniques that target explicit knowledge are prevalent in individuals 
who are likely to operate in low risk environments, thereby leading to new and improved 
innovations. Whereas, individuals who are comfortable to work in high risk environments, are 
likely to be comfortable with boundary spanning techniques that target both explicit and tacit 
knowledge, and might be comfortable to lead into radical or change innovations. Individuals who 
are more adverse to risk may come from cultures that experience resource scarcity, which is a 
cultural characteristic that drives certain behaviors as part of the culture, at a national and 
organizational level. Every organization needs different types of innovation. New and improved 

66 
innovation that are incremental in nature help the organization maintain competitive advantage in 
the current market, while radical innovation provide companies with long term strategic 
advantages that ensure sustained competitive advantage. The focus of these different types of 
innovation suggests an organizational role, via policies, procedures and structures, that helps 
manage and condition individual perceptions of innovation in a manner that balances CA and 
SCA for the organization whereby supporting different types of innovation and incentivizing 
desired behaviors.     
Chapter Summary 
 
In conducting the literature review, several issues have emerged while attempting to 
frame the discussion around perception of innovation and individual’s culture. The most obvious 
and primary challenge is the lack of s a single, coherent and all inclusive definition for 
innovation that could be applied in all contexts. In reviewing the various definitions of 
innovation, there is clarity that the definition of innovation needs to be context driven and hence 
the research conducted also needs to be context driven. The findings of various authors 
organization (Baregheh et al., 2009; Denning, 2012; Kaasa & Vadi, 2008; Leavy, 2011; Roberts, 
2007; Williams & McGuire, 2010), helps clarify that the definition of innovation includes a 
multi-step or multi-phase process, and one that involves distinct and differentiable roles for the 
individual and the organization. The research conducted helps clarify and decouple various parts 
and components of the innovation process and also sheds clarity to the roles of the individual and 
the organization. In addition to the aforementioned definitions and clarifications, and 
additionally defining innovation to be new, improved or change, in association with the various 
degrees of influence on perception of innovation from culture, gender, job function, and skills, 

67 
indicates the existence of a continuum for innovation that is affected by these factors change 
(Zhuang et al., 1999, Baregheh et al., 2009; Shin et al., 2012; Caraballo & McLaughlin, 2012). 
 
Nations are diverse and the culture at the national level is rarely singular (Cohen, 2007).  
Thus, describing innovation at the national level using culture may not be fitting as there is not a 
single best culture that would drive successful innovation. Although, a critical role persists for 
the organization to play at the organizational culture level to bring about the cohesiveness 
between socializing and coordination of innovation activities that deliver on innovative 
outcomes. Organizations are made up of people and when we speak in the context of the 
organizations culture we are speaking in the context of a collective perception, belief and 
collective culture of all the people that make up such an organization over a period. Hence, 
perception begin at the individual level and form or collectively form the organizational culture 
over time. The ways of dealing with uncertainty, risks and challenges that the organization faces 
over time, all help shape the culture of the organization that start with perceptions at the 
individual level. Ultimately the lessons learnt become the way of doing business and hence 
become habit forming and further solidifying the culture. The individual’s perceptions are 
expressed in a non-tangible manner via speech, actions, and behaviors and in a way accept-reject 
decisions. The individual’s behaviors and actions as learned by being exposed to certain 
challenges and environments help with drawing the dichotomy and differentiating between 
cultures (Hofstede, 1980; Williams & McGuire, 2010). The adage, birds of a feather flock 
together, or in this case, socialization among like-minded individuals, who share the same 
perception, collectively demonstrates the perceptions of the group, while coming together and 
solving problems as a team, demonstrates coordination and shows the collective efforts of 
individuals in fulfilling the organizations strategy.  

68 
In realizing the benefits of innovation, the crucial task is to align the perceptions and 
efforts of the individual with those of the organization. Searching for solutions, boundary 
spanning and executing on solution, knowledge management are key to aligning perceptions and 
connecting the perceptions between the individual and the organization. Innovation that are new 
or improved can leverage explicit knowledge and do not find an extensive need for external or 
internal coordination. As opposed to radical change innovations that rely heavily on tacit 
knowledge that is gained via boundary spanning from a diverse talent and knowledgebase. When 
comparing new and improved innovations, with radical and change innovations, the risk 
tolerance amongst the perception of innovation at the individual and organizational level need to 
be high for radical innovations, while a low risk tolerance would suffice for new and improved 
innovations. Radical innovations that disrupt an industry, or change and shift cultures are of high 
risk nature and have many unknowns associated with such change. Context has a relationship 
with innovation in that perception of innovation by the individual level is defined by the 
individual while measuring risk, and the definition of risk in turn is dependent on the context 
(Euchner, 2011).  
All cultures share the commonality of risk and uncertainty, however, what differentiates 
the cultures are the perceptions and variations in the manner in which risk and uncertainty are 
managed by respective cultures (Li, Griffin, Yue, & Zhao, 2013). Certain factors such as 
resource availability, severity of the risk, stability and possible duration of instability, factor into 
how cultures manage risk and uncertainty. Over a period, culture develop mechanisms and 
tactics to dealing with the unknown and risks by switching between traditional solutions driven 
by explicit knowledge and innovative solutions driven by tacit knowledge (Kenny & Reedy, 
2006; Wilson & Doz, 2011). Hence, stable environments lean towards low-risk new and improve 

69 
innovation driven by traditional approaches, while unstable environments lean towards high-risk, 
change innovations and disruptive approaches. The approaches are not exclusive and form the 
ends of the continuum, opposite to one another and distinctly differentiated by their 
characteristics in Figure 4.  
Age (generational cohort), gender and job function are all factors and categories that 
introduce variations in perception of innovation and variations in the types of innovation at the 
individual level (Caraballo & McLaughlin, 2012; Zhuang, 1995; Zhuang et al., 1999). Each 
generation cohort exhibits similar characteristic that are partially dependent on external factors. 
Each culture has its own distinct set of social conventions that apply towards the environment 
and experiences for each gender. The job that the individual is in requires a certain set of skills 
to, first be in the job and second to actually perform the job, thus making the job functional 
dictate the skill-sets needed. Although, the extent to which, job functions influence perception of 
innovation is unclear, as the motivation to perform the job varies and is driven by the 
individual’s need or purpose. Hence, the individual’s perspective clarifies the role for the 
individual to better understand perspectives and perception of innovation, which would help 
drive the individual’s career, and selection of industry, while the role of the organization is 
clarified towards establishing and implementing policies, procedures and structures that allow for 
improvement of human resources and ensuring that such policies, procedures and structures are 
in alignment with the overall strategy at the organizational level.  
 

70 
 
Figure 4. Innovation Continuum.  
 
New and improved innovation rely on similar factors from an influence standpoint, 
especially in relation with change/ radical innovations. There is a degree of variation of the 
factors in terms of new and improved innovation. If broken into three categories, new innovation 
would be somewhere in the middle of the two extremes, change and improved. None of these 
would suffice as a requirement as innovation remains contextual.  
 
 
 
 

71 
 
 
CHAPTER 3.  METHODOLOGY 
Introduction 
This research focused on furthering the comprehension of perception of innovation in 
Indian Americans, while identifying and correlating the relationships between gender, age, and 
job function association and perception of innovation. In addition, identifying the consistency of 
results as compared to previous studies. The research methodology used to collect and analyze 
data will be discussed in this chapter along with a discussion of the survey instrument used for 
this research. This chapter also discusses the research design/ methodology, population, sample, 
variables, setting, data analysis techniques, validity and reliability of the survey instrument and 
ethical considerations.  The research was quantitative, exploratory, and non-experimental, using 
an updated survey instrument for data collection, following the design of Caraballo and 
McLaughlin’s (2012) research. Given the exploratory nature of the research, according to 
Creswell (2009), this type of data collection was suitable and appropriate for such research that 
involves generalizing results from a sample to a larger population.  
The research conducted by Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) leveraged the preliminary 
work conducted by Zhuang (1995) and Zhuang et al. (1999), which used a 10-item survey to 
measure individuals perception of innovation in medium size businesses in England. Because the 
studies conducted by Zhuang (1995) and Zhuang et al. (1999) resulted in mixed results, the 
authors decided not to further pursue their initial exploratory work. Focusing on a different 
population and selecting a different data collection methodology, Caraballo and McLaughlin 

72 
(2012) were able to extend the initial work conducted by Zhuang (1995) and Zhuang et al. 
(1999), and developed statistically significant results.  
Because of the broad and multiple definitions and wide applicability of innovation, there 
is a lack of clear and specific understanding of innovation along with multiple views of how 
innovation may be perceived (Baregheh et al., 2009). Further, at the individual level, there is 
little research on the impact of culture, which also drives perceptions of innovation at the 
individual level (Blodgett, Bakir, & Rose, 2008; Caraballo & McLaughlin, 2012).This research 
addressed a gap in the literature in terms of how innovation is perceived by individuals.  
Research Design 
This research extended and built upon the exploratory research work conducted by 
Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012), and the research was quantitative, exploratory, and non-
experimental using a web-based survey for data collection (Creswell, 2009). Creswell (2009) 
noted that surveys are appropriate data collection instruments to generalize from a sample of a 
target population and infer about specific characteristics, attitudes or behaviors of the target 
population. The intent of this study was to use web-based surveys for data collection purposes 
following the design established and used by Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012). The survey used 
for this research was self-administered, cross-sectional, and web-based, which helped contain 
costs, was sustainable, eliminated unnecessary variables, in addition to added convenience, for 
both the participants and the researcher. The researcher recognized that web-based survey 
approach has trade-offs between benefits and limitation. The benefits of the web-based approach 
include lower costs and convenience of data collection. The disadvantages of the web-based 
approach include a low response rate and the greater possibility of non-response bias. Such 

73 
limitations are consistent with the web-based survey approach and does not negate the usability 
of expected responses (Cooper & Schindler, 2007). 
In order to confirm the validity and reliability of the results, Caraballo and McLaughlin 
(2012) conducted a Varimax Rotation, and Q factor analysis to examine the independent 
demographic variables. This research furthered the work done by Caraballo and McLaughlin 
(2012), and applied the same approach and techniques to the three independent demographic 
variables: gender, age (by generational cohort) and functional association (job function), and 
identify relationships with dependent variables on perceptions of innovation: improvement/ 
change, adoption of something that exists elsewhere, and new ideas/ something new. The 
dependent variables were identified as factors 1, 2, and 3, respectively, by Caraballo and 
McLaughlin (2012).  
This research adopted and followed the research conducted by Caraballo and McLaughlin 
(2012), using a quantitative and exploratory approach. The primary difference between this 
research and the research conducted by Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) was collection of data 
from a different sample that was previously unstudied. 
The two research questions identified by the researcher for this study were: 
1. What are the perceptions of innovation in Indian-American professionals residing in 
the US as they categorize/ associate innovation as new, improvement, or change? 
2. What is the relationship between gender, age (generational cohort), functional 
association (job-function), and an individual’s personal perception of innovation as 
they categorize/ associate innovation as new, improvement, or change? 
The research addresses the management problem of increasing the comprehension of the 
different ways in which perception of innovation influences individuals means as they categorize 

74 
innovation to improve the innovation process (new product or service development) and to 
increase the effectiveness of collaboration with diverse partners and markets. A potential 
outcome of the study will be greater insight into how innovation is perceived by individuals, 
which in turn will enhance team formation, improve comprehension of perception of innovation 
by diverse markets, provide information and enable the process of being partners as companies 
build virtual organizations (Gressgård, 2011). The ultimate goal of obtaining these insights was 
to support and leapfrog the development of competitive advantage for organizations that are 
amenable to accepting and leveraging this knowledge (Amberg, Reinhardt, & Kittler, 2008) 
Sample 
Selection of Population 
The target population for this study consisted of Indian American professionals in the 
United States.  Several reasons exist for focusing on this demography. First and foremost, one of 
the primary reasons for selecting this group is because the Indian American group has not been 
studied in terms of perception of innovation because of the relatively small population in the 
United States. Secondly, as Project Impact expands globally, the insights from this research 
could potentially be applied in the Indian sub-continent. Thirdly, according to the 2010 US 
Census, while Indian Americans represent 1% of the total US population, this group showed a 
69.3% increase since the 2000 census.  This rate of increase is comparable to that of the 
Hispanic/Latino population which comprised 16.3% of the 2010 US population and was the 
target demography in the initial study conducted by Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012).  
Fourthly, according to the 2010 US census data, Indian American households have the highest 
household income, with a median household income of $88,538 (2009 census), amongst all the 
ethnic groups in the United States.  Hence, even though the absolute numbers are smaller for the 

75 
group, the population selection demonstrates exponential and significant economic impact, both 
nationally and internationally (http://www.census.gov/prod/cen2010/briefs/c2010br-11.pdf). 
Sample 
This research does not have a sponsoring organization. The researcher planned to 
advertise the study and solicit participants and responses via the Qualtrics website. Following 
filters were established by the researcher for this research:  Indian American adults over the age 
of 18. The survey instrument had questions on number of years of work experience and area of 
work to ascertain the professional and job function/ association of respondents. The distribution 
of advertisements for this survey was done by Qualtrics to its existing database of participants 
using the established filtering criteria of Indian American adults over the age of 18, which 
produced a random sample of participants meeting this criteria.  
The researcher made the assumption that there will be at least 200 complete responses 
with enough density in multiple professions and both genders, to afford for meaningful inference 
and comparison. The approach was considered acceptable for exploratory research, even though 
selecting a random sample in this manner is a deviation from the initial study conducted by 
Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012). The use of web-based survey was consistent with the work 
conducted in the prior study by Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012). The descriptor Indian 
Americans refers to individuals who can trace their descent to India. While there are several sub-
cultures, religions and states within India, similar to Latinos and their country of origin in the 
study by Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012), this aspect of diversity within India from a descent 
perspective was beyond the scope of this study as it was exploratory in nature as was not 
included as part of the work by Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) or Zhuang (1995) or Zhuang 

76 
et al. (1999). Protection of individual privacy and the ethical concerns therein are addressed in 
accordance with Qualtrics Privacy Protocol, which has been included under. 
Sampling Methodology 
Using a quantitative approach, this research was confirmatory in nature. According to 
Cooper and Schindler (2007), quantitative study is appropriate for confirmatory research. 
Following the design of Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012), a survey methodology was selected 
for quantitative research. In order to derive conclusions about the entire population, a sample was 
used, which also offered additional benefits of lower cost, greater accuracy of results, faster or 
speedier data collection, and availability of population elements (Cooper & Schindler, 2007). 
The sample frame was restricted to Indian Americans over the age of 18 who respond to the 
survey, which satisfied the requirement identified by Cooper and Schindler (2007) of ensuring 
the sample frame to consist of elements from which the sample is actually drawn and constitutes 
“a complete and correct list of population members only" (p. 397). The panel of participants for 
this sample constitutes those Indian American adults over the age of 18, who have self-selected 
to complete the survey. As identified by Cooper and Schindler (2007), the self-selection aspect 
meets the criteria for an acceptable panel for survey research. The population element in this 
research was the individual, which is the same as in the research conducted by Caraballo and 
McLaughlin (2012).  
According to Cooper and Schindler (2007), probability sample procedures are 
appropriate for confirmatory research and this research used probability procedure and 
incorporated random sampling. By the very nature, a random sample enables every individual to 
have an equal opportunity to participate (Cooper & Schindler, 2007).  Confirmatory studies seek 
to test one or more hypotheses pertinent to the relationship between dependent and independent 

77 
variables. Thus making all of these approaches to be mutually supportive and appropriate for the 
methodological approach in this research.  
Setting 
The research was conducted using a web-based survey involving Indian American adults 
over the age of 18 who self-select to participate in this study. The research conducted by 
Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) focuses the survey on members of one specific organization, a 
web-based survey approach is deemed appropriate for collecting the type of data most useful for 
such research. Qualtrics was provided with electronic versions of the welcome letter, 
instructions, informed consent authorization, and link to the survey on the internet by the 
researcher. The survey was advertised by Qualtrics to their database of members and Qualtrics 
distributed informed consent and survey to those who respond positively to participate.  There 
was no direct or indirect access between the researcher and individual member’s identifiable 
information. The ability to self-select was enabled for all participants of the survey, along with 
the ability to opt-out of the survey, should the participants choose to do so. Incomplete surveys 
were not be included as part of the study.  
Instrumentation 
For this research, the researcher selected the modified survey items from Caraballo and 
McLaughlin’s (2012) research, which were modified from Zhuang’s (1995) survey items that 
describe how an individual perceives innovation.  Following the work of Caraballo and 
McLaughlin, hypothesis testing was used to determine if there was a difference between the 
mean response for each statement as well as a test of homogeneity of variance of the responses to 
determine variability of the responses. A survey (Appendix B) consisting of a total of 20 
questions was used to collect data, while the questions were spread out over three sections. 

78 
Zhuang used a 10-item survey to data on how individuals perceived innovation and as to how 
individuals characterized innovation in new, improvement or adoption. Zhuang et al. (1999) 
combined two surveys to avoid repetitive questionnaires to respondents, but this made the 
questionnaire too long and resulted in costly incomplete responses. Caraballo and McLaughlin 
choose Zhuang’s survey to collect and analyze information on how individuals understood 
innovation as applied to a specific demography. In examining the survey statements and 
responses, Caraballo and McLaughlin used the three demographic characteristics of gender, job 
function and age and identified by generation. Eight of the twenty questions addressed personal 
demographic information, such as gender, age, geographical part of the country in which the 
respondent resides, highest level of education, length of time employed in the current position 
and with the current employer, general job classification, industry in which employed, and if the 
respondent is in a technical or a staff position.  
Zhuang (1995) did not provide the Cronbach’s alpha for the 10-question survey, so an 
important measure of internal reliability was not reported. Zhuang et al. (1999) also failed to 
report the Cronbach’s alpha for their innovation survey. In the present study, the Cronbach’s 
alpha for the 10 survey items pertaining to perceived characteristics of innovation was measured 
and reported. A Cronbach’s alpha greater than .7 will be considered to confer a sufficient level of 
internal reliability on the study, in keeping with the criteria specified by Creswell (2009).  The 
Cronbach’s alpha for the survey instrument was calculated to be 0.883 (Appendix G). 
Twelve of the twenty questions required forced choices of Yes/ No addressing the 
individual and their respective work environment. Finally, the survey concludes with questions 
that address how respondents comprehend the different aspects of innovation: six of these 
questions were constructed on a five point Likert Scale ranging from Strongly Agree to Strongly 

79 
Disagree; and the rest were forced choice questions.  Appendix B has a copy of the survey. 
Permission had been given by Zhuang, Caraballo and McLaughlin to use their survey, and have 
documented the validity and reliability of the instrument (Caraballo & McLaughlin, 2012; 
Zhuang, 1995; Zhuang et al., 1999).   
 
Table 1 
Variables in the Study 
 
Independent 
Dependent 
 
Gender 
Age (Generational Cohort) 
Functional Association 
 
New 
Improved 
Change 
 
 
Data Collection 
Qualtrics.com hosted the survey electronically. Individuals who selected to participate, 
were presented on the first screen an explanation on the introductory email and information on 
the purpose of the survey, its length, and guidelines for contacting the researcher to receive a 
copy of the results.  Participants were assured of their confidentiality and of safekeeping of all 
data collected. Participants/ respondents were also informed that completion of the survey would 
equate to their informed consent to participate in the study. Participants were asked certain 
demographic questions as part of the survey, however, they were informed that no personal 
information identifying them uniquely with their name, address, telephone, or organizational 
membership would be collected, and that their responses were coded to prevent identification. In 
addition to the above assurances to protect individual identification, participants were also 
informed that any and all data reported used for the study will be aggregated to ensure 

80 
confidentiality of the individual responses. Participants were asked to indicate that they have 
read the instructions on the first screen of the survey and clicking on the “Next” button indicates 
their acknowledgement. Forced answering was required only on the entry page before moving to 
the next screen. A maximum of two weeks was provided to participants to during which they can 
participate and respond to the survey. Follow-up communications by Qualtrics were sent to 
prompt those who have not responded to the survey, after the first invitation email has been sent.  
Data Analysis 
The researcher had identified the following null and alternate hypotheses in support of 
the questions:  
Question 1: 
H01.  There is no mean difference between the ten survey statements.   
Ha1.  There is a mean difference between the ten survey statements. 
H02.  There are no differences in the variances between the 10 survey statement 
responses.       
Ha2.  There is a difference between the variances for the 10 survey statement responses.    
Question 2: 
 
HO3. Gender does not influence perception of innovation. 
 
Ha3.  Gender does influence perceptions of innovation. 
 
HO4.  Generational cohort does not influence perceptions of innovation. 
 
Ha4.  Generational cohort does influence perceptions of innovation. 
 
HO5.  Functional association does not influence perceptions of innovation. 
 
Ha5.  Functional association does influence perceptions of innovation. 

81 
This study also incorporates the additional hypotheses developed by Caraballo and 
McLaughlin’s (2012).  Null and alternative hypotheses are as follows:   
H06.  Mean of Factors 1, 2, and 3 are not statistically different. 
Ha6.  At least one Factor mean is different. 
The data analysis approach in this study folowed the same approach used by Caraballo 
and McLaughlin (2012).  Survey items from Zhuang (1995) were used, which described how 
individuals perceive innovation.  As noted by Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012, p.555), 
“hypothesis testing will determine if there is a difference between the mean responses for each 
statement as well as a test of homogeneity of variance of the responses to determine variability of 
the responses”.  The author proposed to use an Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) technique at the 
95% confidence level to test the 10-survey response means, following the Caraballo and 
McLaughlin (2012) approach.  IBM SPSS 22 software was used to perform the statistical 
analysis.   
The author also tested the homogeneity of variances at the 95% confidence level to verify 
if individual responses vary when assessing different elements (meanings) of innovation. 
Outliers will have an impact on the homogeneity of variance. The research conducted by 
Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) followed best practices, and no outliers were detected in the 
study.  Because this study focuses on a single group of specific national descent, transferability 
of results would be inappropriate regardless of sample size.      
“Factor analysis condenses (summarizes) information contained in number of original 
variables into a smaller set of new, composite dimensions or factors with a minimum loss of 
information” (Hair, Anderson, Tatham and Black, 1995, p. 368). This study used factor analysis 
to determine the variability or intactness of the Zhuang (1995, 1999) and Caraballo and 

82 
McLaughlin (2012) three dimensions/ factors (gender, age and functional association) of an 
individual’s perception of innovation. In order to ascertain which concepts (constructs) emerge 
from the survey statements and if the concepts are independent of one another, the researcher 
used factor analysis. Factor analysis helped determine the variability in the three factors.      
Validity and Reliability 
 
The initial instrument was piloted and used by Zhuang (1995), which underwent 
revisions that added and deleted certain questions subsequently. The modified instrument was 
used by Zhuang et al. (1999) for their research; however, neither Zhuang nor Zhuang et al. 
reported the Cronbach’s alpha for their respective studies. Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) 
used the same instrument, from Zhuang et al. (1999) and found an alpha reliability estimate of 
0.675, which shows small amount of inconsistency in data, but proves acceptability as a measure 
of overall reliability of the survey. Thus, Caraballo and McLaughlin used the same instrument 
and did not find any issues with reliability or validity of the instrument for their survey. The 
researcher used the modified version of the survey instrument from Project Impact, which 
yielded Chronbach alpha of 0.883, hence improving the validity and reliability of the instrument.  
Ethical Considerations 
Potential risks and benefits discussed by Creswell (2009) in terms of data collection, 
analysis, interpretation, writing, and dissemination of the research have been incorporated into 
the study. From an ethical standpoint, participants did not benefit directly unless such 
participants request a copy of this completed study. Upon completion of the survey, participants 
might benefit indirectly in terms of enhanced comprehension of how perceptions of innovation 
differ, depending on an increased awareness of this matter. 

83 
Ethical standards were maintained through Capella University IRB approval and the 
study did not involve more than a minimal level of risk for the participants. None of the 
individuals were pressured via influence to self-select to participate in the taking the survey by 
the researcher. All participants were made aware that that their participation in the study was 
voluntary and that they have the ability to opt-out at any time. At the beginning of the survey, 
participants were asked to indicate their informed consent. Measures such as, not collecting 
personal identification information (names, email addresses, phone numbers, or addresses, etc.) 
were followed to ensure protection of participant confidentiality. Instead, each participant 
responding to the survey will be assigned a code. Further, all responses were matched to the 
assigned participant code only. The Qualtrics.com website collected all data and in accordance 
with the privacy and security policies of Qualtrics.com, Qualtrics.com will destroy all copies of 
the data and any analysis, after transferring these data and analysis to the researcher. All data are 
electronically safeguarded by the researcher via mandatory password requirement to access data. 
Using password protection, the researcher securely stored data on his personal computer, and in a 
removable media in a locked file cabinet, for the requisite period of seven years, at the end of 
which, the data shall be destroyed and erased from all electronic media in which data may have 
been stored, by electronic sanitization on the removable media as well as on the personal 
computer. 
The study did not include protected groups defined by the Belmont Report (The Belmont 
Report HHS.gov). The focus of the study on a demography with a specific ethnicity and national 
descent, may be interpreted as a violation of the of the provisions of the Belmont Report, 
however, the researcher believes that measures such as self-selection to participate and the ability 
to opt-out at any time will provide adequate protection and means that will prevent harm to any 

84 
participant. While the possibility of one or more pregnant woman participating in the survey may 
exist; this was a self-selection that is not controlled by the researcher. Moreover, the approach 
described for this study replicates the approach used in previous study of a single ethnic group 
without incidence of harm. The researcher believes that these provisions, minimal level of risk to 
the participants, and the potential benefit of increased comprehension of this subject argue for 
approval of this study. 
 
 
 

85 
 
 
CHAPTER 4. RESULTS 
Introduction: Advancing the Research 
 
Building on the seminal and scholarly research conducted on perspectives of innovation 
by Zhuang (1995), Zhuang, Williamson, and Carter (1999) and, Caraballo and McLaughlin 
(2012), the research focuses on the specific demography of Indian Americans (Asian-Indian 
decent) in the United States. Using the definition of individual innovation from Zhuang’s 
research, McAdam and McClelland (2002) extended the research with a focus on creativity 
generation at the individual and team level. McAdam and McClelland’s (2002) research focused 
on the three elements of creativity: expertise, task-motivation, and creative thinking with specific 
examination on the source of ideas. However, research on the source of ideas remains limited. 
Hence, Project Impact, a non-profit organization dedicated to innovation research, leveraged the 
Zhuang’s revised instrument (1995), to determine “if a homogenous group of respondents 
employed by various companies in the IT industry within the United States, perceived a similar 
concept of innovation using the Zhuang (1995; 1999) three-element perspective” (Caraballo & 
McLaughlin, 2012, p.555).  
Advancing the Research 
With permission from Project Impact, this research leverages the revised instrument to 
advance the research and determining if a homogenous group of respondents (Indian 
Americans), from various companies in the United States perceive the similar concept of 
innovation using the three element perspectives of expertise, creative-thinking, and task 
motivation. The validity and reliability of the instrument has been documented by Caraballo and 

86 
McLaughlin (2012) and Zhuang (1999). The research identifies potential correlations and 
relationships between Indian-Americans perceive innovation at the individual level relative to 
variables such as gender, age, functional association, and education). The results of this research 
could benefit leaders, decision makers and organizations in being better prepared during 
recruiting, strategic planning, building high-performance teams and structuring the organizations 
for successful innovation. The research could also help organizations with an understanding of 
cultural perceptions, thereby providing information when attempting to penetrate or broaden 
market reach for the Indian consumer.  The remainder of this chapter will offer a description of 
the sample, summary and detailed analysis of the research results, and summarizing the final 
conclusions regarding the research findings.  
Description of Sample 
As discussed in Chapter 3, the research intended to gather responses from 200 
respondents, using the Qualtrics platform that ran the survey in a voluntary and anonymous 
manner for the Indian-American demography. The Qualtrics panel ensured responses were only 
collected from Indian-Americans (Asian-Indian decent), living in the United States. The survey 
collected data for 8 days from March 20, 2014 to March 28, 2014, during which period a total of 
200 usable responses were received. The primary factor for choosing Indian-Americans is the 
researcher’s familiarity with the Indian demography. Table 2 provides the demographic 
distribution of the respondent’s profiles.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

87 
 
 
Table 2 
 
Distribution of Demographic Profile of Participants 
Demographic Information 
Frequency 
Percent 
Gender 
  
  
Male 
101 
51% 
Female 
99 
49% 
Age (Generational Cohort) 
Born before 1947 
3 
1% 
Born between 1947 and 1963 
8 
4% 
Born between 1964 and 1979 
 56 
28% 
Born after 1980 
 133 
67% 
Technical Role 
Yes 
 93 
47% 
 No 
106 
53% 
Education 
Doctoral degree 
 18 
9% 
Master’s degree 
77 
38% 
Bachelor’s degree 
80 
40% 
Two-year degree 
10 
5% 
Certificate 
6 
3% 
High school or equivalent 
10 
5% 
 
Findings 
Research Question 1: What are the perceptions of innovation in Indian-American 
professionals residing in the US as they categorize/ associate innovation as new, improvement, 
or change? 
Testing the following sets of hypotheses answers the research question.  The first set of 
hypotheses draws a comparison of the mean responses from the 10 survey questions that 
respondents provided answers to. The second set of hypotheses determines whether there is a 
significant difference between the variances for the responses from the 10 survey questions.  
H01 (Null Hypotheses):  There is no mean difference between the ten survey statements.   

88 
Ha1 (Alternate Hypotheses):  There is a mean difference between the ten survey 
statements. 
 
H02 (Null Hypotheses):   There are no differences in the variances between the 10 survey 
statement responses.       
Ha2 (Alternate Hypotheses):  There is a difference between the variances for the 10 
survey statement responses.    
Mean Comparison. Statistical analysis were conducted using IBM SPSS Version 22 
software.  To test the set of hypotheses, the 10-survey response means, the Analysis of Variance 
(ANOVA) technique at 95% confidence level was used.  The one-way ANOVA between 
subjects compared the effect of the concepts or definitions of innovation in terms of how Indian 
American professionals perceived innovation.  A p-value of p < 0.05 presents evidence to reject 
the null hypotheses, thereby testing that there is a mean difference between the 10 survey 
statements. Table 3 shows that the statements tested to be statistically significant. This indicates 
that the responses of the 200 participants to the variations in the definitions of innovation 
presented in the survey are relatively different to each other.  Table 3 presents the results from 
the ANOVA analysis. 
Table 3  
ANOVA Analysis Results 
  
Sum of 
Squares 
df 
Mean 
Square 
F 
Sig. 
Between Groups 
36.844 
9 
4.094 
5.72 
0.000 
Within Groups 
1423.535 
1990 
0.715 
Total 
1460.380 
1999 
  
  
  
S = 0.8458   R-Sq = 2.52%   R-Sq(adj) = 2.08% 
 
Homogeneity of Variances.  A statistically significant test of homogeneity of variances 

89 
verifies that individual responses from Indian-Americans vary when assessing different 
definitions of innovation.  Homogeneity of the data was tested using the using the Levene Test of 
Equality of Variances. As indicated in Table 4, the analysis conducted homogeneity of variance 
test at the 95% confidence level. The results of which revealed that variances are homogeneous, 
no differences. With a p-value of p > 0.05, there is evidence that variances are homogenous 
along with the error value of the dependent variable being equal across groups. Hence, the null 
hypotheses may be accepted that there are no differences in the variances between the 10 survey 
statements.    
Table 4 
Levene’s Test of Equality of Error Variances 
 
F 
df1 
df2 
Sig. 
In your opinion, innovation can be defined as-a. Inventing 
something entirely new 
.044 
1 
198 
.833 
In your opinion, innovation can be defined as-b. Generating 
new ideas 
.182 
1 
198 
.670 
In your opinion, innovation can be defined as-c. Improving 
something that already exists 
.316 
1 
198 
.575 
In your opinion, innovation can be defined as-d. Enhancing 
the desirability of something 
.416 
1 
198 
.520 
In your opinion, innovation can be defined as-e. "Thinking 
out of the box" 
2.913 
1 
198 
.089 
In your opinion, innovation can be defined as-f. Taking 
something that already exists and making it better 
.014 
1 
198 
.907 
In your opinion, innovation can be defined as-g. Changing 
the technology by making the previous version obsolete 
.000 
1 
198 
.991 
In your opinion, innovation can be defined as-h. Adopting 
something that has been tried elsewhere 
.353 
1 
198 
.553 
In your opinion, innovation can be defined as-i. Using a 
different perspective 
.497 
1 
198 
.482 
In your opinion, innovation can be defined as-j. Introducing 
change to make something better 
.255 
1 
198 
.614 
 

90 
Research Question 2: What is the relationship between gender, age (generational 
cohort), functional association (job-function), and an individual’s personal perception of 
innovation as they categorize/ associate innovation as new, improvement, or change? 
To answer the research question, the researcher tested the following set of hypotheses 
using Multivariate ANOVA tests using IBM SPSS version 22. The assumptions of normality and 
assumed independence are not tested but assumed.  The first set of hypotheses refers to the 
comparison of the mean responses from the 10 survey statement responses according to the 
gender while the second set of hypotheses refers to determining whether there is a significant 
difference between the responses of the generational cohort to the 10 survey statement responses.  
Lastly, the third set of hypotheses refers to the comparison of the mean responses from the 10 
survey statement responses according to the functional association of the participants.  
H03 (Null Hypotheses): Gender does not influence perception of innovation. 
 
Ha3 (Alternate Hypotheses):  Gender does influence perceptions of innovation. 
 
Mean Comparison. Multivariate tests on the responses from 200 Indian-
Americans yielded in the results shown in Table 5. The sample of Indian-American respondents 
included 101 (51%) males and 99 (49%) females. As noted in Table 5, p-value of p < 0.05 
presents evidence to reject the null hypotheses, thereby testing that gender does influence 
perception of innovation in Indian Americans. This indicates that the participant being a male or 
female influenced respective perception of innovation between new, change or improved.    
Table 5Multivariate Tests 
Effect 
Test 
Value 
F 
Hypothesis  
Df 
Error df 
Sig. 
Gender 
Pillai's Trace 
0.127 
2.574 
10.00 
177.00 
0.006 
Wilk's Lambda 
0.873 
2.574 
10.00 
177.00 
0.006 
Hotelling's Trace 
0.145 
2.574 
10.00 
177.00 
0.006 
  
Roy's Largest Root 
0.145 
2.574 
10.00 
177.00 
0.006 

91 
Age  
Pillai's Trace 
0.148 
0.932 
30.00 
537.00 
0.573 
(Generational  Wilk's Lambda 
0.857 
0.937 
30.00 
520.20 
0.565 
Cohort) 
Hotelling's Trace 
0.161 
0.942 
30.00 
527.00 
0.558 
  
Roy's Largest Root 
0.101 
1.807 
10.00 
179.00 
0.062 
Functional  
Pillai's Trace 
0.046 
0.416 
20.00 
356.00 
0.989 
association 
Wilk's Lambda 
0.954 
0.417 
20.00 
354.00 
0.988 
 
Hotelling's Trace 
0.048 
0.419 
20.00 
352.00 
0.988 
 
Roy's Largest Root 
0.044 
0.783 
10.00 
178.00 
0.645 
Gender 
Pillai's Trace 
0.309 
2.059 
30.00 
537.00 
0.001 
Age 
Wilk's Lambda 
0.714 
2.105 
30.00 
520.21 
0.001 
Hotelling's Trace 
0.367 
2.150 
30.00 
527.00 
0.000 
  
Roy's Largest Root 
0.254 
4.555 
10.00 
179.00 
0.000 
 
HO4 (Null Hypotheses): Generational cohort does not influence perceptions of 
innovation. 
Ha4 (Alternate Hypotheses): Generational cohort does influence perceptions of 
innovation. 
Mean Comparison. Multivariate tests on the responses from 200 Indian-Americans, 
which as noted in Table 2 included respondents categorized into four generational cohorts:  born 
before 1947, born between 1947 and 1967, born between 1968 and 1979, and born after 1980. 
Those born after 1980 may be categorized as generation X or millennials. The analysis of the 
responses, conducted using Multivariate ANOVA tests using SPSS version 22 indicated in Table 
5 show a  p-value of p > 0.05, thus providing evidence that the null hypotheses be accepted. This 
shows that age or generational cohort, does not influence the perception of innovation. 
Respondents in the 4 generational cohorts did perceive innovation differently when categorizing 
innovation into new or change/ improvement.  
In analyzing the combination of the gender and age in regards to perception of 
innovation, revealed that the combination has a p < 0.05, indicating that there is no influence on 
the perception of innovation.  

92 
HO5 (Null Hypotheses):  Functional association does not influence perceptions of 
innovation. 
Ha5 (Alternate Hypotheses):  Functional association does influence perceptions of 
innovation. 
Mean Comparison. Functional association was categorized as technical versus non-
technical. As noted in Table 2, out of the 200 respondents, 93 were technical and 106 were non-
technical. Multivariate tests, shown in Table 5 yielded a p-value of p > 0.05, thus indicating 
evidence from the tests that the null hypotheses be accepted. Thereby, showing that functional 
association does not influence the perception of innovation.   
 
From the results Multivariate tests of the survey for 200 Indian Americans, gender seems 
influence the perception of innovation, while age and functional association do not seem to 
influence the perception of innovation. Table 5 presents the results from the multivariate 
ANOVA analysis that shows the interaction between gender and age, is statistically significant 
with p < 0.05. Hence, indicating that the interaction of gender and age does have an effect the 
mean response of constructs 1, 2 and 3. 
This study also incorporates the additional hypotheses developed by Caraballo and 
McLaughlin’s (2012).  Null and alternative hypotheses are as follows:   
H06 (Null Hypotheses): Mean of Factors 1, 2, and 3 are not statistically different. 
Ha6 (Alternate Hypotheses): At least one Factor mean is different. 
 
Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) formulated three fundamental constructs or 
dimensions where people associate the definition of innovation: new, adopting, and 
improve/change.  For the purpose of this study, the researcher uses the same, following the 
methodology of Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012): the ten survey statements are categorized 

93 
into these three constructs.  Table 6 presents the allocation of each statement to one of the three 
constructs of innovation.  
 
Table 6 
Allocation of each statement to the construct of innovation 
  
Construct 1 
Construct 2 
Construct 3 
Statements 
c, d, f 
g, h, i, j 
a, b, e 
Naming convention 
Improve 
Change 
New 
 
Minitab 14 was used to conduct a One-way ANOVA technique that tested the additional 
hypotheses developed by Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012). The additional null and alternative 
hypotheses are as follows: 
H06 (Null hypothesis): Mean of Factors 1, 2, and 3 are not statistically different. 
Ha6 (Alternative Hypothesis): At least one Factor mean is different. 
The One-way ANOVA tested that there is a statistical difference.  The test showed that 
there is evidence to reject the null hypothesis (p < 0.05) and accept the alternate hypotheses that 
at least one factor mean is different. Hence, indicating that the mean of factors 1 and 2 are 
statistically different and that gender, generational cohort, and functional association do not have 
an effect on the mean response of the constructs.   
 
Table 7 
One-way ANOVA Analysis Results 
Source 
df 
Sum of 
Squares 
Mean 
Square 
F 
Sig. 

94 
Factor 
1 
5.192 
5.192 
12.43 
0.000 
Error 
398 
166.224 
0.418 
 
 
Total 
399 
171.416 
 
 
 
S = 0.6463   R-Sq = 3.03%   R-Sq(adj) = 2.79% 
 
Factor Analysis 
In conducting factor analysis of the data from the 10 survey statements from the 200 
responses indicated that the sample did not differentiate the perception of innovation into three 
categories of new, change and improvement. Instead there were only two components, which 
were new and change/ improve. Thus, indicating that respondents in this sample identified the 
dichotomy in the perception of innovation only into two categories. However, adding the factor 
of education, highlighted the third component. Varimax rotation indicated that that higher the 
level of education (Masters or higher) led to the respondents being able to differentiate 
perception of innovation into three categories of new, improve and change as opposed to the 
previously note two categories of new and improve/change. Hence respondents with higher 
levels of education were able to differentiate between change and improvement, when it came ot 
perception of innovation. In conclusion, factor analysis highlighted that even though gender and 
age have a similar profile, there are statistical differences in gender and age (Appendix C). The 
addition of the factor called education resulted in differences between the groups in how they 
classified innovation. 
Summary 
The purpose of this research was to examine how Indian Americans perceived 
innovation, and identify the relationships and correlation between the perception of innovation 
and gender, age, or functional association within the homogenous group of Indian Americans.  In 
conducting the research, responses were collected from an Indian-American demography using 

95 
the Qualtrics survey tool, which was used to develop the survey that was a modified version of 
the survey used by Zhuang (1995) and was modified by Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012). 
Analysis was conducted on a total of 200 responses using the IBM SPSS 22 platform and 
techniques such as ANOVA were applied to test the six hypotheses that answered the two 
research questions. The results of the analysis revealed that there is a mean difference between 
the 10 survey statements and there is no difference in the variance between the 10 survey 
statements. From the analysis and tests of the 200 responses from Indian Americans, there is 
evidence that gender does influence perception of innovation. However, age and functional 
association (technical and non-technical) have not influence on the perception of innovation.  
Further factor analysis also determined that in definition or drawing a dichotomy in the three 
categories of new, improve and change, respondents only showed to identify innovation with 
new or change/ improve. With the exception of education as a factor and at the Master’s or 
higher level, respondents perceived innovation to fall into two categories and did not draw any 
significant difference between change and improvement. The test of equality proved to be 
statistically significant. The multivariate analysis revealed that at least one factor has a different 
mean among the three constructs. Chapter 5 addresses the discussion on findings, conclusion and 
recommendations for this research.  

96 
 
 
CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION, IMPLICATIONS, RECOMMENDATIONS 
Discussion 
 
The research focused on the management problem of understanding how innovation is 
perceived within a homogenous group of individual, specifically understanding how Indian 
Americans perceived innovation and how did Indian Americans associate innovation with new, 
improvement or change.  The research broadens the current research conducted by Caraballo and 
McLaughlin (2012) by focusing on a new demography in the United States. The literature review 
covered a review of literature that sheds light on innovation and culture at level of the individual, 
team and country. Although, there is significant body of literature on cultural impact on the 
perception of innovation at the organizational and country level, there is also a level of 
contradiction. Also, there is less research conducted on the perception of innovation within a 
specific cultural demography at the individual level. Inconsistencies in the definition and subject 
of innovation and its perception continue to persists, which is a continuation of findings from the 
literature review. However, the constructs of new, improved and change identified by Baregheh 
et al. (2009) and tested by Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) provide a sustainable framework to 
continue to broaden the study of the subject. Leveraging these constructs Caraballo and 
McLaughlin (2012) were able to identify that perception of innovation within a homogenous 
group could also vary, while the factors of age, cohort and job functions did not influence the 
perception of innovation in terms of new, improved or change. Chapter 5 provides an overview 
of this research conducted within the homogenous cohort of Indian Americans and discusses 
implications, limitations and recommendations for future research.  

97 
Overview 
 
 
 
Preliminary results from the research identified that there is a difference in how Indian 
Americans perceive innovation. In general, participants exhibited an understanding of innovation 
as a multi-dimensional construct. Perception of innovation varied in respondents when the 
dimension of education was introduced as part of the analysis. Respondents who had a Masters 
or Doctoral education identified and perceived innovation into the three constructs, however, 
respondents with a Bachelors or lower degree identified innovation into two areas of new and 
improve/ change. Though the findings from the hypotheses tests were similar to the findings of 
Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012), statistical differences were seen in comparing gender and in 
interaction between gender, age and functional association. Both, this research and the research 
conducted by Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) focused on a homogeneous demography at the 
individual level. This research focused on the Indian American demography across the United 
States and across industries, while the research conducted by Caraballo and McLaughlin focused 
on Hispanic Americans in the Information Technology (IT) industry. Both studies indicated that 
individuals from two different cultures exhibited and understanding of innovation as a multi-
dimensional construct producing similar results. Hence, a safe assumption could be made that 
perceptual differences are not exclusive to one culture or ethnicity. However, further research is 
needed to be done to confirm the broader assumption.  
 
The research confirmed the previous work of Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012) in that 
members of a homogeneous group from the same culture did perceive innovation in a different 
manner. From a cultural standpoint Indian approach innovation as new or change/ improve, and 
change /improve are seen as “jugaad”, a risk driven system that optimizes processes (Birtchnell, 

98 
2011). Prior research at a national level suggested behavioral shaping to be an outcome of shared 
problem solving and sharing of experiencing, especially in times of uncertainty and risk, coupled 
with economic growth and national culture (Franke, Hofstede, & Bond, 1991; Hofstede & Bond, 
1988; Kaasa & Vadi, 2008). Understanding this is important in a global market with global 
teams that comprise members from diverse cultures and hence making a global team a collection 
of perceptions influenced by diverse national cultures. Finally performance of the team directly 
impacts performance of the overall organization as well.  
Factor analysis using Multivariate (ANOVA) tests at the 95% confidence level showed that 
there are statistical differences in gender and age, although both have a similar profile. Gender 
showed statistical differences but age and functional association did not show any statistical 
differences. Gender does not influence perception of innovation, while age and functional 
association did influence perception of innovation. Further factor analysis showed evidence that 
the interaction gender and functional association (technical or non-technical) does influence the 
perception of innovation.  For instance, a certain function, product or service might seem 
technical to Indian American males but may not seem technical to Indian American females. 
This is important to know from a team building, project management, marketing and sales 
perspective. Depending on the teams and assignment of the job function, there could be 
flexibility in task assignment, hiring and developing marketing strategies. The results were 
consistent with Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012).  
Factor analysis also pointed out that there were only two components instead of three. 
Component 1 was “new” and component 2 was “improve/ change”. This indicates that Indian 
American respondents did not draw a significant dichotomy in “change” and “improve” from a 
perception of innovation standpoint. The responses indicated that participants were able to 

99 
clearly define and differentiate innovation when it was new versus change/ improve. This was 
consistent with Caraballo and McLaughlin (2012). However, further factor analysis using the 
dimension of education indicated that respondents with a degree of Masters or Doctorate were in 
fact able to define or perceive innovation into the three constructs of “new”, “change” and 
“improve”. Respondents with a Bachelor or two-year degrees were unable to identify this 
differentiation. This is an important finding, especially when formulating or managing teams and 
project groups that might have a combination of Indian Americans with varying educational 
degrees. In addition, as part of communications, or when presenting an idea as an innovative idea 
or innovative process or innovative product, Indian Americans with a Masters or a Doctorate 
have greater potential to differentiate between innovation that may be a change versus 
improvement.  
Culture, creativity and control (autonomy) could shape behaviors, beliefs via an 
incentivization or penalization mechanism that might result in innovative outcomes driven by the 
vectors of openness and creativity fostered or supported within the organization (Kaasa & Vadi, 
2008; Kenny & Reedy, 2006).  The distinctions and perceptions are crucial from the standpoint 
marketing and sales. For an organization, tailoring the message, product and service to the needs 
of the customer is important for sustain competitive advantage in the market. Understanding the 
perception and culture driven behaviors of the customer afford the company to offer respective 
service or product in a manner that might be both acceptable and differentiable from the 
customer’s standpoint. Understanding perception of innovation could not only help with 
retention of customers but also assist in attracting new customers.  
The same concept and approach applies to teams and groups that may consist of Indian-
Americans. Aligning individuals and convincing all proponents is required to achieve traction 

100 
and collaborative support for accomplishing innovation (Shane, 1994). A better understanding of 
the perception of innovation as perceived by team members affords project managers the ability 
effectively and efficiently communicate and execute on projects. As this study suggests, 
perception of innovation differs even within the homogenous culture at the individual level and 
hence, comprehension of those perceptual difference could afford organizations to solve 
problems and help collaborate on new, improvement or changes to products or services offered 
in a collaborative manner, while overcoming organization inertia to change. Organizational 
leaders would be able to establish the necessary structure, mechanisms and incentives to drive 
and motivate innovation within the organization in a desired direction that is strategic and 
customer focused. Keeping internal operations in sync with external customer driven demand 
needs to be part of the ideation process. Such a connection would avoid gaps that could drive 
teams in a direction not suitable from the company’s or customer’s desired direction, although 
such a change might seem innovative. And hence the need to ensure a structured approach to 
ideation, where there i idea and problem/ gap handshake that ensured there is pairing between 
internal ideas and external needs from customers. Understanding of perceptual differences 
affords the organizations leadership to align teams, functional assignments and most importantly, 
personnel or individuals in appropriate and close alignment with the strategic goals of the 
organization. Via the individual’s behaviors and actions, the organization is impacted by every 
individual who works at the organization (Gee & Gee, 2011).  
Implications 
The cultural variations and understanding highlights and help drive strategy for innovative 
delivery of products and services that are well received and appropriately perceived by the Indian 
American demography. Further, an understanding from a cultural stand point on the definition 

101 
and perception of innovation by Indian Americans, can help managers, leaders and 
organizational executives with planning and formulating teams as well as improve 
communication s from a clarity and perception standpoint. For instance, a team that has Indian 
Americans with Masters and Doctoral degrees can perceive innovation and outcomes to be new, 
improve or change as opposed to a team with members having bachelor’s degrees may only be 
able to translate the vision and plan to fall under the categories of new or change/ improve, when 
it comes to perception of innovation.  
The finding suggests that while selecting and managing a diverse team from a gender, 
generational and cultural standpoint, the understanding on perception of innovation and how 
members of the team define or categorize as innovation is crucial for the success of the team 
from a strategic execution standpoint. The incorrect mix of employees on a team with an 
uncommon understating of the goals or outcomes from a perception standpoint could lead to 
internal conflict and result in the team being ineffective. For instance, one of the findings from 
the factor analysis of the interactions between gender and functional association, suggested that 
males have a broader variation in their perception of innovation as opposed to females, who 
narrowly differentiated the three constructs of innovation and perceived them to be close to one 
another. Appropriate approach with an understanding of the culture background and definition or 
perception of innovation in homogenous groups could help improve diversity, ideation, creativity 
and execution of teams although the perceptions would start at the individual level. Thereby, 
resulting high performance teams or increased customers for a product or services standpoint, 
whose impact and benefits range holistically from a regional/ national to global dispersed and 
diverse environments.  
 

102 
 
Limitations 
 
The research has several limitations that might affect the overall results. One of the first 
limitations is the researcher’s experience level. As opposed to an experienced practitioner, the 
researcher, as a doctoral student did not being much experience to this study. An experienced 
practitioner could anticipate some of the problems that the researched experienced and might 
have developed and different approach that would have yielded improved results and a 
simplified study. In addition, the study did not involve any sponsoring groups, however, the 
responses were 100% usable and the instrument proved to be reliable with Chronbach alpha 
coefficients of greater than 0.8, indicating good internal consistency. A greater sample might 
further enhance the reliability of the study. This survey was web-based and Qualtrics pre-
qualified using a panel Indian-Americans, who in turn responded to demographic questions to 
indicate gender, age and functional association. With no incentives to misidentify, it may not be 
possible to verify this information on the section from web-surveys.  
Recommendations 
 
The Indian-American demography merits further research, especially with new factors 
such as education, which highlighted the dichotomy in the perception of innovation within the 
homogenous group. Further, extending the study into the Indian sub-continent and researching 
the definitions of perception could yield beneficial information and understanding of how Indian 
from various parts of the country in India perceive innovation as well. Further, Indian Americans 
in the United States are one of the fastest growing populations. India as a fast and rapidly 
evolving economy and Indian Americans as contributors to the economy in the United States, 
along with their existing ability of higher earnings, make the demography important from a team 

103 
building, sales, and product and service delivery perspective. An optimal and advanced 
understanding of perception of innovation and how innovation is seen and defined by Indian 
Americans, could benefit the demography, companies and the overall economy.  
 
As the research and body of knowledge are broadened, additional dimensions such as 
education level, regional affiliation (within India), industry affiliation/ verticals, coupled with 
gender, age and functional association could prove beneficial from a management and sales 
perspective as applied to strategy and transformation of organization, products and services.  

104 
 
 
REFERENCES 
Abuhamad, A., & Shaltoni, A. (2013). Open Innovations and international collaboration in the 
context of emerging economies. International Journal of Business & Management, 8(8), 
12-21. 
Amabile, T. M. (1997).  Motivating creativity in organizations: On doing what you love and  
loving what you do.  California Management Review, 40(1), 39-58 
Amberg, M., Reinhardt, M., & Kittler, M. (2008). From virtual teams to online communities: 
Fostering group-based collaboration for innovation and knowledge management. 
Communications of the IBIMA, 28(6), 181-188. 
Arbolino, R. (2011). Innovation in China: Evidence from the provincial data.  Chinese Business 
Review, 10(10), 855-867.  
Argyris, C. (1991).  Teaching smart people how to learn.  Harvard Business Review, 69(3), 99-
109. 
Audi, M. (2011).  Between clusters and networks: Causes of premeditated cooperation between 
organizations in geographical proximity. Journal of International Finance & Economics, 
11(1), 1-15. 
Baregheh, A., Rowley, J., & Sambrook, S. (2009). Towards a multidisciplinary definition of  
Innovation. Management Decision, 47(8), 1323-1339.  
Barney, J. (1991).  Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. Journal of Management, 
17(1), 99.  

105 
Bierly, P. E., III, Kessler, E. H., & Christensen, E. W. (2000). Organizational learning, 
knowledge and wisdom. Journal of Organizational Management, 13(6), 595-618. 
Birtchnell, T. (2011). Jugaad as systemic risk and disruptive innovation in India. Contemporary  
South Asia, 19(4), 357-372 
Björk, J. (2012). Knowledge domain spanners in ideation. Creativity & Innovation 
Management, 21(1), 17-27.  
Blodgett, J. G., Bakir, A., & Rose, G. M. (2008).  A test of the validity of Hofstede’s cultural 
framework.  The Journal of Consumer Marketing, 25(6), 339-349. 
Boudreau, K., & Lakhani, K. (2009).  How to manage outside innovation.  MIT Sloan 
Management Review, 50(4), 69-76.  
Bouncken, R. B. (2009).  Cultural diversity in innovation teams: Surface and deep level effects.  
International Journal of Business Research, 9(4), 17-26.  
Bouncken, R. B., Ratzmann, M., & Winkler, V. A. (2008).  Cross-cultural innovation teams: 
Effects of four types of attitudes toward diversity.  International Journal of Business 
Strategy, 8(2), 26-36.   
Bower, J. L., & Christensen, C. M. (1995).  Disruptive Technologies: Catching the wave.  
Harvard Business Review, 73(1), 43-53. 
Brettel, M., Heinemann, F., Engelen, A., & Neubauer, S. (2011). Cross-functional integration of  
R&D, marketing, and manufacturing in radical and incremental product innovations and 
its effects on project effectiveness and efficiency. Journal of Product Innovation 
Management, 28(2), 251–269. 
Brown, L. (2010). Balancing risk and innovation to improve social work practice. British 
Journal of Social Work, 40(4), 1211-1228 

106 
Business: The new people's car; the Tata nano. (2009, March 28). The Economist, 390, 73-74. 
Caraballo, E., Bynum, T. and McLaughlin, G. (2011, July-August). How to foster innovation in 
BPO. Globalization Today, pp. 28-33.  
Caraballo, E., and McLaughlin, G. (2012). Individual perceptions of innovation: A multi- 
dimensional construct. Journal of Business & Economic Research, 10(10), 553-568.  
Christensen, C. M., & Overdorf, M. (2000). Meeting the challenge of disruptive change. 
Harvard Business Review, 78(2), 66-76. 
Cohen, A. (2007). One nation, many cultures: a cross-cultural study of the relationship between 
personal cultural values and commitment in the workplace to in-role performance and 
organizational citizenship behavior. Cross-Cultural Research, 41(3), 273-300.  
Cooper, D. R., & Schindler, S. (2003). Business research methods (8th ed.). Boston, MA: Wiley. 
Creswell, J. W. (2009).  Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods 
approaches (3rd ed.).  Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 
Cummings, J., & Pletcher, C. (2011).  Why project networks beat project teams.  MIT Sloan  
Management Review, 52(3), 75-80. 
Dahl, A., Lawrence, J., and Pierce, J. (2011). Building an innovation community. Research –  
Technology Management, September-October, pp. 19-27.  
Davenport, T., & Volpel, S. C. (2001). The rise of knowledge toward attention management. 
Journal of Knowledge Management, 5(3), 212-221. 
DeCusatis, C. (2008). Creating, growing and sustaining efficient innovation teams. Creativity 
and Innovation Management, 12(2), 155-164.  
Denning, P. J. (2012).  Innovating the future: From ideas to adoption.  Futurist, 46(1), 40-45.    
 

107 
de Waal, A., Maritz, A., & Shieh, C. J. (2010). Managing Innovation: A topology of theories and 
practice-based implications for New Zealand firms. International Journal of 
Organizational Innovation (Online), 3(2), 35-57. 
Díaz-Díaz, N. L., & De Saá-Pérez, P. (2012).  Novelty of innovation and the effect of existing 
and recently hired R&D human resources.  Innovation: Management, Policy & Practice, 
14(1), 74-89.  
Dobni, C. B. (2008).  The DNA of innovation.  The Journal of Business Strategy, 29(2), 43-50.  
Dobni, C. B. (2010). The relationship between an innovation orientation and competitive 
strategy. International Journal of Innovation Management, 14(2), 331-357. 
Dodd, D., & Favaro, K. (2006). Managing the right tension. Harvard Business Review, 84(12), 
62-74. 
Engel, J. S., & del-Palacio, I. (2011).  Global clusters of innovation: The case of Israel and 
Silicon Valley.  California Management Review, 53(2), 27-49.  
Erwin D. (2002). The dynamics of product innovation and firm competences. Strategic 
Management Journal, 23(12), 1095. 
Euchner, J. A. (2011). Innovation and risk. Research Technology Management, 54(2), 9 
Finkle, T. A., & Mallin, M. L. (2010). Steve Jobs and Apple, inc. Journal of the International 
Academy for Case Studies, 16(7), 31-40 
Flight, R., Allaway, A., Kim, W., and D’Souza, G. (2011). A study of perceived innovation  
characteristics across cultures and stages of diffusion. Journal of Marketing Theory and 
Practice, 19(1), 109-125.  
Franke, R. H., Hofstede, G., & Bond, M. H. (1991).  Cultural roots of economic performance: A 
research note.  Strategic Management Journal, 12, 165-173 

108 
Gurbani, V. K., Garvert, A., & Herbsleb, J. D. (2010).  Managing a corporate open source 
software asset.  Communications of the ACM, 53(2), 155-159.   
Haapasalo, H., & Kess, P. (2001).  In search of organizational creativity: The role of knowledge  
management.  Creativity & Innovation Management, 10(2), 110. 
Hagedoorn, J., & Duysters, G. (2002).  External sources of innovative capabilities: The 
preferences for strategic alliances or mergers and acquisitions.  Journal of Management 
Studies, 39(2), 167-188.  
Hoegland, M., Lichtenthaler, U., & Muethel, M. (2011). Is your company ready for open  
innovation? MIT Sloan Management Review, 53(1), 45–48. 
Hair, J., Anderson, R., Tatham, R., and Black, W. (1995). Multivariate data analysis. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Han, K., Oh, W., Im, K., Oh, H., Pinsonneault, A., & Chang, R. M. (2012).  Value co-creation 
and wealth spillover in open innovation alliances.  MIS Quarterly, 36(1), 291-316.  
Henttonen, K., Pussinen, P., & Koivumäki, T. (2012). Managerial perspective on open source  
collaboration and networked innovation. Journal of Technology Management & 
Innovation, 7(3), 135-147. 
Hoe, S. L., (2006). Tacit knowledge, nonaka and takeuchi seci model and informal knowledge 
processes. International Journal of Organization Theory and Behavior, 9(4), 490-502. 
Hofstede, G. (1980).  Culture and organizations.  International Studies of Management &  
Organization, 10(4), 15-41.  
Hofstede, G. (1983).  National cultures in four dimensions: A research-based theory of cultural 
differences among nations.  International Studies of Management and Organization, 
13(1-3), 46-74 

109 
Hofstede, G. (2001).  Culture’s consequences: Comparing values, behaviors, institutions, and 
organizations across nations (2nd ed.).  Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 
Hofstede, G., & Bond, M. (1988).  The Confucius connection: From cultural roots to economic 
growth.  Organizational Dynamics, 16(4), 5-21.    
Hofstede, G., & Minkov, M. (2010).  Long- versus short-term orientation: New perspectives.   
Asia Pacific Business Review, 16(4), 493-504. 
Gee, V., and Gee, S. (2011). Business improve creates a culture of change and innovation. 
Journal for Quality and Participation, 34, 3, pp. 30-33. 
Gressgård, L. J. (2011). Virtual team collaboration and innovation in organizations. Team 
Performance Management, 17(1/2), 102-119.  
James, A. (2005).  Demystifying the role of culture in innovative regional economies.  Regional 
Studies, 39(9), 1197-1216.  
Jamrog, J., Vickers, M. & Bear, D. (2006).  Building and sustaining a culture that supports 
innovation.  Human Resource Planning, 29(3), 9-19. 
Jusko, J. (2008). Kraft crafts an open innovation strategy. Industry Week/IW, 257(12), 60-61.  
Jucevicius, G. (2010).  Culture vs. cultures of innovation: Conceptual framework and parameters 
for assessment.  Proceedings of The International Conference on Intellectual Capital, 
Knowledge Management & Organizational Learning, 236-244.  
Kaasa, A., & Vadi, M. (2008).  How does culture contribute to innovation? Evidence from 
European countries.  University Of Tartu - Faculty of Economics & Business 
Administration Working Paper Series, 63, 3-39. 

110 
Kang, K. H., & Kang, J. (2009).  How do firms source external knowledge for innovation?  
Analyzing effects of different knowledge sourcing methods.  International Journal of 
Innovation Management, 13(1), 1-17.  
Kenny, B., & Reedy, E. (2006).  The impact of organizational culture factors on innovation 
levels in SMEs: An empirical investigation.  Irish Journal of Management, 27(2), 119-
142.  
Kumar, V., Jones, E., Venkatesan, R., & Leone, R. (2011).  Is market orientation a source of 
sustainable competitive advantage or simply the cost of competing?  Journal of 
Marketing, 75(1), 16-30.  
Lasagni, A. (2012).  How can external relationships enhance innovation in SMEs? New evidence 
for Europe.  Journal of Small Business Management, 50(2), 310-339.  
Leavy, B. (2011).  Vijay Govindarajan: Innovation coach to the developed and developing 
world.  Strategy & Leadership, 39(5), 4-12.  
Leung, K., Bhagat, R. S., Buchan, N. R., Erez, M., & Gibson, C. B. (2005).  Culture and 
international business: Recent advances and their implications for future research. 
Journal of International Business Studies, 36(4), 357-357.  
Li, K., Griffin, D., Yue, H., & Zhao, L. (2013). How does culture influence corporate risk-
taking? Journal of Corporate Finance, 23(0), 1-22. 
Lin, T., Chuang, L., Chang, M., & Yeh, C. (2012).  A study of the relationship between team 
innovation and organizational innovation in the high-tech industry: Confirmation of the 
organizational culture moderation effect.  Advances in Management and Applied 
Economics, 2(2), 19-52.   

111 
Marrone, J. A. (2010).  Team boundary spanning: A multilevel review of past research and 
proposals for the future.  Journal of Management, 36(4), 911-940 
McAdam, R., & McClelland, J. (2002).  Individual and team-based idea generation within 
innovation management: Organizational and research agendas.  European Journal of 
Innovation Management, 5(2), 86-97.  
Mohanty, K., & Kar, S. (2012).  Achieving innovation and success: Organizational learning. 
SCMS Journal of Indian Management, 9(1), 36-42.  
Naranjo-Valencia, J. C., Jimenez-Jimenez, D., & Raquel Sanz-Valle, R. (2011).   Innovation or 
imitation? The role of organizational culture.  Management Decision, 49(1), 55-72.  
Nonaka, I., & Takeuchi, H. (1995). The knowledge-creating company. New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
Quintane, E., Casselman, R. M., Reiche, B. S., & Nylund, P. A. (2011). Innovation as a 
knowledge-based outcome. Journal of Knowledge Management, 15(6), 928-947. 
Ray, S., & Kanta Ray, P. (2011). Product innovation for the people's car in an emerging  
economy. Technovation, 31(5–6), 216-227.  
Roberts, E. B. (2007).  Managing invention and innovation.  Research Technology Management, 
50(1), 35-54. 
Rothaermel, F., & Hess, A. (2010). Innovation strategies combined. MIT Sloan Management 
Review, 51(3), 13-15.  
Rufat-Latre, J., Muller, A., & Jones, D. (2010).  Delivering on the promise of open innovation.  
Strategy & Leadership, 38(6), 23-28.     
Sadri, G., & Condia, J. (2012).  Managing the virtual world.  Industrial Management, 54(1), 21-
25.  

112 
Sawang, S., & Matthews, J. (2010).  Positive relationships among collaboration for innovation, 
past innovation abandonment and future product introduction in manufacturing SMEs.  
Interdisciplinary Journal of Contemporary Research In Business, 2(6), 106-117.    
Sandmeier, P., Morrison, P. D., & Gassmann, O. (2010).  Integrating customers in product 
innovation: Lessons from industrial development contractors and in-house contractors in 
rapidly changing customer markets.  Creativity & Innovation Management, 19(2), 89-
106.  
Schweitzer, F., Buchinger, W., Gassmann, O., & Obrist, M. (2012).  Crowdsourcing.  Research 
Technology Management, 55(3), 32-38.  
Scroggins, W. A. (2006).  Managing meaning for strategic change: The role of perception and 
meaning congruence.  Journal of Health and Human Services Administration, 29(1), 83-
102.  
Sebestova, J., & Rylkova, Z. (2011). Competencies and innovation within learning organizations.   
Economics & Management, 16, 954-960.  
Senge, P. M. (1990). The art and practice of the learning organization.  New York, NY: 
Doubleday 
Shane, S. (1994). Championing Innovation in the Global Corporation. Research Technology  
 
Management, 37 (4), 29-35.  
Shin, S. J., Kim, T., Lee, J., & Bian, L. (2012).  Cognitive team diversity and individual team 
member creativity: A cross-level interaction.  Academy of Management Journal, 55(1), 
197-212. doi:10.5465/amj.2010.0270  

113 
Sirmon, D. G., Hitt, M. A., & Ireland, R. (2007).  Managing firm resources in dynamic 
environments to create value: looking inside the black box.  Academy Of Management 
Review, 32(1), 273-292. doi:10.5465/AMR.2007.23466005 
Srivastava, S. B., & Banaji, M. R. (2011). Culture, cognition, and collaborative networks in 
organizations. American Sociological Review, 76(2), 207-233. 
Tellis, G. J., Prabhu, J. C., & Chandy, R. (2009).  Radical innovation across nations: The 
preeminence of corporate culture.  Journal of Marketing, 73(1), 3-23. 
doi:10.1509/jmkg.73.1.3 
Thompson, V. (1965). Bureaucracy and innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly, 10, 1-20.  
Tuulenmaki, A., & Valikangas, L. (2011).  The art of rapid, hands-on execution innovation. 
Strategy & Leadership, 39(2), 28-35. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/10878571111114446   
Weick, K. E. (1987). Organizational culture as a source of high reliability. California 
Management Review, 29(2), 112-127 
Williams, L. K., & McGuire, S. J. (2010).  Economic creativity and innovation implementation: 
the entrepreneurial drivers of growth? Evidence from 63 countries.  Small Business 
Economics, 34(4), 391-412. doi:10.1007/s11187-008-9145-7 
Wilson, K., & Doz, Y. L. (2011).  Agile innovation: A footprint balancing distance and 
immersion.  California Management Review, 53(2), 6-26.  
Yim-Yu, W., & Nicholson, J. D. (2008).  National culture and innovation capability: Some 
observations concerning Chinese-Americans.  Management Research Review, 31(9), 697-
712. doi:10.1108/01409170810898581 
Zhuang, L. (1995). Bridging the gap between technology and business strategy: A pilot study on  
the innovation process. Management Decision, 33(8), 13-19.  

114 
 Zhuang, L., Williamson, D. and Carter, M. (1999). Innovate or liquidate – are all organizations  
convinced? A two-phased study into the innovation process. Management Decisions, 
37(1), 57-71.  

115 
 
 
APPENDIX A. STATEMENT OF ORIGINAL WORK 
Academic Honesty Policy 
Capella University’s Academic Honesty Policy (3.01.01) holds learners accountable for the 
integrity of work they submit, which includes but is not limited to discussion postings, 
assignments, comprehensive exams, and the dissertation or capstone project.  
Established in the Policy are the expectations for original work, rationale for the policy, definition 
of terms that pertain to academic honesty and original work, and disciplinary consequences of 
academic dishonesty. Also stated in the Policy is the expectation that learners will follow APA 
rules for citing another person’s ideas or works. 
The following standards for original work and definition of plagiarism are discussed in the 
Policy: 
Learners are expected to be the sole authors of their work and to acknowledge the 
authorship of others’ work through proper citation and reference. Use of another person’s 
ideas, including another learner’s, without proper reference or citation constitutes 
plagiarism and academic dishonesty and is prohibited conduct. (p. 1) 
Plagiarism is one example of academic dishonesty. Plagiarism is presenting someone else’s 
ideas or work as your own. Plagiarism also includes copying verbatim or rephrasing ideas 
without properly acknowledging the source by author, date, and publication medium. (p. 2)  
Capella University’s Research Misconduct Policy (3.03.06) holds learners accountable for research 
integrity. What constitutes research misconduct is discussed in the Policy: 
Research misconduct includes but is not limited to falsification, fabrication, plagiarism, 
misappropriation, or other practices that seriously deviate from those that are commonly 
accepted within the academic community for proposing, conducting, or reviewing research, 
or in reporting research results. (p. 1) 
Learners failing to abide by these policies are subject to consequences, including but not limited to 
dismissal or revocation of the degree.  

116 
Statement of Original Work and Signature 
I have read, understood, and abided by Capella University’s Academic Honesty Policy (3.01.01) 
and Research Misconduct Policy (3.03.06), including the Policy Statements, Rationale, and 
Definitions.  
I attest that this dissertation or capstone project is my own work. Where I have used the ideas or 
words of others, I have paraphrased, summarized, or used direct quotes following the guidelines 
set forth in the APA Publication Manual. 
Learner name 
 and date  
Chandragupta Gudena, March 3, 2014 
Mentor name 
and school 
Dr. Gregory McLaughlin, Capella University 
 

117 
 
  
APPENDIX B. SURVEY INSTRUMENT 
INDIAN AMERICANS INNOVATION SURVEY 
Background: The first seven questions are about your general background. 
 
1 Please indicate your gender 
 Male 
 Female 
 
2 What is your age? 
 Born before 1947 
 Born between 1947 and 1963 
 Born between 1964 and 1979 
 Born after 1980 
 
3 In what country do you reside?  
 United States 
 Other (Please Specify) ____________________ 
 
4 What is your highest level of education? 
 Did not complete High School 
 High School or Equivalent 
 Certificate 
 Two-year degree 
 Bachelor's degree 
 Master's degree 
 Doctoral degree 
 
5 Which category best describes your position 
 CEO/President 
 Vice President 
 Director 
 Manager 
 Supervisor 
 Employee 
 Other (please specify) ____________________ 
 

118 
6 How many years in your present position? (Check only one box) 
 Less than 1 year 
 1-3 years 
 4-6 years 
 7-10 years 
 Over 10 years 
 
7 Identify the type of Organizations where you worked 
 Small business (less than 50 employees) 
 Non-profit 
 Governmental agency 
 Education 
 Consulting 
 Manufacturing 
 Healthcare 
 Process industry 
 Services 
 Hospitality or Travel 
 Legal 
 Construction 
 Food 
 Agriculture 
 Other 
 Other (please specify) ____________________ 
 
8 Which of the following best describe your job function? 
 Leadership 
 Managerial 
 Technical 
 Engineering 
 Financial 
 Administrative 
 Clerical 
 HR 
 Other (Please specify) ____________________ 
 
 

119 
Environment Related: The following twelve statements asks you about your relation to your 
work environment. 

120 
9 Choose the best response that describes your present work environment 
 
Strongly 
disagree 
Disagree 
Neither 
Agree nor 
Disagree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
a. The work 
environment 
supports 
creativity 
  
  
  
  
  
b. I have 
confidence in 
my own 
abilities to 
solve 
problems 
  
  
  
  
  
c. My 
workplace 
provides me 
with 
challenges 
  
  
  
  
  
d. The 
workplace 
enables me to 
be creative 
  
  
  
  
  
e. The work 
environment 
is open to new 
ideas 
  
  
  
  
  
f. There is a 
sense of 
cooperation 
among 
employees 
  
  
  
  
  
g. 
Management 
rewards 
improvements 
  
  
  
  
  
h. Work 
demands are 
not 
overburdening 
  
  
  
  
  
i. My 
workplace 
encourages 
  
  
  
  
  

121 
change 
j. Trust is a 
value in my 
workplace 
  
  
  
  
  
 

122 
Innovation Related: To different people, the concept of INNOVATION can mean different 
things. In the following ten questions, we would like to know what you think. 
 
10 In your opinion, innovation can be defined as 
 
Strongly 
disagree 
Disagree 
Neither Agree 
nor Disagree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
a. Inventing 
something 
entirely new 
  
  
  
  
  
b. Generating 
new ideas 
  
  
  
  
  
c. Improving 
something 
that already 
exists 
  
  
  
  
  
d. Enhancing 
the 
desirability of 
something 
  
  
  
  
  
e. "Thinking 
out of the 
box" 
  
  
  
  
  
f. Taking 
something 
that already 
exists and 
making it 
better 
  
  
  
  
  
g. Changing 
the 
technology 
by making 
the previous 
version 
obsolete 
  
  
  
  
  
h. Adopting 
something 
that has been 
tried 
elsewhere 
  
  
  
  
  
i. Using a 
different 
perspective 
  
  
  
  
  

123 
j. Introducing 
change to 
make 
something 
better 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
11 As far as you are concerned, innovation can occur in a? 
 
Strongly 
disagree 
Disagree 
Neither Agree 
nor Disagree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
a. A product 
  
  
  
  
  
b. A service 
  
  
  
  
  
c. A 
technology 
  
  
  
  
  
d. A process 
  
  
  
  
  
e. A person 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
12 Who benefits most from an innovation? 
 
Strongly 
disagree 
Disagree 
Neither Agree 
nor Disagree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
a. The 
individual or 
group 
responsible 
for the 
innovation 
  
  
  
  
  
b. The 
employer 
  
  
  
  
  
c. The 
industry 
  
  
  
  
  
d. The society 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 

124 
13 Once an innovation is identified, what are the next steps? (Please rank the following 
statements in order of importance from 1 to 6) 
______ a. It should be thoroughly evaluated 
______ b. An implementation plan initiated 
______ c. A cost-benefit analysis completed 
______ d. An assessment of its short-term and long-term potential 
______ e. Determine how it advances, improves, or changes performance 
______ f. Determine if it meets its stated objectives 
 
14 The value of an innovation should be judged upon: 
 
No Value 
Little value 
Has some 
value 
Is valued 
Of great 
value 
a. How new 
or novel it is 
  
  
  
  
  
b. how many 
people it 
involves 
  
  
  
  
  
c. How much 
it costs 
  
  
  
  
  
d. How long 
it takes 
  
  
  
  
  
e. How much 
improvement 
does it make 
  
  
  
  
  
f. How well 
the 
technology is 
advanced 
  
  
  
  
  
g. The extent 
of change that 
occurs 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 

125 
15 Check the box that best matches your agreement (disagreement) with each "value" statement 
 
Strongly 
agree 
Agree 
Neither Agree 
nor Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
a. The core 
mission of 
my company 
has my 
support 
  
  
  
  
  
b. The 
strengths of 
my 
organization 
help me to 
accomplish 
my work 
  
  
  
  
  
c. 
Weaknesses 
in the 
organization 
do not deter 
my 
enthusiasm 
  
  
  
  
  
d. Individuals 
are 
committed to 
the success of 
the 
organization 
  
  
  
  
  
e. 
Management 
effectively 
motivates 
employees 
  
  
  
  
  
f. Applying 
positive 
values to the 
work 
environment 
is helpful 
  
  
  
  
  
g. Accepting 
the assigned 
priorities for 
the most 
critical tasks 
  
  
  
  
  

126 
is easy 
h. My beliefs 
can conform 
to achieve the 
desired 
objective 
  
  
  
  
  
i. 
Empowering 
others is a 
value that 
generates 
success 
  
  
  
  
  
j. Teams can 
achieve 
greater 
success than 
individuals 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
16 For your organization, rank in the order of importance, whom you think is in a better position 
to initiate an innovation? 
______ The board of directors 
______ The marketing personnel 
______ The quality staff 
______ Accounting and finance 
______ The purchasing people 
______ Experts (consultants) 
______ HR (human resources) 
 
17 Organizations sometimes embark on innovative activities Choose the single most critical 
reason. 
 a. Because they want to increase the bottom line 
 b. Because their competitors are innovative 
 c. Because they want to do better than their competitors 
 d. Because of pressure from accreditors and regulators 
 e. Because they happen to have creative personnel 
 f. In an attempt to reduce costs 
 g. Since they have the financial resources 
 h. Due to decreased reimbursement 
 

127 
18 The key to one's ability to innovate is to (Choose only one response) 
 a. Be born with the right talent 
 b. Be able to think creatively 
 c. Do a postgraduate course 
 d. Have extensive experience in the field 
 e. Possess good interpersonal skills 
 f. Be good at putting theory into practice 
 g. Other (please specify) ____________________ 
 
19 Which of the following organizational factors is paramount to realizing one's innovation 
potential? (Choose only one response) 
 a. Regular employee performance appraisals 
 b. Freedom to work on areas of greatest interest 
 c. Feedback from superiors 
 d. Recognition and appreciation 
 e. Contacts with like-minded colleagues 
 f. Training and education 
 g. Encouragement to take risks 
 h. Monetary rewards 
 i. Tolerance of nonconformity 
 j. Opportunity to work alone rather than on a team 
 
20 Which of the following organizational factors do you think is most emphasized in the 
organization where you work (choose only one response) 
 a. Regular employee performance appraisals 
 b. Freedom to work on areas of greatest interest 
 c. Feedback from superiors 
 d. Recognition and appreciation 
 e. Contacts with like-minded colleagues 
 f. Creativity training programs 
 g. Encouragement to take risks 
 h. Monetary rewards 
 i. Tolerance of nonconformity 
 j. Opportunity to work alone rather than on a team 
 
 
 

128 
 
 
APPENDIX C. FACTOR ANALYSIS OVERALL 
Table C1 
Factor Analysis of all 200 participants at 95% confidence level 
Level 
N 
Mean 
StDev. 
C30 (New) 
200 
4.2450 
0.6130 
C31 (Improve+Change) 
200 
4.0191 
0.6779 
 
“New” scores higher than “Improve or Change”. The component C30 represents the “new” 
construct and C31 represents “Improve or change”. Respondents did not seem to differentiate 
between Improve and Change. 
 
Table C2 
Descriptive Statistics 
 
Mean 
Std. Deviation 
Analysis N 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-a. 
Inventing something 
entirely 
New 
4.16 
.833 
200 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-b. 
Generating new ideas 
4.30 
.702 
200 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-c. 
Improving something 
that 
already exists 
 
4.03 
.905 
200 

129 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-d. 
Enhancing the 
desirability 
of something 
4.07 
.777 
200 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-e. 
"Thinking out of the 
box" 
4.28 
.809 
200 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-f. Taking 
something that 
already 
exists and making it 
better 
4.00 
.894 
200 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-g. 
Changing the 
technology by making 
the previous version 
obsolete 
3.93 
.916 
200 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-h. 
Adopting something 
that 
has been tried 
elsewhere 
3.85 
1.016 
200 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-i. Using a 
different perspective 
4.12 
.754 
200 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-j. 
Introducing change to 
make something 
better 
4.14 
.806 
200 
 
 

130 
Table C3 
KMP and Bartlett’s Tests 
Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin Measure of Sampling Adequacy 
.867 
Bartlett's Test of Sphericity Approx. Chi-Square 
945.012 
Df 
45 
Sig. 
.000 
 
Table C4  
Communalities 
 
Initial 
Extraction 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-a. 
Inventing something 
entirely 
New 
1.000 
.666 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-b. 
Generating new ideas 
1.000 
.717 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-c. 
Improving something 
that 
already exists 
 
1.000 
.662 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-d. 
Enhancing the 
desirability 
of something 
1.000 
.628 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-e. 
"Thinking out of the 
box" 
1.000 
.421 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
1.000 
.687 

131 
defined as-f. Taking 
something that 
already 
exists and making it 
better 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-g. 
Changing the 
technology by making 
the previous version 
obsolete 
1.000 
.512 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-h. 
Adopting something 
that 
has been tried 
elsewhere 
1.000 
.705 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-i. Using a 
different perspective 
1.000 
.630 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-j. 
Introducing change to 
make something 
better 
1.000 
.612 
Extraction Method: Principal Component Analysis 
 
Table C5  
Total Variance Explained 
Component 
Initial Eigenvalues 
Extraction Sums of Squared Loadings 
 
Total 
% of Variance 
Cumulative % 
Total 
% of Variance 
Cumulative % 
1 
4.975 
47.754 
49.754 
4.975 
49.754 
49.754 
2 
1.264 
12.642 
62.396 
1.264 
12.642 
62.396 
3 
.805 
8.046 
70.442 
 
 
 

132 
4 
.649 
6.491 
76.933 
 
 
 
5 
.589 
5.894 
82.827 
 
 
 
6 
.463 
4.628 
87.455 
 
 
 
7 
.436 
4.356 
91.811 
 
 
 
8 
.300 
2.995 
94.806 
 
 
 
9 
.282 
2.820 
97.627 
 
 
 
10 
.237 
2.373 
100.00 
 
 
 
 
Table C6  
Principal Component Analysis 
Component 
Rotation Sum of Squared Loadings 
 
Total 
% of Variance 
Cumulative % 
1 
3.901 
39.013 
39.013 
2 
2.338 
23.384 
62.396 
3 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
8 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
Extraction Method: Principal Component Analysis 

133 
 
 
Table C7  
Component Matrix 
 
Component 
 
1 
2 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-a. 
Inventing something 
entirely 
 
New 
.522 
.627 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-b. 
Generating new ideas 
.610 
.587 
 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-c. 
Improving something 
that 
already exists 
 
.763 
-.283 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-d. 
Enhancing the 
desirability 
of something 
.754 
-.272 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-e. 
"Thinking out of the 
box" 
.522 
.385 
 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-f. Taking 
.768 
-.310 

134 
something that 
already 
exists and making it 
better 
 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-g. 
Changing the 
technology by making 
the previous version 
obsolete 
.710 
-.088 
 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-h. 
Adopting something 
that 
has been tried 
elsewhere 
.771 
-.332 
 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-i. Using a 
different perspective 
.793 
.023 
 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-j. 
Introducing change to 
make something 
better 
.777 
.091 
Extraction Method: Principal Component Analysis 
2 Components extracted.  
 
 
Table C8  
Rotated Component Matrix 
 
Component 
 
1 
2 

135 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-a. 
Inventing something 
entirely 
 
New 
 
.102 
 
.810 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-b. 
Generating new ideas 
 
.198 
 
.823 
 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-c. 
Improving something 
that 
already exists 
 
 
.795 
 
.171 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-d. 
Enhancing the 
desirability 
of something 
 
.774 
 
.172 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-e. 
"Thinking out of the 
box" 
 
.233 
 
.606 
 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-f. Taking 
something that 
already 
exists and making it 
better 
 
.815 
 
.152 
 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-g. 
Changing the 
technology by making 
the previous version 
obsolete 
 
.646 
 
.308 

136 
 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-h. 
Adopting something 
that 
has been tried 
elsewhere 
 
.829 
 
.135 
 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-i. Using a 
different perspective 
 
.657 
 
.446 
 
In your opinion, 
innovation can be 
defined as-j. 
Introducing change to 
make something 
better 
 
.606 
 
.495 
Extraction Method: Principal Component Analysis. 
Rotation Method: Varimax with Kaiser Normalization.  
a. Rotation converged in 3 iterations. 
Table C9  
Component Transformation Matrix 
Component 
1 
2 
1 
.843 
-.538 
2 
-.538 
.843 
Extraction Method: Principal Component Analysis. 
Rotation Method: Varimax with Kaiser Normalization. 
 
 
 

137 
Table C10  
Reliability Statistics 
 
N 
% 
Valid 
200 
100.0 
Excluded 
0 
0.0 
Total 
200 
100.0 
 
 
 
 
Table C11  
Cronbach Alpha 
Cronbach’s Alpha 
N of items 
0.883 
10 
 
 
