Role Stress in Horizontal Alliances / 61Journal of Marketing
Vol. 66 (April 2002), 61–82Arne Nygaard & Robert Dahlstrom
Role Stress and Effectiveness in
Horizontal Alliances
Horizontal arrangements are increasingly deployed in organizational networks, yet research has rarely examined
the effectiveness of these alliances. The coalition of disparate corporate cultures yields appreciable levels of rolestress for people in boundary-spanning positions. Dedicated assets and communication modality are factors thatinfluence the level of role ambiguity and conflict. The authors implicate these facets of role stress as antecedentsto four forms of effectiveness drawn from the competing values framework. The authors present alternative per-spectives that examine the relationship between stress and performance. The received view frames role stressorsas linear, negative antecedents to organizational outcomes. The authors contrast this perspective with theories thatespouse triphasic, parabolic, and interactive influences of stressors on organizational outcomes. Data gatheredwith 218 managers of dual-branded retail oil outlets indicate that the relevance of these alternative perspectives ismitigated by the form of effectiveness pursued by the organization. The results support a linear relationshipbetween role conflict and bargaining efforts, yet they also offer evidence of nonlinear influences of role ambiguityon contributions to sales, customer satisfaction, and competence. The study concludes with a discussion of rele-vance of the findings to the management of horizontal alliances and to interorganizational theory.
Arne Nygaard is a professor, Graduate School, Norwegian School of Man-
agement. Robert Dahlstrom is Bloomfield Endowed Associate Professorof Marketing, Carol Martin Gatton College of Business and Economics,University of Kentucky. The authors thank the four anonymous JMreview-
ers for their insightful critiques of this article. In addition, the authors thankMichelle Duffy, Scott Kelley, and Steve Skinner for their valuable evalua-tions of a previous version of this article. The authors are listed in randomorder. Both contributed equally to the study. The U.S.–Norway FulbrightFoundation provided partial funding for this research.Marketing practice and thought have benefited sub-
stantially from the adoption of a long-term perspec-tive in the analysis of exchange. Theory has been
developed that addresses the domestication of markets(Arndt 1979) and the breadth of governance structuresemployed to manage long-term vertical exchange relation-ships (Heide 1994).
Increases in the magnitude of horizontal alliances have
been concomitant with the rise in emphasis on long-termvertical exchange. Merger-related activities surpassed
US$2.30 trillion in 1998, and the top ten mergers aloneexceeded US$550 billion (Jackson 1999), yet empirical
work has not kept pace with the rise in horizontal alliances.
Bucklin and Sengupta (1993) examine success-related fac-tors in comarketing pacts, and Johnson and Houston (2000)offer evidence of synergistic returns in horizontal joint ven-tures. Unfortunately, complementary work has notaddressed interaction and performance in other horizontalarrangements.
Mergers and acquisitions are horizontal exchange rela-
tionships that dynamically change the organizational struc-ture of multiple entities. Parties to these relationships seekscale economies in production and marketing, yet researchsuggests that many mergers have a negative influence onprofits (Cartwright and Cooper 1995). The new organizationmust not only consolidate supply chain factors but also bringtogether disparate corporate cultures. Nevertheless, market-
ing research has not examined the organizational challengesthat emerge in the wake of a horizontal alliance. Role ambi-
guity emerges because of the paucity of relevant information
as well as the level of complexity and change (Kahn et al.1964). Role conflict similarly materializes as employees
evaluate responsibilities in light of historical obligations and
associations with new partners. Ambiguity and conflictjeopardize efforts to achieve objectives, but research has notexamined stress in mergers and acquisitions.
The goal of this research is to examine role stress in hor-
izontal alliances. Three objectives underlie our pursuit ofthis goal. The first objective is to examine influences ofambiguity and conflict on multiple facets of effectiveness.The competing values framework (Cameron and Quinn1999) emphasizes the simultaneous pursuit of severaldimensions of performance. Examinations of the determi-nants of a single facet of performance are ill equipped toevaluate the consequences of these antecedents to other
channel outcomes (Kumar, Stern, and Achrol 1992). Focus-ing on a single element of performance constrains advance-ments in theory and limits researchers’ ability to make pol-icy recommendations (see Singh 2000). Our research,however, augments channel thought with an examination ofrole-based antecedents to multiple facets of effectiveness.Analysis of diverse facets of effectiveness informs managersabout the multiple consequences of stress.
Our second objective is to examine alternative theoreti-
cal perspectives on the influences of role stress on organiza-tional outcomes. Role stress is often implicated as a deter-minant of performance, yet prior research has notconsistently supported this hypothesis (Tubre and Collins2000). We present the linear negative influence of stress onperformance (House and Rizzo 1972) as the received view .
We contrast this perspective with theories that espouse
triphasic (Selye 1950), parabolic (Yerkes and Dodson 1908),
62 / Journal of Marketing, April 2002and interactive influences (Fried et al. 1998) of stressors on
performance. We contribute to contemporary role researchby offering evidence that the influences of role stress varyon the basis of the form of effectiveness. Moreover, man-agers of horizontal alliances can gain insight into the posi-tive and negative influences of stress.
The third objective of our research is to identify organi-
zational and communicative processes that influence thelevel of stress in alliances. Williamson (1985) underscoresthe importance of transaction-specific assets, yet the influ-ence of these assets on stress has not been examined. Priorresearch offers insight into the content and flow of commu-nication, but the medium employed for interaction hasreceived less attention (Frazier 1999). Identification of thesefactors enables management to prepare for conflict and
ambiguity. Furthermore, identification of these factorsenables managers to discount some opportunities because ofinevitably high levels of stress.
Our empirical context is the distribution system of two
oil companies that operate through a horizontal alliance atthe retail level. Mergers or acquisitions have recently beencompleted in a variety of retail settings (Zecher 1998), andthe retail sector accentuates some inherent challenges asso-ciated with interfirm alliances. Retail executives who super-vise mergers must monitor multiple aspects of integrationthat are deemed critical to the success of alliances. Theseintegration issues include consolidation of financial sys-tems; product delivery systems; pricing, promotion, and cus-tomer service policies; information systems; and humanresources (Harvey, Price, and Lusch 1998). There is often asignificant gap between the expected value of an acquisitionand its actual performance, and the acquisition may lead tolayoffs or divert attention away from core brands and mar-kets (Weston and Chiu 1996). Brand managers should value
research that addresses efforts to integrate divergent firmsinto a unified, effective enterprise. Nevertheless, researchhas rarely addressed postmerger integration (Kerin andVaraiya 1985; Kumar, Kerin, and Pereira 1991).
The article proceeds as follows: In the next section, we
present our theoretical model and hypotheses. We then pre-sent the method and data collection procedures, along withthe results. The final section outlines implications of theresearch for channel management and theory.
Model and Hypotheses
Role theory uses the metaphor of playacting to characterizethe interaction between a focal person and a role sender(Kahn et al. 1964). The focal person encounters pressurebecause of expectations placed on him or her by rolesenders. For example, franchisees are endowed with roleexpectations from McDonald’s upon investing in the fran-
chised system.
Inherent to the nature of boundary-spanning positions is
the likelihood that people occupying these roles will experi-ence ambiguity and conflict. Role ambiguity refers to the
“lack of clarity and predictability of the outcomes of one’sbehavior” (House and Rizzo 1972, p. 475). Interfirm theoryand research on boundary-spanning occupations indicatethat organizational factors and coping mechanisms haveimportant influences on role clarity (Singh 1998). Standardindustry practice is to develop comprehensive operating sys-tems that are at the retail managers’ disposal (Keating 1991),yet retailers still encounter ambiguity. For example, retailmanagers experience ambiguity when retail traffic history isunavailable to assist in the scheduling of personnel.
Role conflict refers to the “degree of incongruity or
incompatibility of expectations associated with the role”(House and Rizzo 1972, p. 475). House and Rizzo’s analy-sis of conflict addresses incompatibilities among standardsor values, time, resources, or capabilities; multiple roleresponsibilities; and various organizational inputs. Priorstudies of boundary personnel recognize that each of thesefacets may influence conflict (Ford, Walker, and Churchill
1975; Singh, Verbeke, and Rhoads 1996). Retail managersencounter incompatibilities emanating from a variety ofsources. For example, franchisees experience conflict whenorder quantities suggested by the franchisor are not consis-tent with the recommendations of local suppliers.
The Received View of Role Stress and
Organizational Outcomes
Our theoretical model incorporates multiple perspectives on
the relationship between stress and performance in horizon-tal alliances. The influences of ambiguity and conflict onperformance have been the focus of considerable research,yet the findings do not support a strong, direct relationship(see Table 1). Consequently, researchers have proposed non-linear (e.g., Schuler 1980) and interactive relationships(Fried et al. 1998) between stress and performance. Ourmodel examines the independent influences of role stress onorganizational outcomes and treats nonlinear and interactiveeffects as competing hypotheses. Treatment of conflict andambiguity as independent factors is consistent with Kahnand colleagues’ (1964) framework, yet it stands in contrastto several analysts’ (e.g., Dubinsky et al. 1992) treatment ofconflict as antecedent to ambiguity. Because the conditionsleading to the sources of stress are similar, Kahn and col-leagues (1964) address the independent effects of ambiguityand conflict and posit modest correlation among facets ofstress. We incorporate this premise into our analysis.
Wepresent the competing values framework (Cameron
and Quinn 1999) as a means to contrast alternative stress theo-ries and differentiate among forms of performance. The com-peting values framework reveals two major dimensions ofeffectiveness. The first dimension differentiates effectivenesson the basis of the extent to which adaptation and change arevalued over predictability and stability. The second dimension
contrasts an internal orientation that emphasizes unity and inte-gration with an external orientation that focuses on differentia-tion and rivalry. Simultaneous consideration of the two dimen-sions reveals four perspectives on effectiveness. The clan
approach reflects an internal emphasis with individual discre-tion. Its polar opposite, the market approach, refers to an exter-
nally oriented firm that values control. The adhocracy
approach refers to an external orientation with value placed onflexibility. The hierarchical approach contrasts with adhocracy
through an internal emphasis coupled with a desire for stability.
Organizations vary in the extent to which they empha-
size one form of effectiveness over other facets. Our analy-
Role Stress in Horizontal Alliances / 63TABLE 1
Empirical Analyses of Satisfaction and Organizational Outcomes in Role Stress Research
Authors 
Donnelly and Ivancevich
(1975)  
Churchill, Ford, and
Walker (1976) 
Oliver and Brief
(1977–78) 
Bagozzi (1978) 
Busch and Bush (1978) Dubinsky and Mattson
(1979) 
Teas, Wacker, and
Hughes (1979) 
Bagozzi (1980) 
Berkowitz (1980) 
Kelly and Hise (1980)
Kelly, Gable, and Hise
(1981) Role Ambiguity Items
3
41: 21 company, 7
manager, 7 customer, 6
family
6 (Rizzo, House, and
Lirtzmann 1970)
12 (Ford, Walker, and
Churchill 1975)
5 (Donnelly and
Ivancevich 1975)
24: company,
supervisors, customers
6 (Rizzo, House, and
Lirtzmann 1970)
12 (Ford, Walker, and
Churchill 1975)
5 (Hamner and Tosi
1974)
5 (Lyons 1971)5 (Lyons 1971)Role Conflict Items
3
30: company, manager,
customer, family
8 (Rizzo, House, and
Lirtzmann 1970)
15 (Kahn et al. 1964)
24: company,
supervisors, customers
15 (Kahn et al. 1964)
15 (Secord and Backman
1970)
8 (Rizzo, House, and
Lirtzmann 1970)
8 (Rizzo, House, and
Lirtzmann 1970)Setting
86 sales representatives,
46 supervisors
265 sales representatives
114 retail managers
161 industrial sales
representatives
78 industrial sales
representatives, 39
women, 39 men
203 retail sales
representatives
107 sales representatives
122 industrial sales
representatives
49 sales managers, 148
sales representatives
198 brand managers
179 chain store
managersResults
Ambiguity is negatively associated with three
facets of satisfaction.
Ambiguity lowers job, coworker, company, and
pay-based satisfaction. Conflict lowers supervisor
and company-based satisfaction.
Ambiguity and conflict lower satisfaction.
Conflict and ambiguity are negatively associated
with sales and job satisfaction. Stepwise
regression suggests that only conflict lowers sales
and satisfaction.
Ambiguity is negatively associated with
performance. Ambiguity is negatively associated
with customer (female representatives), work, and
supervisor satisfaction.
Conflict and ambiguity are negatively associated
with performance and satisfaction.
Ambiguity lowers higher-order need fulfillment.
Role ambiguity is negatively associated with sales
and satisfaction in the structural equation model,
but conflict is not related to either endogenous
variable.
Ambiguity raises the sales-to-expense ratio for
sales managers. Ambiguity and conflict lower job
satisfaction.
Ambiguity and conflict lower satisfaction.
Ambiguity and conflict are unrelated to
performance. Ambiguity is negatively related to
job satisfaction.Role Constructs a
64 / Journal of Marketing, April 2002
TABLE 1
Continued
Authors Role Ambiguity Items Role Conflict Items Setting Results
Behrman, Bigoness, and
Perreault (1981) 
Teas (1983) 
Behrman and Perreault
(1984) 
Kohli (1985) 
Chonko, Howell, and
Bellenger (1986)
Fry et al. (1986) Hampton, Dubinsky, and
Skinner (1986) 
Michaels, Day, and
Joachimsthaler (1987) 
Yammarino and
Dubinsky (1990) 
Lusch and Jaworski
(1991) 
Singh and Rhoads
(1991) 19: 4 customer, 5
company, 5 family, 5
manager (Ford, Walker,
and Churchill 1975)
(Rizzo, House, and
Lirtzmann 1970) 
b
8 (Rizzo, House, and
Lirtzmann 1970)
6 (Rizzo, House, and
Lirtzmann 1970)
36: 3 family, 12 job, 7
company, 7 supervisor, 7
customer
8 (Rizzo, House, and
Lirtzmann 1970)
6 (Rizzo, House, and
Lirtzmann 1970)
10 (Rizzo, House, and
Lirtzmann 1970)
6 (Rizzo, House, and
Lirtzmann 1970)
4 (Kahn et al. 1964)
45: 9 company, 9 boss, 8
customer, 6 ethical, 4
other managers, 5
coworkers, 4 family(Rizzo, House, and
Lirtzmann 1970) b
18 (Rizzo, House, and
Lirtzmann 1970)
30: 4 family, 4 job, 11
supervisor, 6 customer, 5
self
7 (Rizzo, House, and
Lirtzmann 1970)
8 (Rizzo, House, and
Lirtzmann 1970)
13 (Rizzo, House, and
Lirtzmann 1970)
5 (Dansereau, Graen,
and Hage 1975)
4 (Kahn et al. 1964)193 industrial sales
representatives
116 sales managers
196 sales representatives
114 sales managers
121 industrial sales
representatives
216 sales representatives
116 retail sales
representatives
952 industrial buyers
109 retailers, 116
insurance agents
182 retail store managers
472 SMEs: sales and
marketing executivesFamily-based ambiguity raises performance.
Manager- and customer-based ambiguity lower
performance. Manager-based ambiguity lowers
satisfaction.
Conflict lowers satisfaction.
Ambiguity lowers and conflict raises performance.
Ambiguity and conflict lower job satisfaction.
Ambiguity lowers satisfaction.
Congruence of evaluation and compensation is
lowered through job-related ambiguity, but it is
raised through company and supervisor
ambiguity.
Ambiguity lowers job, company, and customer
satisfaction. Conflict lowers all INDSALES facets
except customer satisfaction.
Ambiguity and conflict are unrelated to
performance. Conflict lowers overall satisfaction.
Ambiguity lowers and conflict raises performance.
Both role factors lower satisfaction.
Conflict and ambiguity are negatively associated
with performance.
Role stress lowers performance.
All seven dimensions are negatively associated
with performance and satisfaction.Role Constructs a
Role Stress in Horizontal Alliances / 65Dubinsky et al. (1992);
Singh (1995) 
Singh (1993) 
Singh, Goolsby, and
Rhoads (1994) 
Singh, Verbeke, and
Rhoads (1996) 
Hartline and Ferrell
(1996) 
Singh (1998) 
Singh (2000)9 (Rizzo, House, and
Lirtzmann 1970)
45: 9 company, 9 boss, 8
customer, 6 ethical, 4
other manager, 5
coworkers, 4 family
(Singh and Rhoads 1991)
3 (Rizzo, House, and
Lirtzmann 1970)
3 (Rizzo, House, and
Lirtzmann 1970)
17 (Chonko, Howell, and
Bellenger 1986)
7 (Rizzo, House, and
Lirtzmann 1970)
9 company, 8 customer
(Singh and Rhoads 1991)11 (Rizzo, House, and
Lirtzmann 1970)
3 (Rizzo, House, and
Lirtzmann 1970)
3 (Rizzo, House, and
Lirtzmann 1970)
12 (Chonko, Howell, and
Bellenger 1986)
8 (Rizzo, House, and
Lirtzmann 1970)
2 intersender, 4 resource
demands (House 1980)Sales representatives:
U.S., 218; Japan, 220;
Korea, 156
472 SMEs: marketing
executives, 254 IS
marketing and support
representatives
377 customer service
representatives
188 boundary spanners
797 hotel employees
703 marketing executives
and representatives
182 customer support
representatives, 177 bill
collectorsAmbiguity lowers performance; conflict has a
positive, direct effect on performance, but the total
effect is nonsignificant. Conflict and ambiguity
(Japan only) lower satisfaction.
SME: Customer-based ambiguity lowers
performance, company and supervisor ambiguity
lower satisfaction, and family-based ambiguity
raises satisfaction. IS: company, customer, and
other ambiguity lower performance; supervisor-
based ambiguity lowers satisfaction.
Direct effects of conflict and ambiguity on
performance are not significant. Burnout mediates
the effects of stress on performance and
satisfaction.
Ambiguity lowers performance, and the effect is
moderated by organizational archetype. Ambiguity
lowers satisfaction. Conflict lowers satisfaction for
the affective archetype.
Conflict lowers self-efficacy. Ambiguity lowers self-
efficacy and satisfaction.
Ambiguity and conflict lower performance. Conflict
lowers satisfaction.
In both samples, customer-based ambiguity
lowers quality and productivity, and resource-
based conflict lowers productivity.
aNames in parentheses correspond with the sources of the measures.
bThe number of items was not reported.
Notes: Churchill, Ford, and Walker’s (1974) INDSALES assesses satisfaction with the job, fellow workers, supervision, company, pay, promotion potential, and customers. SMEs = Small and
medium-sized enterprises. IS = information systems.TABLE 1
Continued
Authors Role Ambiguity Items Role Conflict Items Setting ResultsRole Constructs a
66 / Journal of Marketing, April 2002sis focuses on multiple facets of effectiveness pursued at the
retail level. Table 2 summarizes research on the relationshipbetween effectiveness and stress and categorizes opera-tionalizations within the competing values framework. Mostrecent research acknowledges multiple facets of effective-ness, yet the empirical analyses develop composite mea-sures that are drawn from multiple, competing forms ofeffectiveness (see Singh 2000). For example, Michaels, Day,and Joachimsthaler (1987) describe six elements of perfor-mance, yet their analysis solely addresses the compositemeasure. Composite measures provide insight into overalleffectiveness, yet the influence on independent facets of per-formance is not established. In contrast, our model examinesinfluences of stress on each mode of effectiveness. Considerfirst the influence of stress on the clan perspective.
Clan-based effectiveness and role stress . The clan-based
approach emphasizes the shared goals and values of teammembers in conjunction with participative decision making.The primary tasks of managers in this approach are toempower employees and foster their commitment and loy-alty to the organization (Cameron and Quinn 1999). Ourtreatment of clan-based effectiveness examines the compe-tence of the retailer. Competence reflects the experience,
product knowledge, and capabilities acquired at the retailsite (see Kumar, Stern, and Achrol 1992). Domino’s Pizza,for example, attributes its success to the experience andskills acquired by franchisees (Boroian and Boroian 1997).
Research with organizational teams (Orsburn et al.
1990) suggests that clearly defined role responsibilitiesinfluence efforts to achieve confidence. The humanresources within a team are unlikely to be channeled towardcommon objectives unless the responsibilities of the man-agers are well defined. Clear expectations enable retailers togain confidence in the abilities of their trading partners. Incontrast, poorly defined roles preclude personnel from rec-ognizing expectations and foster lower perceptions of com-petence (Dubinsky and Mattson 1979; Singh 1998).
Role conflict should also influence competence.
Research by Cohen (1980) suggests that role stress affectsthe availability of cognitive resources. As more resourcesare dedicated to coping with the stress, fewer resources aredevoted to performing job responsibilities. Therefore,Dubinsky and Mattson (1979) report a negative relationshipbetween conflict and retail salespeople’s perceptions ofcompetence. As stress-related demands increase, local man-agers are less likely to recognize factors critical to successand become uncertain about their job-related abilities.Inconsistencies in the messages sent by role partners shouldcloud managers’ evaluations of their capabilities.
H1a: The manager’s role ambiguity is negatively associated
with managerial competency.
H2a: The manager’s role conflict is negatively associated with
managerial competency.
Adhocracy-based effectiveness and role stress . An adhoc-
racy parallels a clan in its emphasis on flexibility and discre-tion, yet an adhocracy places greater emphasis on  externalpositioning and differentiation. Our adhocracy-based analy-sis addresses local efforts to enhance customer satisfaction.Copy Mat photocopy systems offer evidence of the valuederived from attending to customer satisfaction (Boroian andBoroian 1997). Although operating in a commodity businessthat has a poor reputation for quality, the company succeedsthrough managerial efforts to raise customer satisfaction.
Substantial research has addressed the relationship
between role stress and boundary spanners’ satisfaction withcustomers, yet few studies have considered the influence ofstress on efforts to enhance customer satisfaction. When suf-ficient knowledge is not provided, boundary spanners lack the
information necessary to attend to the needs of buyers. Singh(1993) reports that performance wanes in the presence ofcustomer-based role ambiguity encountered by sales and cus-tomer service agents. Role ambiguity among retailers shouldhave a strong influence on the level of customer satisfaction.When retailers perceive that obligations associated with jobperformance are unclear, they should experience greater diffi-culty in their efforts to meet customer expectations.
Role conflict should have a similar influence on efforts to
enhance customer satisfaction. Pfeffer and Salancik (1978)maintain that competing demands inhibit people from achiev-ing objectives. Retailers faced with the demands of multipleparties may perform tasks that have countervailing influenceson customer outcomes. Conflicting demands may also leadretailers to prioritize obligations to role partners and down-play customer needs. In either case, the likelihood of address-ing the demands of external constituents is likely to suffer.
H3a: The manager’s role ambiguity is negatively associated
with managerial efforts to enhance customer satisfaction.
H4a: The manager’s role conflict is negatively associated with
managerial efforts to enhance customer satisfaction.
Market-based effectiveness and role stress . Market-
based organizations focus on relationships external to thefirm, yet they simultaneously value stability. Market-based
effectiveness emphasizes performance compared with com-petition and is embodied in contribution to sales (see Kumar,Stern, and Achrol 1992). This construct reflects the revenuesgenerated by a location as compared with other dealers. Forexample, to varying degrees, managers engage in local mar-
keting activities that are designed to fuel sales.
Afundamental premise of the rational goal approach is
the notion that organizations are collectivities oriented to spe-cific goals. Ambiguity and conflict constrain efforts toachieve these goals. Consistent with this perspective,Bagozzi (1980) reports a negative influence of role ambigu-ity on sales performance. As role responsibilities become lessclear, retail managers must dedicate more cognitive resourcesto identify role expectations. Because cognitive resources arelimited, resources allocated to clarifying responsibilities can-not be dedicated to pragmatic, goal-based action (Cohen1980). Consequently, managers encountering unclear expec-tations should contribute less to the firm’s revenue stream. Anincrease in the level of conflict similarly requires managers todedicate more energy to sorting out the demands of multiplestakeholders. As more resources are allocated to sorting outrole obligations, contributions to performance should falter.
H5a: The manager’s role ambiguity is negatively associated
with managerial contributions to sales.
H6a: The manager’s role conflict is negatively associated with
managerial contributions to sales.
Role Stress in Horizontal Alliances / 67Donnelly and Ivancevich (1975)  
Churchill, Ford, and Walker (1976) 
Oliver and Brief (1977–78) Bagozzi (1978) Busch and Bush (1978) Dubinsky and Mattson (1979)  Teas, Wacker, and Hughes (1979) 
Bagozzi (1980)
Berkowitz (1980)  
Kelly and Hise (1980)
Kelly, Gable, and Hise (1981)
Behrman, Bigoness, and Perreault
(1981)1 Net profit
1 Sales/expense
ratio
1 Controlling
expense6
95 (Churchill, Ford,
and Walker 1974) b
18 (Brayfield and
Rothe 1951)
8 (Pruden and Reese
1972)
13 (Porter and Lawler
1968)
8 (Pruden and Reese
1972)
9 (Ivancevich and
Donnelly 1974)
9 (Ivancevich and
Donnelly 1974)
9 (Ivancevich and
Donnelly 1974)
95 (Churchill, Ford,
and Walker 1974) b1
1 (Pruden and
Reese 1972) c
1 (Pruden and
Reese 1972) c
1
5c
5
5 1 Technical knowledge
1 Providing information
1 Sales presentations1 Sales
1 Sales
1 Sales
1 Turnover
1 Return on
assets, 1
Volume 
1 Volume/
square foot, 1
Contribution, 1
Contribution/
square foot
1 Meeting sales
objectivesTABLE 2
Operationalizations of Satisfaction and Organizational Outcomes in Role Stress Research
Satisfaction Performance Human Open Rational Internal
Authors Items a Items a Relations Systems Goal ProcessCompeting Values Framework: Conceptual Domain of the Performance Items
68 / Journal of Marketing, April 2002
Teas (1983) 
Behrman and Perreault (1984)
Kohli (1985)
Chonko, Howell, and Bellenger
(1986)
Fry et al. (1986)
Hampton, Dubinsky, and Skinner
(1986)
Michaels, Day, and Joachimsthaler
(1987)
Yammarino and Dubinsky (1990)
Lusch and Jaworski (1991)
Singh and Rhoads (1991)Dubinsky et al. (1992); Singh
(1995)1 Customer
relations
1 Vendor
relations
1 Customer
relations7 Controlling
expense
1 Expense
accounts
1 Time
management
1 Planning
1 Cost savings
1 Negotiations
1 Profitability
1 Time
management36 (Smith, Kendall,
and Hulin 1969)
95 (Churchill et al.
1974) b
13 (Porter and Lawler
1968)
95 (Churchill, Ford,
and Walker 1974) b
8 (Hackman and
Oldham 1975)
18 (Smith, Kendall,
and Hulin 1969)
15e(Dansereau,
Graen, and Hage
1975)
26 (Churchill, Ford,
and Walker 1974) b
5 (Hackman and
Oldham 1975)31 (Behrman
and Perreault
1982)
11d
1 (Pruden and
Reese 1972) c
6 (Reck 1978)
5e(Dansereau et
al. 1982); 10
(retail), 12
(insurance)
31c, e
6e
10e(Yammarino
and Dubinsky
1990)6 Technical knowledge
5 Providing information
6 Sales presentations
1 Ability to reach quota 
1 Company knowledge
1 Customer knowledge
1 Product knowledge
1 Competitor knowledge
1 Departmental relations
1 Workload
1 Product knowledge
1 Resourcefulness
5 Satisfaction with
performance
22 Competence
8 Satisfaction with
performance
1 Ability
1 Product knowledge
1 Performance potential7 Quantity and
quality sales
objectives
1 Sales volume
1 Percent
increase in
salary
1 Price
variances
1 Quantity of
salesTABLE 2
Continued
Satisfaction Performance Human Open Rational Internal
Authors Items a Items a Relations Systems Goal ProcessCompeting Values Framework: Conceptual Domain of the Performance Items
Role Stress in Horizontal Alliances / 69Singh (1993)
Singh, Goolsby, and Rhoads (1994)Singh, Verbeke, and Rhoads (1996)Hartline and Ferrell (1996)
Singh (1998)
Singh (2000)1 Customer
relations
1 Customer
relations
1 Customer
relations
1 Customer
relations
3 Trust, 5
promptness, 5
reliability, 4
attention1 Time
management
1 Time
management
1 Time
management
1 Time
management
3 Backroom work26 (Churchill, Ford,
and Walker 1974) b
26 (Churchill, Ford,
and Walker 1974) b
6 (Ironson et al. 1989)
8 (Brown and
Peterson 1993)
26 (Churchill, Ford,
and Walker 1974) b6 (Dubinsky and
Mattson 1979)
6 (Dubinsky and
Mattson 1979)
6 (Dubinsky and
Mattson 1979)
8 (Jones 1986)
6 (Dubinsky and
Mattson 1979)
17 (Hartline and
Ferrell 1993); f7
developed1 Ability
1 Product knowledge
1 Performance potential
1 Ability
1 Product knowledge
1 Performance potential
1 Ability
1 Product knowledge
1 Performance potential
8 Self-efficacy
1 Ability
1 Product knowledge
1 Performance potential1 Quantity of
sales
1 Quantity of
sales
1 Quantity of
sales
1 Quantity of
sales
4 Contact
outputsTABLE 2
Continued
Satisfaction Performance Human Open Rational Internal
Authors Items a Items a Relations Systems Goal ProcessCompeting Values Framework: Conceptual Domain of the Performance Items
aNames in parentheses correspond to the sources of the measures.
bChurchill, Ford, and Walker’s (1974) INDSALES assesses satisfaction with the job, fellow workers, supervision, company, pay, pr omotion potential, and customers.
cAsingle-item, global measure of performance was incorporated into this study.
dIn this study, the effectiveness measure addressed the congruence between the sales representatives’ increase in salary and the other performance factors.
eAll items are not reported.
fHartline and Ferrell’s (1996) measures address quality; the new measures address productivity.
Hierarchy-based effectiveness and role stress . Interfirm
relationships with a hierarchical orientation parallel market-based organizations in their emphasis on control, yet theirinternal focus is consistent with clan-based organizations.The simultaneous attention to stability and internal opera-tions is reflected in values that center on efficiency andsmooth-flowing production. Berkowitz’s (1980) analysis ofindustrial sales territories is one of the few studies that linksrole clarity to sales-to-expense ratios. Our investigation ofefficiency-based factors examines the degree to which nego-tiation between firms reflects coordinated bargaining
efforts , which address the extent to which negotiation
between the transacting parties is systematic and effective(Milgrom and Roberts 1991). For example, retailers negoti-ate with suppliers over order quantities, deliveries, training,and staffing.
Ambiguity and conflict are likely to inhibit efforts to
coordinate bargaining sessions. When role obligations arepoorly understood or underspecified, trading partners areinclined to use bargaining sessions as vehicles for clarifyingresponsibilities. In addition, managers experiencing highlevels of ambiguity are unlikely to focus on relevant factorsduring negotiation periods. Conflict should similarly lead tolengthy negotiation sessions, but the motivations for negoti-ating are different. Retail managers who are cognizant ofhigh conflict may view bargaining sessions as opportunitiesto reconcile disputes, and recognition of points of contentionmay lead them to stake out negotiation stances that are unac-ceptable to their trading partners. Conflict may also leadtrading partners to avoid interaction and interact less openlywhen bargaining commences (see Michaels, Day, andJoachimsthaler 1987). Consequently, ambiguity and conflictrequire the dedication of additional resources to the bargain-ing process.
H7a: The manager’s role ambiguity is negatively associated
with coordinated bargaining efforts.
H8a: The manager’s role conflict is negatively associated with
coordinated bargaining efforts.
Alternative Perspectives on Role Stress and
Organizational Outcomes
General adaptation syndrome (G-A-S) . Many studies
have examined relationships between role stress and effec-tiveness, yet the results do not unequivocally support thehypotheses. For example, analyses in retail (e.g., Kelly,Gable, and Hise 1981) and other contexts (Singh, Verbeke,and Rhoades 1996) fail to support the negative influences ofstress on performance. Research in biology and psychologysuggests that responses to stress may not be linear. Yerkesand Dodson’s (1908) laboratory experiments illustrate anonlinear relationship among habit formation, performance,and stressors. Their research indicates that intermediate lev-els of stimuli outperform weak or strong stimuli when tasksare challenging. Thus, stress is viewed as having a parabolicrelationship with performance. Activation theory (Scott1966) similarly maintains that low levels of stress constrainperformance because of minimal stimulation. High levels ofstress yield similar performance because of overstimulation
70 / Journal of Marketing, April 2002and disorganization of responses. Intermediate levels of
stressors, however, provide appropriate stimulation to yielddesirable outcomes.
Marketing researchers (e.g., Singh 1998) have incorpo-
rated logic from habit formation and activation theory, buttheir results do not corroborate these perspectives. Selye(1950) offers a contrasting perspective in his presentation ofthe G-A-S as a three-phase model of reactions to stressors(see Figure 1). The alarm phase (A to B) is characterized byincreasingly lower levels of performance. For example, bio-logical research characterizes body weight loss as a symp-tom of this phase. During the reactance stage (B to D), per-formance factors increase and resistance to stress increases.Selye (1974) uses the term “eustress” to describe positiveconsequences of stress. Eustress is accompanied by copingbehaviors that enable people to overcome stress and accom-plish tasks that are considered worthwhile. Beyond somethreshold, however, the exhaustion phase (D to E) isobserved, in which reactions are similar to those in the ini-tial phase.
The G-A-S perspective was developed from laboratory
observations of within-subject responses to increasing levelsof stimuli. The experimental results do not evince constantthresholds of responses to stress but reflect consistent pat-terns of results across subjects (Selye 1974). The thresholds(B and E) vary across subjects, but the triphasic responsepattern should be consistent.
The periodicity outlined in G-A-S augments the hypothe-
ses examined in prior research. The linear effects offered inmany studies are embedded into the initial and final phases ofthe function (arcs A to B and D to E, respectively, in Figure 1).The function also incorporates logic fromYerkes and Dodson’s(1908) research on habit formation to account for nonlinearinfluences of stress. This relationship is incorporated into theG-A-S function by the arcs from points C to E in Figure 1.
Our investigation of G-A-S effects examines the discrete
influence of stress on four performance factors that are
FIGURE 1
General Adaptation Syndrome Effects of Stress
on Performance
BReactance
PhaseExhaustion
PhaseAD
E C
Alarm
PhasePerformance
Role Ambiguity and Conflict
Role Stress in Horizontal Alliances / 71drawn from the competing values framework (Cameron and
Quinn 1999). Interorganizational systems that value flexibil-ity maintain that people should be granted the opportunity toimplement their own styles to achieve objectives. This per-spective emphasizes an internal orientation and personalflexibility and is embodied in an organization’s efforts tonurture competence. Low levels of ambiguity and conflictprovide limited opportunity to hone capabilities and yieldlower levels of competency. At high levels, stress factors areoverwhelming and similarly constrain competence. In con-
trast, intermediate levels of ambiguity and conflict posechallenges to boundary spanners, and accomplishmentsachieved in this context heighten competence.
H1b: The manager’s role ambiguity has a nonlinear, triphasic
relationship with managerial competency.
H2b: The manager’s role conflict has a nonlinear, triphasic
relationship with managerial competency.
Values related to the open systems framework under-
score a firm’s simultaneous emphasis on external position-ing, flexibility, and individuality. When ambiguity and con-flict are present in trivial amounts, managers have littleincentive or opportunity to implement strategies thatenhance customer satisfaction. As ambiguity and conflictincrease, coping skills are developed that enable managersto initiate action that raises satisfaction. Nevertheless, thepositive influence of stress operates within a limited spec-trum. Excessive levels of ambiguity preclude managers fromidentifying action that is relevant to customer satisfaction.Extreme conflict requires the dedication of resources toevaluate and reconcile interrole disagreements. As the
resources dedicated to reconciliation of responsibilitiesmount, less effort is channeled toward customer satisfaction.
H3b: The manager’s role ambiguity has a nonlinear, triphasic
relationship with managerial efforts to enhance customersatisfaction.
H
4b: The manager’s role conflict has a nonlinear, triphasic
relationship with managerial efforts to enhance customersatisfaction.
The triphasic influence of stress outlined in the G-A-S
should also be germane to contributions to sales. The rationalgoal model emphasizes the pursuit of productivity through astrong emphasis on external positioning and control. At lowlevels of ambiguity and conflict, retailers are not motivated toengage in activity to raise revenues. As clarity begins to waneand conflicts intensify, the retailer is likely to feel challengedand dedicates more energy to enhancing sales. At extremelevels, however, unclear expectations and inconsistencies inrequirements preclude the manager from recognizing andengaging in efforts that enhance contributions to sales.
H5b: The manager’s role ambiguity has a nonlinear, triphasic
relationship with managerial contributions to sales.
H6b: The manager’s role conflict has a nonlinear, triphasic
relationship with managerial contributions to sales.
The G-A-S effects should also be germane to bargaining
efforts. Initial observations of unclear guidelines and con-flicting expectations warrant consideration in bargainingsessions. As ambiguity and conflict increase, managersdevelop skills that enable them to function efficiently ininteractions with brand management. At excessive levels,uncertainty and competing expectations void any gains asso-ciated with coping skills. Trading sessions become opportu-nities to clarify obligations and prioritize conflictingdemands, and bargaining sessions are prolonged.
H7b: The manager’s role ambiguity has a nonlinear, triphasic
relationship with coordinated bargaining efforts.
H8b: The manager’s role conflict has a nonlinear, triphasic
relationship with coordinated bargaining efforts.
Interaction effects . Fried and colleagues (1998) offer a
perspective on the influences of stress that stands in contrastto those outlined in the G-A-S. According to their approach,each facet of stress reduces a person’s capacity to control thework setting. As multiple dimensions of stress materialize,
the person’s ability to maintain control over the work settingdiminishes. Although people can control single componentsof stress, the simultaneous presence of ambiguity and con-flict inhibits the ability to exercise control, which results inlower performance.
We propose that these interactive influences of ambigu-
ity and conflict are relevant to organizational values thatemphasize stability and control. Therefore, the pursuit ofmarket-based objectives such as contributions to salesshould be impaired by the simultaneous presence of ambi-guity and conflict. When responsibilities are poorly defined,consistent role obligations emanating from multiple partnersenable local retailers to attain acceptable sales levels. In con-trast, when retailers are confronted with inconsistentdemands from multiple trading partners, clearly delineatedresponsibilities enable retail managers to garner high contri-butions to sales. The recognition that roles are poorly speci-
fied and multiple partners are placing inconsistent demands,
however, leads retail managers to generate lower contribu-tions to sales.
The interactive influences of role stressors should also
affect bargaining efforts. Ambiguities in obligations may notlead to higher bargaining expenditures when role expecta-tions are compatible, yet well-defined roles may identifyrelevant bargaining issues despite substantial conflict. Highconflict exacerbates role demands, and low clarity compli-cates efforts to prioritize expectations. Thus, effort is focusedon addressing multiple demands throughout negotiations.
H5c: The manager’s role ambiguity and conflict have an inter-
active influence on contributions to sales. Managerialcontributions to sales decrease as role ambiguity and con-flict increase simultaneously.
H
7c:The manager’s role ambiguity and conflict have an inter-
active influence on coordinated bargaining efforts. Thedegree to which bargaining efforts are coordinated declinesas role ambiguity and conflict increase simultaneously.
Antecedents to Role Stress
Our model addresses economic factors and communication
processes that influence the level of stress operating inalliances. Consider first how economic factors influencerole stress.
Economic antecedents to role stress . Transaction cost
analysis is a theory that underscores the importance of the
72 / Journal of Marketing, April 2002nature of investments made in a relationship (Williamson
1985). To varying degrees, assets dedicated to a relationshiphave limited value in other settings. For example, operatingprocedures for an online cash register system have limitedvalue in other retail networks. Transaction cost theory refers
to these investments as transaction-specific assets . Specific
assets take on importance because managers must ensurethat these investments are employed productively.
A manager’s commitment to a retail distribution system
involves several forms of capital that have limited value out-side of the network. For example, hoteliers become wellacquainted with the chain’s reservation and operating sys-tems (Shook and Shook 1993), and the nuances of the sys-tem cannot be redeployed in other hotel systems. Invest-ments in learning the operating system of a retail networkare investments in the role outlined by the role sender. Hor-izontal alliances complicate specific assets because man-agers enter the new contract with a history of dedicatedinvestments. Managers carry over expectations based ontheir knowledge of the operating system developed for theold branded concept. These investments augment the expec-tations on the local managers and should raise conflict. Sim-ilarly, obligations endemic to the old system should escalateambiguity for retailers. Investments in understanding theprior operating system complicate the managerial task to theextent that current policies are inconsistent with prior oblig-
ations. Managers more familiar with the old system shouldexperience less clarity about expectations in the dual-
branded system.
H9: Transaction-specific investments in the former operating
systems are positively associated with managerial roleambiguity.
H
10: Transaction-specific investments in the former operating
systems are positively associated with managerial roleconflict.
Investments in the current operating system also have
implications for role stress. Agency contracts such as fran-chises are designed to bring the best possible outcome forthe principal by aligning the incentives of both parties to thecontract (Bergen, Dutta, and Walker 1992). As the agentsdedicate more effort to learning the system, they are likelyto recognize facets of the system that favor the principal. Asa result of this process, they experience higher levels of con-flict in their relationships with network management. Theirinvestment should have a contrasting effect on ambiguity.Efforts to learn the operating system should clarify the prin-cipal’s expectations.
H11: Transaction-specific investments in the current operating
systems are negatively associated with managerial roleambiguity.
H
12: Transaction-specific investments in the current operating
systems are positively associated with managerial roleconflict.
Communication-based antecedents to role stress . The
mode of communication should have a strong influence onretail managers’ stress. The medium used to transmit infor-mation has been operationalized in a variety of ways,including personal/impersonal and formal/informal means.Huber and Daft (1987) present a hierarchy of communica-tion modes that ranges from face-to-face contact to less per-sonal communiqués such as form letters. As the vehiclebecomes more personal and multidimensional, greateropportunity is presented to interpret and transmit informa-tion. For example, face-to-face communication provides theopportunity to send verbal and nonverbal messages, yetform letters are more sterile means of communication.Employees prefer personal communication because it pro-vides opportunities for dialogue that is more difficult toachieve in other modes (Larkin and Larkin 1996). Personalcommunication underscores the social link between the val-ues of the employee and the firm, and conflict emerges whenthis link breaks down (Strebel 1996). Dialogue enablesemployees to express contingencies associated with multi-ple role obligations, and resolutions can be designed thatmeet each party’s needs without raising conflict. Hallowell(1999) uses similar logic in his description of the humanmoment in interpersonal communication. The humanmoment involves occupying the same physical space anddedicating physical and emotional attention to interaction.Electronic media offer efficiencies in transmissions of ster-ile information, but personal cues cannot be transmitted aseffectively in modes such as fax or e-mail. Body language,intonation, and emotion are constrained in less personalcommunication. Group gatherings and written correspon-dences are less capable of transmitting the meaning embod-ied in nonverbal communication. The meaning underlyingwords is muddled as the communication becomes less per-
sonal and ambiguity becomes more pronounced.
H13: Personal modes of communications are negatively associ-
ated with managerial role ambiguity, yet group andimpersonal modes are neither positively nor negativelyassociated with role ambiguity.
H
14: Personal modes of communications are negatively associ-
ated with managerial role conflict, yet group and imper-sonal modes are neither positively nor negatively associ-ated with role conflict.
Method
Empirical Context
The Norwegian distribution system of two oil refiners
served as the setting for our study. The refiners recentlyelected to merge their operations at the retail level. The sta-tions adopted dual-branded trademarks and signs, and theirshops were redesigned to reflect uniformity in the productsetting and offerings. The retail setting provided a consistentimage for consumers, yet the retail operating system broughttogether two corporate systems. The Norwegian state-owned company became a retailer in 1986 through the pur-
chase of the retail network of a global refiner. Before themerger, this company had limited access to oil retailing. Theglobal partner began Norwegian operations in 1930 andestablished a highly bureaucratic system with extensivereporting lines.
An internal proprietary study suggested that stress
increased after the merger. The proprietary study, collectedat the same time as the focal survey, revealed that managersbelieved that role responsibilities within the system wereunclear and managerial decision making was performed on
Role Stress in Horizontal Alliances / 731After the data-collection period, the refiners implemented two
systems to alleviate stress associated with the transition to the dualbrand. The refiners established a program designed to guaranteeconsistency in role expectations and reporting responsibilitiesthroughout the system, and they developed a comprehensive onlineoperating system intended to clarify managerial role expectations.a day-to-day basis. Similarly, area supervisors indicated that
they lacked the responsibility to perform their jobs properly.Managers reported that information related to new programswas insufficient, and no area supervisor could describe the
strategy for the market or for the dual-branded concept.Unclear internal responsibilities, ad hoc decision making,and limited empowerment of supervisors fueled conflict inthe system, and insufficient information in the system exac-erbated role ambiguity.
1
The method for analysis was a between-subjects design,
and data were collected with retailers and the refiners’ areamanagers. Much of the theory pertaining to responses tostress has been developed in laboratory settings that employwithin-subjects designs. The laboratory setting provides anopportunity to decrease the variance in response to stress(Carroll and Nelson 1993), but a controlled within-subjectsdesign is rarely feasible in applied settings. The effects areweaker in a between-subjects design, yet their observationsuggests that the effects are appreciable (Grice and Hunter1964).
Sampling Procedure and Data Collection
The data were collected through surveys sent to each retail
manager in the network. Respondents were informed bytelephone that they were about to receive the survey. Thesurvey was accompanied by supporting letters from theretail union, the refiners, and the principal researcher. Theresponse rate was 55.9% (218 of 390 responses). Among theresponding firms, 89 had been associated with the state-owned network, and 129 had been associated with the global
refiner. The mean level of managerial experience was 16.4years, and all managers had at least one year of experiencebefore the merger. Analysis of several variables (e.g., annualsales) and the focal constructs indicated no significant dif-ferences between early and late responses (Armstrong andOverton 1977). This analysis suggests that nonresponse biasis not an issue, but a stronger test would have been to con-tact nonrespondents.
Measure Development
Measure development followed the guidelines outlined by
Gerbing and Anderson (1988). The survey instrument wasdeveloped with retail management. The director of the retailnetwork, the director of the retail managers’ union, and anindustry consultant provided insight into the proper wordingof the measures. In addition, pretests with four managersoffered us an opportunity to make semantic changes in vari-ables and make the study more meaningful to therespondents.
Although additional respondents enable researchers to
control for informant bias (Kumar, Stern, and Anderson1993), the pilot study indicated that additional respondentswere not available at the retail level. Nevertheless, weemployed a matching dyad approach using data gatheredwith the refiners’ area supervisors. Given that supervisorsoversee four to ten retail outlets, it was infeasible to obtain
reports for each outlet. We obtained 71 reports, whichreflected a 95% response rate from supervisors. The man-ager and supervisory surveys used parallel wording. Weemployed coefficient alpha, item-to-total correlation, andexploratory factor analysis to purify the measures. We elim-
inated items that did not load properly in either factor ana-lytic procedure. Eigenvalues and scree tests illustrated thatone factor was sufficient to represent the items within eachconceptual domain.
Measures
Transaction-specific assets . The dealer’s investments in
the current and prior operating systems were analyzed byseparate sets of measures drawn from Anderson’s (1985)company-specific asset scale. Four seven-point Likert-typeitems assessed the investment dedicated to learning the retailoperating system.
Communication modality . We assessed this construct
using formative measures of the frequency of usage of com-munication channels (Mohr, Fisher, and Nevin 1996). Man-agers interact with the refiner through face-to-face contact,telephone, letters, Internet, union meetings, seminars, andlocal retailer meetings. The refiner uses these modes but alsocommunicates through advertisements, sales literature, andnewsletters. We grouped the measures into three categories:personal (face-to-face messages and telephone calls), group(union meetings, local managers’ meetings, and seminars),and impersonal interactions (letters and Internet contacts,refiner promotions, sales, and newsletters).
Role stress . The role stress scales were based on the
seven-point measures developed by Rizzo, House, andLirtzmann (1970). The conflict and ambiguity measuresconsisted of six and seven items, respectively.
Competence . This construct was analyzed by two seven-
point items that addressed the knowledge and skills acquiredby the local retail personnel. The scale was adapted fromKumar, Stern, and Achrol (1992).
Customer satisfaction . The satisfaction scale was based
on Kumar, Stern, and Achrol’s (1992) customer satisfactionscale. Three seven-point Likert items assessed efforts toachieve customer satisfaction.
Contributions to sales . This construct was assessed
through three seven-point Likert items derived from Kumar,Stern, and Achrol (1992). The items addressed sales’ contri-butions compared with competitors’ and other retailers’
sales.
Coordinated bargaining efforts . This construct exam-
ined the extent to which negotiation sessions were system-atic and effective. Two seven-point items drawn fromNygaard (1992) were employed.
Construct Validity
We employed Anderson and Gerbing’s (1988) two-phase
approach to assess the model. We assessed the first phase,confirmatory factor analysis of the reflective measures,
74 / Journal of Marketing, April 20022We also assessed the proposed model using ordinary least
squares regression. We extracted the trigonometric and multiplica-tive terms from equations that regressed them against their relevantlinear constructs (see Singh 1998). This procedure eliminates prob-lematic multicollinearity among the antecedent variables. Althoughthe resulting models are biased because of measurement errors, thepattern of results is similar to that resulting from the structuralequation models.using EQS. Initial analysis ( χ2(406) = 635.546, p< .05;
comparative fit index [CFI] = .921) indicated that elimina-tion of some items would enhance the fit indices. Neverthe-less, pursuit of optimal fit can limit the conceptual domain.Standardized residuals and Lagrange multipliers indicatedsignificant cross-loadings for one conflict item. Removal ofthe item (see the Appendix) offered a stronger representationof the data ( χ
2(377) = 589.979, p< .05; CFI = .926). We
assessed discriminant validity by comparing this model withothers in which the correlation between two constructs wasset to one. In each case, the chi-square difference testevinced discrimination. For example, the discriminant test
for conflict and current assets was significant ( χ
2(1) =
14.504, p< .05). Table 3 provides correlations and descrip-
tive statistics for the constructs.
Tests of Hypotheses
The second phase of Anderson and Gerbing’s (1988) frame-
work employs structural equation modeling to assess the
proposed relationships. 2We developed two series of models.
The first series assessed the received view, interactive, andparabolic influences of stress. As a means for assessinginteraction effects, we incorporated Ping’s (1995) estimationtechnique. Because multiplicative terms raise the possibilityof multicollinearity and Type II errors, we mean-centeredand standardized the individual measures before developingthe nonlinear terms. The initial model examined the linearinfluences of stress on effectiveness. We employedLagrange multipliers to assess whether interactive and para-bolic influences enhanced the received view model (Bentler1993). Structural analysis of the linear model indicatedsome correspondence between the model and data(χ
2(529) = 610.049, p< .05; CFI = .976), yet chi-square dif-
ference analyses warranted the deletion of paths from thereceived view model. In addition, sequential chi-square dif-ference tests suggested a group-based communication deter-minant of cooperative bargaining efforts ( χ
2(1) = 5.222, p<
.05), a parabolic influence of ambiguity on competence(χ
2(1) = 5.735, p< .05), and interaction effects for contribu-
tions to sales ( χ2(1) = 5.763, p< .05). The resulting analysis
offers a more parsimonious model ( χ2(537) = 605.534, p<
.05; CFI = .980).
The second series investigated the G-A-S effects as a
competing model to the received view. The G-A-S effectswere modeled as sine functions of the ambiguity and con-flict variables. This model offers some correspondence tothe data ( χ
2(496) = 607.337, p< .05; CFI = .967), yet chi-
square difference tests warrant the deletion of several pro-posed paths. The Lagrange procedure indicates a relation-ship between group-based communication and bargainingefforts ( χ
2(1) = 6.686, p< .05). In addition, personal inter-
action has a direct influence on contributions to sales(χ
2(1) = 7.911, p< .05). The resulting model offers a more
efficient representation of the relationships among the con-structs ( χ
2(502) = 607.785, p< .05; CFI = .970). The Fried-
man comparison test (Rigdon 1999) suggests that this modelprovides superior fit to the trimmed multiplicative model(χ
2(1) = 7.52, p< .05), yet the pattern of results warrants
examination of both models (see Table 4).
The influence of role stress on retailer competence is the
focus of H 1a, H1b, H2a, and H 2b. Ambiguity has the antici-
pated negative, linear effect ( β= –.373, t = –3.21), and the
parabolic effect ( β= .228, t = 2.76) is significant. The graph
outlined in Figure 2, Panel A, suggests that these results donot reflect the inverted-U effects outlined in habit formationand activation theory, but they are consistent with the alarmand reactance phases of the G-A-S. The sine function, how-ever, is not significant ( β= .155, t = 1.82). The linear ( β=
.077, t = .47) effects of conflict are nonsignificant. Althoughthe trigonometric ( β= –.154, t = –1.80) effects of conflict
are marginally significant, they are contrary to the hypothe-
TABLE 3
Correlation Matrix and Descriptive Statistics
Correlations a
Mean s 1234567 8 9 1 0 1 1
1. Current specific assets 5.19 1.02 .65 b
2. Prior specific assets 3.88 2.46 .042 .95
3. Personal mode 3.14 1.46 .121 .038 — c
4. Group mode 2.99 1.35 .085 .056 .348 — c
5. Written mode 3.45 1.22 .045 –.043 .188 .408 — c
6. Role ambiguity 2.96 1.06 –.030 .263 –.224 –.125 –.132 .817. Role conflict 4.07 1.43 .424 .025 .000 –.047 .012 .280 .848. Competence 4.92 1.23 .042 –.082 .127 –.015 .126 –.299 .075 .699. Customer satisfaction 6.43 .86 .113 .002 .115 .054 .144 –.260 –.027 .234 .88
10. Contributions to sales 4.67 1.24 .071 –.012 .229 –.025 .047 –.230 .000 .260 .092 .8111. Bargaining efforts 3.82 1.49 –.110 –.007 .106 .198 .152 –.401 –.316 .079 .149 .062 .75
aCorrelations with absolute values greater than .13 are significant at p< .05.
bInternal consistency measures are on the diagonal.
cFormative scale.
Role Stress in Horizontal Alliances / 75TABLE 4
Structural Equation Models of Antecedents and Consequences of Role Stress
Initial Received View Model Trimmed Received View Model
Role Customer Contri- Bargain- Role Customer Contri- Bargain-
Ambi- Role Compe- Satis- butions ing Ambi- Role Compe- Satis- butions ing 
guity Conflict tence Faction to Sales Efforts guity Conflict tence faction to Sales Efforts
Prior specific .349 .000 .336
assets (3.613) (.002) (3.675)
Current specific .079 .606 .575
assets (.886) (3.568) (3.563)
Personal –.277 –.086 –.247
mode (–3.175) (–1.230) (–3.065)
Group .192
mode (2.465)
Role –.406 –.201 –.297 –.164 –.373 –.292
ambiguity (–3.055) (–1.164) (–2.704) (–.898) (–3.206) (–2.939)
Role .077 .082 –.010 –.327 –.311
conflict (.473) (.862) (.065) (–2.108) (1.989)
(Role .228
ambiguity) 2 (2.759)
Ambiguity × .186
conflict (2.486)
Summary 
Statistics χ2(529) = 610.049 CFI = .976 p< .01 RMSR = .051 χ2(537) = 605.534 CFI = .980 p< .01 RMSR = .053
Initial Trigonometric Model Trimmed Trigonometric Model
Role Customer Contri- Bargain- Role Customer Contri- Bargain-
Ambi- Role Compe- Satis- butions ing Ambi- Role Compe- Satis- butions ing 
guity Conflict tence Faction to Sales Efforts guity Conflict tence faction to Sales Efforts
Prior specific .341 .001 .341
assets (3.734) (.011) (3.798)
Current specific .020 .564 .547
assets (.255) (3.333) (3.329)
Personal –.212 –.060 –.217 .202
mode (–2.768) (–0.872) (–2.852) (2.793)
Group .205
mode (2.607)
Sine (role .155 .200 .126 .073 .157 .165
ambiguity) (1.815) (2.550) (1.945) (.944) (1.958) (2.194)
Sine (role –.174 –.050 .057 .043 –.154
conflict) (–2.023) (–.656) (.914) (.566) (–1.795)
Summary 
Statistics χ2(496) = 607.337 CFI = .967 p< .01 RMSR = .058 χ2(502) = 607.785 CFI = .970 p< .01 RMSR = .056
76 / Journal of Marketing, April 2002FIGURE 2
Effects of Stress on Multiple Facets of
Effectiveness
A: Nonlinear Effects of Ambiguity on Effectiveness
5.00 4.00 3.00 2.00 1.007.0
6.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
Role Ambiguity              Competence
        Contributions to Sales          Customer Satisfaction
High Low5.2
5.04.8
4.6
4.44.2
4.0
Role AmbiguityRole Conflict
  High
  LowB: Interactive Effects of Stress on Contributions to
Sales
ses. At low levels, increases in conflict yield greater compe-
tence, yet this trend subsides rapidly. Together, these resultssupport H
1a, yet they do not support H 1b, H2a, and H 2b.
H3a, H3b, H4a, and H 4b examine the effects of stress on
customer satisfaction. The linear ambiguity parameter ( β=
–.201, t = –1.16) is nonsignificant, yet the trigonometric ( β=
.157, t = 1.96) function supports H 3b. Graphic presentation
of the relationship (Figure 2, Panel A) is suggestive of theinitial and reactance stages of G-A-S, yet the degradationstage is not observed. H
4aand H 4bare not supported, given
the nonsignificant, linear ( β= .082, t = .86) and sinusoidal
(β= –.050, t = –.66) effects.
The linear, trigonometric, and interactive influences of
stress on contributions to sales are addressed in H 5a, H5b,
H5c, H6a, and H 6b. Ambiguity ( β= –.292, t = –2.94) is sig-
nificantly related to the dependent variable, yet the trigono-metric function is also significant ( β= .165, t = 2.49).
Simultaneous evaluation of the linear and sine functions bymeans of constraint analysis (Bentler 1993) indicates(χ
2(1) = .88, p< .35) that the influence of the linear function3The constrained model treating the absolute value of the coeffi-
cients as equivalent provides beta coefficients of –.132 (t = –3.08)and .205 (t = 3.08) for the linear and sine functions, respectively.In the unconstrained model, the beta coefficient for the linear vari-able is –.202 (t = –2.20), and the sine coefficient is .172 (t = 2.30).
4No other parabolic or interactive terms are significant. The
Lagrange multipliers do not implicate the squared ambiguity termas an antecedent to customer satisfaction ( χ
2(1) = 2.600, p< .11),
contributions to sales ( χ2(1) = .595, p< .44), or bargaining efforts
(χ2(1) = .237, p< .63). Similarly, the quadratic conflict term is not
related to competence ( χ2(1) = 2.182, p< .14), customer satisfac-
tion ( χ2(1) = 1.767, p< .18), contributions to sales ( χ2(1) = .617,
p< .43), or bargaining efforts ( χ2(1) = .854, p< .36). The interac-
tion term is unrelated to competence ( χ2(1) = 1.897, p< .17), cus-
tomer satisfaction ( χ2(1) = 1.184, p< .28), and bargaining efforts
(χ2(1) = .000, p< .99).
5The Lagrange multipliers indicate that neither written ( χ2(1) =
1.258, p< .262) nor group-based ( χ2(1) = .174, p< .676) commu-
nication influence role ambiguity. Similarly, the Lagrange multi-pliers do not indicate an influence of written ( χ
2(1) = .000, p< .99)
or group-based ( χ2(1) = 1.091, p< .30) communication on role
conflict.does not exceed that of the sine variable. 3In addition, the
linear ( β= –.010, t = –.06) and trigonometric ( β= .057, t =
.91) effects of conflict are nonsignificant. The interactiveinfluence of ambiguity and conflict on contributions to salesis significant ( β= .186, t = 2.49), yet the effect is contrary to
the hypothesis. To examine these effects, we generatedichotomous levels of ambiguity and conflict on the basis ofa median split. We estimate mean levels of contributions tosales for each pair of dichotomous values. The results (seeFigure 2, Panel B) indicate that ambiguity has a negativeinfluence on contributions to sales, yet role conflict moder-ates the effect. When conflict is low, increases in ambiguitylower contributions to sales (t
104= 3.88, p< .05). When con-
flict is high, increases in ambiguity do not significantlylower contributions to sales (t
110= 1.58, p> .05). Together,
these results support H 5aand H 5bbut fail to support H 5c,
H6a, and H 6b.
The influences of stress on bargaining efforts are the
focus of H 7a, H7b, H7c, H8a, and H 8b. In contrast to H 7a, H7b,
and H 7c, ambiguity is not a significant, linear ( β= –.164, t =
–.90) or trigonometric ( β= .073, t = .94) antecedent to bar-
gaining efforts, and the interaction with conflict ( χ2(1) = .85,
p< .36) does not influence bargaining efforts. H 8bis rejected
because of the nonsignificant, trigonometric effect ( β=
.043, t = .57), but the linear effect of conflict outlined in H 8a
(β= –.311, t = –1.99) is supported. 4
H9–H12examine whether transaction-specific assets
influence role stress. Although previous investments in theoperating system do not influence conflict ( γ= .000; t = .00,
p> .05), they have a significant influence on ambiguity ( γ=
.336; t = 3.68, p< .05). Currently dedicated assets are asso-
ciated with conflict ( γ= .575; t = 3.56, p< .05), yet they do
not influence ambiguity ( γ= .079; t = .89, p> .05). These
results support H
9and H 12, but they offer no support for H 10
and H 11.
Facets of communication are the focus of H 13and H 14.
Personal interaction lowers ambiguity ( γ= –.247; t = –3.07,
p< .05), yet it does not influence conflict ( γ= –.086; t =
–1.23 p> .05). The results lend partial support to H 13, but
not H 14.5
Role Stress in Horizontal Alliances / 77Discussion
Our goal has been to examine role stress in horizontal
alliances. The results support the received view prediction ofa linear, negative influence of conflict on efforts to stream-line bargaining and of ambiguity on competence and contri-butions to sales. In addition, nonlinear effects that reflect the
alarm and reactance phase of G-A-S are observed in thetreatment of ambiguity as a determinant of competence, cus-tomer satisfaction, and contributions to sales. The data alsosuggest that conflict moderates the influence of ambiguityon contributions to sales. Role ambiguity is positivelyassociated with dedication to the old operating system, but itis quelled through personal communication. In contrast,conflict is positively associated with current specificinvestments.
Theoretical Implications
Our analysis of stress in horizontal alliances has incorpo-
rated three underlying goals. The first goal has been toexamine influences of ambiguity and conflict on facets of
effectiveness drawn from the competing values frame-work (Cameron and Quinn 1999). Human resource devel-
opment values, such as competence, focus on flexibilityand an internal focus, yet market-based values such ascontributions to sales favor control along with an externalorientation. Retailer efforts to enhance customer satisfac-tion and other open-system values emphasize autonomyand an external orientation, whereas coordinated bargain-ing efforts and related factors emphasize an internal,control-based approach to performance. Our treatment ofthese facets of effectiveness underscores the need to iden-tify the dimensions of effectiveness that are focal to theresearch. Discrete organizational outcomes not only maybe uncorrelated but also may have different antecedents.Theory and practice benefit through explicit identificationof the forms of effectiveness addressed in the research.The competing values approach provides a rich theoreti-cal foundation for the analysis of multiple channeloutcomes.
Our second objective has been to examine alternative
theoretical perspectives on the influences of role stress onorganizational outcomes. We offered rationales that areassociated with the received view (House and Rizzo1972), G-A-S (Selye 1950), and the interaction approach(Fried et al. 1998). Although no support is provided to theinteraction approach, our research suggests that the formof effectiveness mitigates the merits of the otherapproaches. The negative effects associated with thereceived view are observed in the relationship betweenconflict and bargaining efforts. The received view effectsof ambiguity also garner some support, but these effectsare augmented by other factors. When the system placesvalue on personal autonomy or an external orientation,
there is evidence that managers develop skills that yieldcompetence, customer satisfaction, and contributions tosales despite rising levels of ambiguity. These results sug-gest that the effects outlined by G-A-S (Selye 1950) aregermane when organizational values emphasize personalflexibility or an external focus. These results are tentative,yet they point to the need to consider multiple theorieswhen examining the influences of ambiguity oneffectiveness.
The third objective of our research has been to identify
organizational and communicative processes that influencealliances. Dedicated assets have been implicated as determi-nants of organizational structure, but the deleterious conse-quences of specific assets have not been considered. Ourresearch indicates that investments in the previous retailoperating system raise ambiguity that influences compe-tence, customer satisfaction, and contributions to sales. Cur-rent investments in the operating system increase conflictand subsequently constrain bargaining sessions. Theseresults reinforce the need to consider multiple consequencesof specific assets. Investments not only have implications forcontrol structures but also influence working relationships.
Our study also has implications for theory addressing
the mode of communication employed to distribute infor-mation. Mohr, Fisher, and Nevin (1996) emphasize theinfluence that communication style has on commitment, sat-isfaction, and coordination, yet scant research has examinedthe influence of communication media on other facets ofinterfirm process and performance. Our research suggeststhat personal modes of communication reduce ambiguityand thus indirectly influence effectiveness. In addition,group-based communication raises the efficiencies of inter-firm bargaining. These results are consistent with research
that underscores the merits of personal communication(Hallowell 1999). Personal media facilitate dialogue thatenables parties to resolve ambiguities, and they facilitategestalt evaluations of verbal and nonverbal aspects of inter-action. The overriding implication of these results is theneed to consider the mode of communication. As electronicmedia evolve and become more personal, research shouldexamine their influence on multiple facets of effectiveness.
Implications for Organizational Design
Although the context, pattern of results, and method limit
the extent to which generalizations can be drawn from ourresearch, some tentative recommendations should beacknowledged. First, our work underscores the need to con-sider the underlying values associated with effectiveness.Prior studies indicate that the influences of stress vary withthe form of effectiveness, yet prior research does not offer aframework for categorization and analysis of alternativeforms of effectiveness. The competing values frameworkclassifies forms of performance, and our research augmentsthis framework by linking alternative stress theories to theunderlying values pursued by the organization. When orga-nizational values downplay personal autonomy, role conflicthas a deleterious influence on interfirm outcomes. There-fore, organizations grounded in this perspective should seekdecision-making structures that limit the level of stressencountered by trading partners.
Other performance-related values stand in contrast to
the control-based internal orientation of a hierarchy, andour research suggests that these values systems have morecomplex relationships with stressors. Organizational val-ues that emphasize flexibility recognize the merits ofenabling local managers to develop their own approaches
78 / Journal of Marketing, April 2002to problem solving. Similarly, organizational values that
emphasize an external orientation recognize that bound-ary spanners interact with the environment to exact out-comes. To the extent that these outcomes are valuedwithin the organization, local managers should anticipatesome uncertainty. Ambiguities in a role facilitate learningby the role player, and the learning process garners posi-tive outcomes despite increasing levels of stress (Selye1974).
A second implication of our work is the need to under-
stand that action taken to achieve one objective may havecountervailing influences on other factors. For example,training programs designed to make local managers moreknowledgeable about the operating system may result inmore prolonged bargaining sessions. The competing valuesframework emphasizes contradictory outcomes realizedbecause of managerial action, yet few research studies haveaddressed this contingency. Our work reinforces the needfor local and area managers to recognize multiple influencesof stress.
The results provide insight into mechanisms that can be
used to control the level of ambiguity and conflict, notablythrough transaction-specific investments and personalmodes of communication. Our preliminary results suggestthat facets of the investment in the retail system yield higherlevels of role stress. Consequently, upper-level managers ofthese networks should recognize that role issues are mostlikely to emerge among local managers with the mostinvested in the retail system. Retailers contemplating dualbranding should recognize that ambiguity would be greateramong local managers with large personal investments inthe system. Similarly, the investment made upon enteringthe new system will raise the level of role conflict. Upper-level management can confront these issues by placinggreater emphasis on personal interactions with the localmanagers. As the perceived level of personal interactionincreases, ambiguity diminishes. Impersonal communiquésoffer efficiency in the transmission of policies, but they donot quell conflict or ambiguity. Consequently, organizationsthat seek to contain role stress should place greater empha-sis on personal modes of communication.
Limitations and Further Research
The implications drawn from this study must be viewed in
light of the limitations inherent to the research. The outcomevariables were based on measures developed in prior
research. Replication facilitates comparison, yet replicatedmeasures may provide relatively poor statistical properties.Therefore, the results associated with competence and bar-gaining efforts are limited by the constraints of two-itemscales. The role stress measures have been criticized becauseof the counterbalancing of positive and negative role stressmeasures. McGee, Ferguson, and Seers (1989) have devel-oped a procedure for the comparison of the ambiguity andconflict factors with a singular-factor model that incorpo-rates negatively keyed ambiguity items. Their results indi-cate that the factor structure for Rizzo, House, and Lirtz-mann’s (1970) measures of ambiguity and conflict is due tothe wording of the items. Although our replication is not
6Replication of the procedure developed by McGee, Ferguson,
and Seers (1989) failed to illustrate that differences in the scalesare solely due to wording or construct discrepancies. The proce-dure involves the comparison of the oblique ambiguity and conflictfactors model with a singular factor model that incorporates nega-
tively keyed ambiguity items. The chi-square for the oblique modelis greater than that of the second model ( χ
2(76) = 210.468 versus
χ2(71) = 205.780), and the rho statistic for the second model
exceeds that of the oblique model ( ρ= .805 versus ρ= .801). In
contrast, the delta statistic and CFI for the oblique model ( δ= .833,
CFI = .805) are greater than the values generated for the secondmodel ( δ= .821, CFI = .801). The root mean square residual
(RMSR) statistics are identical for the two models (RMSR = .05).fully consistent with their findings, 6their study underscores
the need to address the breadth of the construct by means ofmeasures that are not confounded by wording biases.
Our Norwegian oil retailing milieu can also be aug-
mented through replication of the model in contrastingempirical contexts. Oil retailing may differ from other con-texts on the basis of the resource advantages and near-monopoly power wielded by the refiners. In addition, stateparticipation in the oil industry may limit the ability to gen-eralize our findings to contexts in which government adoptsa more laissez-faire approach to commerce. Moreover, thefindings associated with retail managers may not replicate
with other groups. Retail managers interact with customers,yet they also dedicate time to administrative tasks. Theinfluence of stress on efforts to achieve customer satisfac-tion and contributions to sales may be more pronouncedamong customer service employees than among managers.
This survey-based research uses logic drawn from labo-
ratory research to examine the effects of stress on effective-ness. An important distinction between the methods is themanner in which the influences of stimuli are recorded. Lab-oratory methods chart the within-subjects responses oforganisms to progressively higher levels of stress, yet surveysrecord between-subjects self-reports of multiple levels ofstimuli. Future efforts can augment our research by longitu-dinally tracking responses to stress. Time series provides theopportunity to chart the initial distribution of respondentsalong the G-A-S thresholds. The researcher has the opportu-nity to observe whether the G-A-S or other stress-basedeffects are realized. This design would be particularlyinsightful in the tracking of stress throughout the planningand completion of an alliance. The research can move beyondthe limits of our study and isolate changes in stress incurredthrough the alliance. Furthermore, the research could trackbidirectional changes in the mode of communication and pre-/postmerger specific assets and their influences on stress.
Our research suggests that stress influences organiza-
tional outcomes, but it does not consider factors that miti-gate the influence of stress. Empowerment should be ger-mane to organizational values that emphasize personalflexibility (Quick et al. 1997). Organizations that empowertheir managers grant them a level of autonomy that raisesperceptions of competence. Because empowered managersoperate under a broader set of parameters, they should beequipped to achieve levels of customer satisfaction thatexceed those achieved by highly scrutinized managers. If
empowerment is to yield desired outcomes, it is essential for
Role Stress in Horizontal Alliances / 79managers to be psychologically involved and interested in
the decision-making process (Quick et al. 1997). They mustalso have the ability to express their thoughts about deci-sions and believe that their participation is personally rele-vant to their future. When these conditions hold, empower-
ment should lead to heightened levels of competence andcustomer satisfaction.
Analysis of the dominant organizational culture operat-
ing within the network can also augment our research oncompeting values. Multiple facets of effectiveness are asso-ciated with specific organizational cultures, yet few firmsplace equal emphasis on all facets of effectiveness. Singh,Verbeke, and Rhoads (1996) illustrate that organizational
archetype mitigates the influences of stress. A proceduralarchetype characterized by an emphasis on efficiency cat-alyzes the effects observed in the relationships among ambi-guity, conflict, and bargaining efforts, yet an achievementconfiguration exacerbates the influences of stress on contri-butions to sales. Research that examines organizational cul-
ture and archetype would offer insight into processes bywhich stress influences effectiveness.
In addition to the institutional constraints on stress, the
research can also be augmented by analysis of coping skills.Coping refers to efforts to manage demands that tax a per-son’s resources (Latack and Havlovic 1992). Researchshould consider the extent to which the focus of coping isproblem-centered and the degree to which the method forcoping is cognitive, proactive, and social. When stressorsexceed people’s ability to cope, burnout is manifested as
emotional exhaustion, reduced accomplishment, and deper-sonalization (Singh, Goolsby, and Rhoads 1994). Stressdirectly lowers psychological outcomes, yet the eustresseffects of stress on behavioral outcomes are cancelled out bythe mediating effects of burnout. Research seeking to isolatepositive and negative influences of stress would benefit fromanalysis of coping mechanisms.
In conclusion, the purpose of our research has been to
investigate antecedents and consequences of stress in hori-zontal alliances. Our results suggest that economic condi-tions and communicative mechanisms influence role stress.Furthermore, ambiguity and conflict influence multiplefacets of effectiveness, and the form of influence is miti-
gated by the underlying values pursued by the organization.We hope that these findings are informative to retail man-
agement and interorganizational theory.
APPENDIX
Measurement Models
Initial Trimmed
Scale Items Model a Model a
Investment in Current System
It is vital that a manager builds strong relationships within our company. .322 b .324 b
The refiner’s procedures and policies are complicated. .807 .810It is difficult for a manager to learn all tasks necessary to function effectively in the system. .655 .653Anewcomer to the system must learn our language and culture before being capable to function 
effectively. .356 .352
Investment in Previous System
Before the merger, it was difficult for a new station manager to work effectively. .869
b .869 b
The refiner’s procedures and policies were complicated prior to the merger. .917 .917Before the merger, it was difficult for a manger to learn all tasks necessary to function effectively in 
the system. .951 .951
Prior to the merger, a newcomer to the system had to learn the company’s language and culture 
before being capable to function effectively. .901 .901
Role Ambiguity
I feel certain about how much authority I have. (r) .422
b .422 b
I know what my responsibilities are. (r) .616 .615I have just the right amount of work to do. (r) .422 .420I know that I have divided my time properly. (r) .566 .567I know exactly what is expected of me. (r) .751 .752Explanation of what has to be done is clear. (r) .738 .738I perform work that suits my values. (r) .594 .594
Role Conflict
I receive assignments without the personnel to complete the task. .818
b .822 b
I have to circumvent rules or policies to complete assignments. .635 .644I receive incompatible requests form two or more refiner personnel. .446 .446I often get assignments without adequate resources and materials to execute them. .843 .841I work on unnecessary things for the refiner. .709 .703I have to work under vague directives or orders. .389 —
Competence
We believe that we have acquired the necessary business skills to operate successfully in my 
market. .721
b .724 b
We believe that we have a great deal of knowledge about the features and attributes of the 
refiner’s products. .731 .728
80 / Journal of Marketing, April 2002REFERENCES
Anderson, Erin (1985), “The Salesperson as Outside Agent or
Employee: A Transaction Cost Analysis,” Marketing Science , 4
(3), 234–54.
Anderson, James C. and David W. Gerbing (1988), “Structural
Equation Modeling in Practice: A Review and RecommendedTwo-Step Approach,” Psychological Bulletin , 103 (3), 411–23.
Armstrong, J. Scott and Terry S. Overton (1977), “Estimating Non-
response Bias in Mail Surveys,” Journal of Marketing
Research , 14 (August), 396–402.
Arndt, Johan (1979), “Toward a Concept of Domesticated Mar-
kets,” Journal of Marketing , 43 (Fall), 69–75.
Bagozzi, Richard P. (1978), “Salesforce Performance and Satisfac-
tion as a Function of Individual Difference, Interpersonal, andSituational Factors,” Journal of Marketing Researc h, 15
(November), 517–31.
——— (1980), “The Nature and Causes of Self-Esteem, Perfor-
mance, and Satisfaction in the Sales Force: A Structural Equa-tion Approach,” Journal of Business , 53 (3, Part 1), 315–31.
Behrman, Douglas N., William J. Bigoness, and William D. Per-
reault Jr. (1981), “Sources of Job Related Ambiguity and TheirConsequences upon Salespersons’ Job Satisfaction and Perfor-mance,” Management Science , 27 (11), 1246–60.
——— and William D. Perreault Jr. (1982), “Measuring the Per-
formance of Industrial Salespersons,” Journal of Business
Research , 10 (September), 355–70.
——— and ——— (1984), “A Role Stress Model of the Perfor-
mance and Satisfaction of Industrial Salespersons,” Journal of
Marketing , 48 (Fall), 9–21.
Bentler, Peter M. (1993), EQS: Structural Equations Program
Manual . Los Angeles: BMDP Statistical Software.
Bergen, Mark, Shatanu Dutta, and Orville C. Walker (1992),
“Agency Relationships in Marketing: A Review of the Implica-
tions of Agency and Related Topics,” Journal of Marketing , 56
(July), 1–24.Berkowitz, Eric N. (1980), “Role Theory, Attitudinal Constructs,
and Actual Performance: A Measurement Issue,” Journal of
Applied Psychology , 65 (2), 240–45.
Boroian, Donald D. and Patrick J Boroian (1997), The Franchise
Advantage . Chicago: Griffith Steadman and Associates.
Brayfield, Arthur H. and Harold F. Rothe (1951), “An Index of
Job Satisfaction,” Journal of Applied Psychology ,35(5),
307–11.
Brown, Steven P. and Robert A. Peterson (1993), “Antecedents and
Consequences of Salesperson Job Satisfaction: Meta-Analysisand Assessment of Causal Effects,” Journal of Marketing
Research , 30 (February), 63–77.
Bucklin, Louis P. and Sanjit Sengupta (1993), “Organizing Suc-
cessful Co-marketing Alliances,” Journal of Marketing , 57
(April), 32–46.
Busch, Paul and Ronald F. Bush (1978), “Women Contrasted to
Men in the Industrial Salesforce: Job Satisfaction, Values, RoleClarity, Performance, and Propensity to Leave,” Journal of
Marketing Research , 15 (August), 438–48.
Cameron, Kim S. and Robert E. Quinn (1999), Diagnosing and
Changing Organizational Culture . Reading, MA: Addison
Wesley.
Carroll, Marie and Thomas O. Nelson (1993), “Effect of Over-
learning on the Feeling of Knowing Is More Detectable inWithin-Subject Than Between-Subject Designs,” American
Journal of Psychology , 106 (2), 227–35.
Cartwright, Sue and Cary L. Cooper (1995), “Organizational Mar-
riage: ‘Hard’ Versus ‘Soft’ Issues?” Personnel Review , 24 (3),
32–41.
Chonko, Lawrence B., Roy D. Howell, and Danny N. Bellenger
(1986), “Congruence in Sales Force Evaluations: Relation toSales Force Perceptions of Conflict and Ambiguity,” Journal of
Personal Selling and Sales Management , 6 (1), 35–48.aAll factor loadings have t-values that exceed 2.0.
bThese items are fixed for the purpose of scaling.
Notes: Items marked (r) were reverse scored.Customer Satisfaction
We do everything we can to make our customers happy. .715 b .715 b
We provide quality assistance in the solution of any problem involving the refiner’s products. .902 .901
We provide information that lowers uncertainty about use of the refiner’s products. .705 .705
Contributions to Sales
Relative to other dealers, we have been successful in selling the refiner’s products. .820 b .820 b
Compared to other dealers, we have achieved a higher level of market penetration for the refiner. .946 .946We have contributed more to the refiner’s business in this market than other dealers. .746 .746
Bargaining Efforts
Our meetings with the refiner’s representatives are very effective and systematic. .753
b .751 b
Both parties are always well prepared in the meetings with the refiner so that decisions can 
be made. .804 .805
Summary Statistics
χ2 635.546 589.979
(d.f.) 406 377
p-Value .001 .001
RMSR .050 .047
CFI .921 .926APPENDIX
Measurement Models
Initial Trimmed
Scale Items Model a Model a
Role Stress in Horizontal Alliances / 81Churchill, Gilbert A., Jr., Neil M. Ford, and Orville C. Walker Jr.
(1974), “Measuring the Job Satisfaction of Industrial Sales-men,” Journal of Marketing Research , 11 (August), 254–60.
———, ———, and ——— (1976) “Organizational Climate and
Job Satisfaction in the Salesforce,” Journal of Marketing
Research , 13 (November), 323–32.
Cohen, Sheldon (1980), “Aftereffects of Stress on Human Perfor-
mance and Social Behavior: A Review of Research and The-ory,” Psychological Bulletin , 88 (1), 82–108.
Dansereau, Fred, Joseph A. Alutto, Steven E. Markham, and Mal-
colm Dumas (1982), “Multiplexed Supervision and Leadership:An Application of Within and Between Analysis,” in Leader-
ship: Beyond Establishment Views , James G. Hunt, Uma
Sekaran, and C.A. Schriesheim, eds. Carbondale, IL: SouthernIllinois University Press, 81–103.
———, George Graen, and William J. Hage (1975), “A Vertical Dyad
Linkage Approach to Leadership Within Formal Organizations: ALongitudinal Investigation of the Role Making Process,” Organi-
zational Behavior and Human Performance ,13(1), 46–78.
Donnelly, James H., Jr., and John M. Ivancevich (1975), “Role Clar-
ity and the Salesman,” Journal of Marketing ,39(January), 71–74.
Dubinsky, Alan J. and Bruce E. Mattson (1979), “Consequences of
Role Conflict and Ambiguity Experienced by Retail Salespeo-ple,” Journal of Retailing , 55 (4), 70–86.
———, Ronald E. Michaels, Masaaki Kotabe, Chae Un Lim, and
Hee-Cheol Moon (1992), “Influence of Role Stress in IndustrialSalespeople’s Work Outcomes in the United States, Japan, andKorea,” Journal of International Business Studies ,23(1), 77–99.
Ford, Neil M., Orville C. Walker Jr., and Gilbert A. Churchill Jr.
(1975), “Expectation-Specific Measures of the IntersenderConflict and Role Ambiguity Experienced by Industrial Sales-men,” Journal of Business Research , 3 (April), 95–111.
Frazier, Gary L. (1999), “Organizing and Managing Channels of
Distribution,” Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , 27
(2), 226–40.
Fried, Yitzhak, Haim Ailan Ben-David, Robert Tiegs, Naftali Avi-
tal, and Uri Yeverechyahu (1998), “The Interactive Effect ofRole Conflict and Role Ambiguity on Job Performance,” Jour-
nal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology , 71
(March), 19–27.
Fry, Louis W., Charles M. Futrell, A Parasuraman, and Margaret A.
Chmielewski (1986), “An Analysis of Alternative Causal Mod-els of Salesperson Role Perceptions and Work-Related Atti-tudes,” Journal of Marketing Research , 23 (May), 153–63.
Gerbing, David W. and James C. Anderson (1988), “An Updated
Paradigm for Scale Development Incorporating Unidimension-
ality and Its Assessment,” Journal of Marketing Research , 25
(May), 186–92.
Grice, G. Robert and John J. Hunter (1964), “Stimulus Intensity
Effects Depend upon the Type of Experimental Design,” Psy-
chological Review , 71 (4), 247–56.
Hackman, J. Richard and Greg R. Oldham (1975), “Development
of the Job Diagnostic Survey,” Journal of Applied Psychology ,
60 (April), 159–70.
Hallowell, Edward M. (1999), “The Human Moment at Work,”
Harvard Business Review , 77 (January/February), 1–8.
Hamner, W. Clay and Henry L. Tosi (1974), “Relationship of Role
Conflict and Role Ambiguity to Job Involvement Measures,”Journal of Applied Psychology , 59 (August), 497–99.
Hampton, Ron, Alan J. Dubinsky, and Steven J. Skinner (1986), “A
Model of Sales Supervisor Leadership Behavior and RetailSalespeople’s Job-Related Outcomes,” Journal of the Academy
of Marketing Science , 14 (3), 33–43.
Hartline, Michael D. and O.C. Ferrell (1993), “Service Quality
Implementation: The Effects of Organizational Socializationand Managerial Actions on Customer Contact,” Marketing Sci-
ence Institute Working Paper No. 93-122 . Cambridge, MA:
Marketing Science Institute.——— and ——— (1996), “The Management of Customer-
Contact Employees: An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of
Marketing, 60 (October), 52–70.
Harvey, Michael, Michael P. Price, and Robert F. Lusch (1998),
“Beyond Traditional Due Diligence for Mergers and Acquisi-tions in the 21st Century,” Review of Business , (19) 3, 17–22.
Heide, Jan B. (1994), “Interorganizational Governance in Market-
ing Channels,” Journal of Marketing , 58 (January), 71–85.
House, Robert J. (1980), Occupational Stress and the Mental and
Physical Health of Factory Workers . Ann Arbor, MI: Institute
for Social Research, University of Michigan.
——— and John R. Rizzo (1972), “Role Conflict and Ambiguity as
Critical Variables in a Model of Organizational Behavior,” Orga-
nizational Behavior and Human Performance ,7(June), 467–505.
Huber, George and Richard Daft (1987), “The Information Envi-
ronment of Organizations,” in Handbook of Organizational
Communication: An Interdisciplinary Perspective , Fredric M.
Jablin, Lyman W. Porter, Karlene H. Roberts, and Linda L. Put-nam, eds. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications, 130–64.
Ironson, G.H., P.C. Smith, M.T. Brannick, W.M. Gibson, and K.B.
Paul (1989), “Construction of Job in General Scale: A Compar-
ison of Global, Composite, and Specific Measures,” Journal of
Applied Psychology , 74 (2), 193–200.
Ivancevich, John M. and James H. Donnelly Jr. (1974), “A Study
of Role Clarity and Need for Clarity for Three OccupationalGroups,” Academy of Management Journal , 17 (March), 28–36.
Jackson, Tony (1999), “Speak Up About the Good Side of Merg-
ers, Executives Warned,” Financial Times , (February 2), 8.
Johnson, Shane A. and Mark B. Houston (2000), “Buyer–Supplier
Contracts Versus Joint Ventures: Determinants and Conse-quences of Transaction Structure,” Journal of Marketing
Research , 37 (February), 1–15.
Jones, Gareth (1986), “Socialization Tactics, Self-Efficacy, and
Newcomers’ Adjustments to Organizations,” Academy of Man-
agement Journal , 29 (June), 262–79.
Kahn, Robert L., Donald M. Wolfe, Robert P. Quinn, J. Diedrick
Snoek, and Robert A. Rosenthal (1964), Occupational Stress:
Studies in Role Conflict and Ambiguity . New York: John Wiley
& Sons.
Keating, William J. (1991), Franchising Adviser . New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Kelly, J. Patrick, Myron Gable, and Richard T. Hise (1981), “Con-
flict, Clarity, Tension, and Satisfaction in Chain Store ManagerRoles,” Journal of Retailing , 57 (1), 27–42.
——— and Richard T. Hise (1980), “Role Conflict, Role Clarity,
and Job Satisfaction in the Brand Manager Position,” Journal of
the Academy of Marketing Science , 8 (Winter), 120–37.
Kerin, Roger A. and Nikhil Varaiya (1985), “Mergers and Acquisi-
tions in Retailing: A Review and Critical Analysis,” Journal of
Retailing , 61 (2), 9–34.
Kohli, Ajay (1985), “Some Unexplored Supervisory Behaviors and
Their Influence on Salespeople’s Role Clarity, Specific Self-Esteem, Job Satisfaction, and Motivation,” Journal of Market-
ing Research , 22 (November), 424–33.
Kumar, Nirmalya, Louis W. Stern, and Ravi S. Achrol (1992),
“Assessing Reseller Performance from the Perspective of the
Supplier,” Journal of Marketing Research , 29 (May), 238–53.
———, ———, and James C. Anderson (1993), “Conducting
Interorganizational Research Using Key Informants,” Academy
of Management Journal , 36 (6), 1633–51.
Kumar, V ., Roger A. Kerin, and Arun Pereira (1991), “An Empiri-
cal Assessment of Merger and Acquisition Activity in Retail-ing,” Journal of Retailing , 67 (3), 321–28.
Larkin, T.J. and Sandar Larkin (1996), “Reaching and Changing
Frontline Employees,” Harvard Business Review , 74 (May/
June), 95–104.
Latack, Janina C. and Stephen J. Havlovic (1992), “Coping with
Job Stress: A Conceptual Framework for Coping Measures,”Journal of Organizational Behavior , 13 (September), 479–508.
82 / Journal of Marketing, April 2002Lusch, Robert F. and Bernard J. Jaworski (1991), “Management
Controls, Role Stress, and Retail Store Manager Performance,”Journal of Retailing , 67 (4), 397–419.
Lyons, Thomas (1971), “Role Conflict, Need for Clarity, Satisfac-
tion, Tension, and Withdrawal,” Organizational Behavior and
Human Performance , 6 (January), 99–110.
McGee, Gail W., Carl E. Ferguson, and Anson Seers (1989), “Role
Conflict and Ambiguity: Do the Scales Measure These TwoConstructs?” Journal of Applied Psychology , 74 (5), 815–18.
Michaels, Ronald E., Ralph L. Day, and Eric A. Joachimsthaler
(1987), “Role Stress Among Industrial Buyers: An IntegrativeModel,” Journal of Marketing , 51 (April), 28–45.
Milgrom, Paul and John Roberts (1991), Economics, Organization
and Management . Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Mohr, Jakki J., Robert J. Fisher, and John R. Nevin (1996), “Col-
laborative Communication in Interfirm Relationships: Moderat-ing Effects of Integration and Control,” Journal of Marketing ,
60 (3) 103–15.
Nygaard, Arne (1992), “An Empirical Analysis of Performance in
Principal-Agent Relationships,” doctoral dissertation, Norwe-gian School of Economics and Business Administration.
Oliver, Richard L. and Arthur P. Brief (1977–78), “Determinants
and Consequences of Role Conflict and Ambiguity AmongRetail Sales Managers,” Journal of Retailing , 53 (4), 47–58.
Orsburn, Jack D., Linda Moran, Ed Musselwhite, and John H.
Zenger (1990), Self-Directed Work Teams: The New American
Challenge . Homewood, IL: Business One Irwin.
Pfeffer, Jeffrey and Gerald R. Salancik (1978), The External Con-
trol of Organizations: A Resource Dependence Perspective .
New York: Harper and Row.
Ping, Robert A., Jr. (1995), “A Parsimonious Estimating Technique
for Interaction and Quadratic Latent Variables,” Journal of
Marketing Research , 32 (August), 336–38.
Porter, Lyman and Edward E. Lawler (1968), Managerial Attitudes
and Performance . Homewood, IL: Richard D. Irwin.
Pruden, Henry O. and Richard M. Reese (1972), “Interorganiza-
tional Role-Set Relations and the Performance and Satisfactionof Industrial Salesmen,” Administrative Science Quarterly , 17
(December), 601–609.
Quick, James C., Jonathan D. Quick, Debra Nelson, and Joseph J.
Hurrell Jr. (1997), Preventive Stress Management in Organiza-
tions . Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Reck, Ross R. (1978), “Purchasing Effectiveness,” Journal of Pur-
chasing and Materials Management , 14 (Summer), 5–11.
Rigdon, Edward E. (1999), “Using the Friedman Method of Ranks
for Model Comparison in Structural Equation Modeling,”Structural Equation Modeling ,6 (July), 219–32.
Rizzo, John R., Robert J. House, and Sidney I. Lirtzmann (1970),
“Role Conflict and Ambiguity in Complex Organizations,”Administrative Science Quarterly , 15 (June), 150–63.
Schuler, Randall S. (1980), “Role Perceptions, Satisfaction, and
Performance: A Partial Reconciliation,” Journal of Applied Psy-
chology , 60 (6), 683–87.
Scott, William E. (1966), “Activation Theory and Task Design,”
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance , 1 (Septem-
ber), 3–30.
Secord, Paul F. and Carl W. Backman (1970), Social Psychology .
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Selye, Hans (1950), The Physiology and Pathology of Exposure to
Stress: A Treatise Based on the Concepts of the General-Adaptation-Syndrome and the Diseases of Adaptation . Mon-
treal, Canada: ACTA.
——— (1974), Stress Without Distress . Philadelphia, PA: J.B. Lip-
pencourt Company.
Shook, Carrie and Robert L. Shook (1993), Franchising: The Busi-
ness Strategy That Changed the World . Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall.
Singh, Jagdip (1993), “Boundary Role Ambiguity: Facets, Deter-
minants, and Impacts,” Journal of Marketing ,57(April), 11–31.
——— (1995), “Measurement Issues in Cross-National Research,”
Journal of International Business Studies , 26 (3), 597–619.
——— (1998), “Striking a Balance in Boundary-Spanning Posi-
tions: An Investigation of Some Unconventional Influences ofRole Stressors and Job Characteristics on Job Outcomes ofSalespeople,” Journal of Marketing , 62 (July), 69–86.
——— (2000), “Performance Productivity and Quality of Front-
line Employees in Service Organizations,” Journal of Market-
ing, 64 (October), 15–34.
———, Jerry R. Goolsby, and Gary K. Rhoads (1994), “Behav-
ioral and Psychological Consequences of Boundary SpanningBurnout for Customer Service Representatives,” Journal of
Marketing Research , 31 (November), 558–69.
——— and Gary K. Rhoads (1991), “Boundary Role Ambiguity in
Marketing-Oriented Positions: A Multi-dimensional, Multifac-eted Operationalization,” Journal of Marketing Research , 28
(August), 328–38.
———, Willem Verbeke, and Gary K. Rhoads (1996), “Do Orga-
nizational Practices Matter in Role Stress Processes? A Studyof Direct and Moderating Effects of Marketing-OrientedBoundary Spanners,” Journal of Marketing , 60 (July), 69–96.
Smith, Patricia Cain, Lorne M. Kendall, and Charles L Hulin (1969),
The Measurement of Satisfaction in Work and Retirement: AStrategy for the Study of Attitudes .Chicago: Rand McNally.
Strebel, Paul (1996), “Why Do Employees Resist Change?” Har-
vard Business Review , 74 (May/June), 86–92.
Teas, R. Kenneth (1983), “Supervisory Behavior, Role Stress, and
the Job Satisfaction of Industrial Salespeople,” Journal of Mar-
keting Research , 20 (February), 84–91.
———, John G. Wacker, and R. Eugene Hughes (1979), “A Path
Analysis of Causes and Consequences of Salespeople’s Percep-tions of Role Clarity,” Journal of Marketing Research , 16
(August), 355–69.
Tubre, Travis C. and Judith M. Collins (2000), “Jackson and
Schuler Revisited: A Meta-Analysis of the RelationshipsBetween Role Ambiguity, Role Conflict, and Job Performance,”Journal of Management , 26 (1), 155–69.
Weston, J. Fred and Susan Chiu (1996), “Growth Strategies in the
Food Industry,” Business Economics , 31 (1), 21–27.
Williamson, Oliver E. (1985), The Economic Institutions of Capi-
talism . New York: The Free Press.
Yammarino, Francis J. and Alan J. Dubinsky (1990), “Salesperson
Performance and Managerially Controllable Factors: An Inves-tigation of Individual and Work Group Effects,” Journal of
Management , 16 (1), 87–106.
Yerkes, Robert M. and John D. Dodson (1908), “The Relation of
Strength of Stimulus to Rapidity of Habit-Formation,” Journal
of Comparative Neurology and Psychology , 18 (November),
459–82.
Zecher, Ira L. (1998), “Striking the Best Deal,” Chain Store Age
Executive with Shopping Center Age , 74 (July), 4.