Building a Learning Organization
in the Offshore Oil Industry
Eric Cassells
The meek may inherit the earth, but not its mineral rights.
Source: J.P. Getty
The oil industry has always drawn a distinction
between the intangible assets that are often the
source of underlying value in oil exploration and
production,
and
mere
physical
assets.
In
more
recent years, it has, for example, become clearer that
successful exploration for oil or gas reserves is re-
lated to the quality and private nature of the infor-
mation that a corporation acquires about a possible
hydrocarbon reservoir, and the manner in which
that information is manipulated and interpreted. A
corporation's capabilities in information and knowl-
edge acquisition and management are, therefore,
critical distinguishing features in long term compe-
tition for new oil and gas reserves.
In the 1990s, there has been a new emphasis on
the way that corporations can learn to identify,
appraise and develop reservoirsÐeach an essen-
tially unique geological con®gurationÐin the most
effective manner. This paper reports on lessons con-
cerning strategic learning capabilities encountered
in exploratory case studies in UK Continental Shelf
oil ®eld development projects. The case studies par-
ticularly highlight four aspects of strategic learning
capabilities: a strategic concern with institutionaliz-
ing an appropriate learning style; an emphasis on
the pace of learning as a competitive tool; the struc-
turing of learning capabilities so as to recognize
areas where the potential for competitive advantage
exists; and the structuring of learning to recognize
other areas where collaborative approaches to learn-
ing through alliances provide better returns.*
Background to the Case Studies
The studies were limited to the upstream explora-
tion and production sectors of the oil and gas
business. These sectors are not concerned with the
Long Range Planning, Vol. 32, No. 2, pp. 245 to 252, 1999
# 1999 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved
Printed in Great Britain
0024±6301/99 $ - see front matter
Pergamon
PII: S0024-6301(99)00023-0
Since the collapse of the price of crude oil in
the mid 1980s, some participants in the sector
have overhauled their approach to learning for
strategic advantage. The management teams
dealing with the projects discussed here
demonstrated an awareness that learning can
be a core rigidity as well as a core competence,
and set about institutionalizing new learning.
The speed of learning was an important
determinant of success, leading to substantial
increases in project NPVs and a rapid
reinvestment in the learning capabilities
themselves. Learning about `boundary
management' helps to distinguish areas where
internal learning could develop proprietary
competitive advantage, from those areas where
valuable learning might best be achieved
through alliance. # 1999 Elsevier Science Ltd.
All rights reserved
*The underlying case studies were conducted as a research
for a joint Open University Business School/BBC business video,
entitled ``A New Way of Life''. This video has been broadcast
and is available as part of the OUBS MBA course, ``Strategy''
(OU, 1997, Milton Keynes). It also won a silver medal at the New
York Film Festival.
245

transportation, trading or re®ning of crude oil or
gas, nor with the marketing and retailing of oil,
gasoline or petrochemical products.
The study reported on here was based primarily
on a series of interviews with senior management of
three offshore oil ®elds in the UK Continental Shelf.
In all cases the operator of the ®elds was BP,
although interviews were also conducted with BP's
partners, allies, and suppliers. The ®elds are distin-
guished from each other by the stage of `upstream'
activity underway at the time of the study (see Fig.
1). Taken together, the three ®elds provide examples
of most pre-production activities in the upstream oil
sector.
Upstream oil and gas businesses primarily com-
prise three types of activities:
{
Crude oil or natural gas supplies must be discov-
ered. This exploration activity was represented
in the study by the Schehalion ®eld, together
with
the
recent
history
of
discovery
of
the
Foinaven ®eld. These two ®elds were discovered
after 1992, and are likely to prove to be the ®rst
commercial oil ®elds to be exploited in the hos-
tile and environmentally sensitive Atlantic `fron-
tier' west of the Shetland Islands.
{
Once a reservoir has been discovered, oil compa-
nies must ensure that its reserves are capable of
being commercially exploited. This spans both
the appraisal of the recoverable quantity of oil or
gas in the reservoir, and the process of develop-
ing the most effective production infrastructure.
The Foinaven ®eld was in the process of simul-
taneous appraisal and development, while the
third ®eld (Andrew) was nearing the completion
of its development. Andrew was originally dis-
covered
in
the
mid-1970s,
but
remained
unexploited until a new alliance-based approach
to its development rendered it commercially
viable in the 1990s.
{
The third upstream activityÐphysical extraction
of oil and gas, or `production'Ðwas not an ac-
tivity that featured centrally in the study.
Upstream oil and gas is characterized by the key
role
played
by
information
and
knowledge
in
exploration and appraisal, and by high levels of
uncertainty throughout. Uncertainty arises mainly
from political, geological, geophysical and engineer-
ing unknowns concerning the physical reservoir, the
best means to maximize the oil recovery rate, and
the ®nancial uncertainties surrounding the long-
term realizable revenue stream. Much upstream ac-
tivity traditionally occurs in partnerships or joint
ventures, utilizing a wide range of suppliers and
contractors. Information and knowledge, where not
carefully guarded, can spread quickly through the
sector.
Institutionalizing Appropriate
Learning
Business has seen an explosion of interest in the
area of organizational learning. Senge1 has identi®ed
the new task of leaders as the creation of the con-
ditions for organizational learning, while Pedler et
al.2 have suggested methods to encourage organiz-
ations to become `learning companies'. Others see
the need to challenge existing mental models or
shared cognitive structures as a key activity for man-
agement; de Geus,3 from his experiences of using
scenarios at Shell, argues that this is the key pur-
pose of effective strategic planning.
Learning
as
a
competitive
weapon
was
most
famously
explored
by
the
Boston
Consulting
Group's
development
of
the
experience
curve.4
Interest in the strategic value of learning has blos-
somed, however, alongside increased interest in the
resource-based explanation of competitive success,5
which views learning as a complex, potentially dis-
tinctive strategic capability. Organizational learning,
by its nature, arises from a complex interaction of
individual and team learning skills. It is, therefore,
EXPLORATION
APPRAISAL
DEVELOPMENT
PRODUCTION
Schehalion
Foinaven
Andrew
FIGURE 1. Status of the oilfields in the mid-
1990s.
Building a Learning Organization
246

less likely to be capable of being imitated, and more
likely to prove an enduring source of competitive
advantage. Prahalad and Hamel,6 for example, argue
that the core competencies that underpin global cor-
porate competition re¯ect `collective learning' of
how to integrate and co-ordinate complex skill sets
with sophisticated technologies.
These writers re¯ect the increase in corporate
learning activities such as external benchmarking,
reverse engineering, total quality management, con-
tinuous
improvement programmes, intranets and
corporate knowledge systems. Mission statements
increasingly refer to the objective of becoming a
`learning organization'.
This interest in organizational learning, and its
identi®cation as a potential source of competitive
advantage, may, however, encourage the view that
all
learning
is
advantageous.
Challenging
this,
Leonard-Barton7 describes how knowledge sets in
the area of innovative new product development
can become `core rigidities', rather than core compe-
tencies.
In the cases studied in this report, learning has
not been discovered as a new corporate capability.
Oil companies have always valued knowledge and
learning in upstream exploration and production.
The traditional approach to learning has, however,
been one that has emphasized the production of
professional reports by the companies' own engin-
eers,
geologists,
surveyors,
and
geophysicists.
Considerable time was spent producing detailed
pre-project reports, designed to identify and assess
most areas of project uncertainty, and enumerate
and evaluate multiple development options. This
approach of learning everything learnable about the
potential development led to long delays between
discovery and the production of ®rst oil, reinforced
by the sequential approach taken to studying the
uncertainties of development. The professional qual-
ity of these reports was usually undeniable, the pro-
ducts
of
an
institutionalized
approach
to
high
quality learning which is summarized in Table 1.
The reported outcomes were, however, less desir-
able.
This approach was being replaced in the compa-
nies studied, however, by one that recognized the
limitations of uncertainty reduction. Instead, the
new approach emphasized the need to identify
those key factors, which ensure the success or fail-
ure of a project. Possible outcomes for such factors
were
then
identi®ed
and
contingency
strategies
were designed to be put in place should the project
be threatened. This was matched by an emphasis on
action learning as a method of assessing uncertain-
ties.
Breaking free of the reliance on detailed pro-
fessional pre-project assessment has led to three
further changes in the approach to learning:
{
The sequential approach to risk assessment and
development planning has been replaced by an
approach,
which
allows
parallel
exploration,
appraisal and development. The only impedi-
ments to parallel proceedings are created where
key project success factors must be assessed.
This parallel approach has signi®cantly shor-
tened the discovery-to-®rst-oil cycle time for
®elds such as Foinaven and Schehalion (see Fig.
2).
{
Information, knowledge and learning have been
able to ¯ow more rapidly, through the creation
of
task-orientated
teams
and
lateral
linkages
between professionals.
{
The systematic studies which emphasized the
pre-project views of the companies' own special-
ist professionals, have given way to an approach
which accesses the best available skills as and
when they are needed, opening up alliancing as
a key strategy to enhance learning. This new
approach to learning is summarized in Table 2.
The difference between the two approaches to learn-
ing is also captured in Box 1, an example quotation
from BP's Asset Manager (the chief executive of the
Foinaven and Schehalion ®elds)
TABLE 1. Traditional approach to learning
CHARACTERISTICS
OUTCOMES
. Importance of pre-project reports and studies
. Marginal reduction in uncertainty
. Perceived need to address all uncertainties
. Value of options often illusory
. Preservation of many options
. High appraisal and development costs
. Heavily professionalized
. Encouraged a sequential approach to development
. Separate inputs from functional departments
. Prolonged appraisal and development phases
. Significance of post-project audit
. Reduced the present value of projects
Long Range Planning Vol. 32
April 1999
247

Box 1
The little cloud of problems
``Let's consider that every new discovery is a little
cloud of problems. You may think that discovering an
oil field is a moment of celebration, the work is fin-
ished, and BP has made another excellent discovery.
How it shows up for the teams of people working on
the discovery, however, is it is a little cloud of pro-
blems. How are we going to solve these things? How
are we going to take this discovery and move it
through to the point where we produce barrels of oil.
Now there are two ways to deal with this little pile of
problems called the discovery.
Let's take Schehalion: Schehalion lies in very deep
water; in a harsh climate; its an interesting reservoir
but with fairly heavy oil; there are huge environmental
concerns. All these things need to be dealt with.
Originally what we would have done is pool together
quite a large team of technologists, geologists, engin-
eers, and so forth, and work every problem to death.
Now by working every problem to death, I mean writ-
ing learned reports on every problem, be they small
or big problemsÐputting them together in beautifully
prepared reports, getting people like me, the manager,
to sign off, saying, `this is a very important piece of
work'.
Inevitably those things end up in files or libraries,
and sometimes some person comes along with a lot
of money and makes an investment in this cloud of
problems, for all it is still a cloud of problems for
which people have written learned reports. The invest-
ment decision is taken, the project is developed, the
field goes on production and it doesn't behave the
way people expect it to behave. We then get the post-
project audit reportÐthe famous post-project auditÐ
in which people write down why it didn't work, and
that in turn is filed, and we never learn. Libraries are
full of this type of learning.
There is an alternative though. Let's take the same
problems, the same little cloud of concern that the
Schehalion discovery is. Lets look into that cloud with
teams who are trained to look at what's going to
make a difference here. Not everything is going to
make a difference. There will be some problems at
Schehalion which will be there now, and they'll be
there during production, but they're not going to
make a great deal of difference to the profitability of
the project. So we distinguish those problems that are
going to make a difference if intervened against:
which are going to make the project highly profitable,
and which problems, if we do nothing about, are
going to kill us. We get a very small sub-set of that
big cloud of concern, which used to be the discov-
eryÐa little subset of those problems that are going
to make a difference. Then we go to work on these
problemsÐnot
understanding
them
for
their
own
sake, not writing learned reports about them, but actu-
ally inventing interventions to put in place should
those problems come about.''
Colin MacLean, BP Asset Manager.
Institutionalizing this new approach to learning
was
critical
if
the
inappropriate,
traditional
approach was not to remain a core rigidity.
Formal structures and systems were changed to
allow information and learning to ¯ow more freely
across the organization. Corporate structures were
refocused on business units based on individual oil
®elds or groups of oil ®elds, termed simply `Assets'.
Geologists, for example, reported on the bene®ts of
understanding reservoir engineers needs gained by
simply working at desks alongside them, instead of
within functional departments. Alliances were cre-
ated with partners (no longer considered `contrac-
tors' or `suppliers') who brought their expertise to
bear on the problems of development.
The traditional approach to learning, because it
was institutionalized, had to be discredited. The
example in Box 1 gives a good example of how the
symbols which validate this learningÐthe studies,
the role of the manager in approving the studies, the
post-project auditÐcan be discredited by an effec-
tive leader. Rhetoric can be a very effective strategic
tool.8
Behaviours must change
to support this new
approach to learning. The discovery of Foinaven, for
example,
the
®rst
commercial
discovery
in
the
Atlantic, and an asset likely to be worth in excess of
US$2 billion, would probably not have occurred
without behavioural change. The exchange of tech-
nical
information
on
new
seismic
techniques
between BP's Gulf of Mexico and Atlantic assets
was encouraged by international exchanges, and the
willingness of individuals to experiment with alien
EXPLORE
EXPLORE
APPRAISE
DEVELOP
APPRAISE
DEVELOP
(a) Traditional Learning: Sequential Activities
(b) New learning: Parallel Activities
9 to 10 years
4years
FIGURE 2. Reducing the discovery-to-first-oil.
Building a Learning Organization
248

techniques, only happened because space for indi-
vidual initiative had been created in the organiz-
ation.9
New behaviours were validated by new symbols
and meanings. The action orientation of learning
encouraged at BP was captured in the name of the
change
consultants
employedÐJMW
Consultants
(`Just Might Work'), and in the `JDI' (Just Do It)
awards made to offshore operational personnel. In
the same way, validation of learning from external
sources was recognized in the admission that paral-
lel exploration, appraisal and development is a con-
cept leveraged from Toyota's parallel engineering
approach to new automobile model development.
Such approaches help break down apparent indus-
try paradoxes, and provide new innovative solutions
to development.9
In all three case studies, the role of the leader in
enabling or encouraging new learning behaviours
appears to have been critical. BP's asset manager,
for example, described his job as designing the `or-
ganizational technology' to allow innovative learn-
ing.
The Pace of Learning
Stalk10 asserted that `time' was the next source of
competitive
advantage.
The
three
case
studies
reported here demonstrate a growing understanding
of the signi®cance of time to the successful and
pro®table outcome of the projects.
The parallel engineering approach followed at
Foinaven (see Fig. 3) successfully brought ®rst oil
forward by over ®ve years, and this approach was
being
followed
in
the
development
of
the
Schehalion prospect. BP management estimated the
present value bene®t of bringing revenue ¯ows for-
ward in this way, as applied to the UKCS portfolio
of prospects, as being in excess of £200 million.
This change of approach was matched by a switch
in the measure for describing the signi®cance of a
prospect: traditionally, Foinaven would have been
measured by millions of barrels of recoverable crude
oil, or crude oil equivalent; the Foinaven project
saw the description of scale measures change to esti-
mated present values.
BP and its 50% Atlantic joint venture partner,
Shell, have also seen the development of existing
prospects at Foinaven and Schehalion as weapons
in the market to develop the future of this frontier
province. Thus, extensive wide area 3-D seismic
data were acquired, which, together with the experi-
ence of developing the ®rst commercial ®eld at
CASH FLOWS
Positive
Neutral
Negative
4 YEARS
10 YEARS TIME
FIGURE 3. The typical effect of parallel develop-
ment engineering on project cash flows.
TABLE 2. The new approach to learning
CHARACTERISTICS
OUTCOMES
. Recognizing that uncertainty is avoidable
. Lower appraisal and development costs
. Emphasizing key success factors
. Flexible routing in appraisal
and development
. Designing `uncertainty intervention' strategies
. Parallel approach to appraisal,
development and production
. Action learning
. Much reduced time to
first oil (less than half)
. Cross-functional structures and lateral linkages
. Increased present value of projects
. Recognition of information leakage
. Accessing best knowledge and
skills through alliances and external benchmarking
Long Range Planning Vol. 32
April 1999
249

Foinaven appeared to position them well in the bid-
ding
for
future
licence
prospects
in
1994.
Commentators at that time suggested that the estab-
lished credibility of the BP±Shell joint venture
encouraged the UK government to award a majority
of further exploration prospects to the joint venture.
The Alliance partners at the development project
on the Andrew ®eld were likewise concerned with
time as an important dimension of value. This sur-
faced in two obvious examples from their innovative
development.
{
The partners ascribe beating the development
timetable to ®rst oil by nearly six months to the
more effective ways of working they developed
as an Alliance. Some of this can be attributed to
the ef®ciency of networked ¯ows of information
and knowledge in an Alliance structure.11
{
There was considerable emphasis on re-engineer-
ing the phasing of the development to minimize
the installation time spent offshore. For example,
hooking up the offshore production units was
completed in a matter of minutes rather than the
previous best practice achievements of ten to
twenty hours. Minimizing offshore installation
time was estimated by the Andrew Alliance to
have saved £20 million from the development
cost of the ®eld.
The focus on development time and the emphasis
on learning in these companies led to an awareness
of the importance of the pace of learning. The
dynamic aspect of learning captured by the Boston
Consulting Group4 in their studies of the experience
curve remains the best known example of this effect,
although the link between the rate of learning and
cumulative output volumes has been questioned.12
Building on the ideas concerning core competence
of Prahalad and Hamel 6, Leavy 13 describes learning
as ``in some respects analogous to money . . . its
impact depends not only on the stock of knowledge
but also on the velocity of its circulation''.
In these three oil ®eld development projects, the
pace of learning was bene®cial in three ways:
{
The pace of learning impacted the date of ®rst
oil. In the case of Foinaven, this meant that
learning new 3-D seismic techniques that could
allow an accurate delineation of sandstone reser-
voirs eliminated the need for a time-consuming
and
costly
programme
of
drilling
appraisal
wells.
{
Such learning is transferable to other projectsÐ
interpretation techniques on this 3-D seismic
were
transferred
to
Foinaven
by
a
manager
seconded from the Gulf of Mexico, and the same
appraisal techniques will reduce the develop-
ment cost of the Schehalion ®eld.
{
Learning as a capability is enhanced through its
use.
On
these
projects,
learning
capability
includes the ability to encounter new and poss-
ibly unique issues or success factors, and to de-
sign intervention strategies to deal with them.
The pace of learning is therefore signi®cant to
how quickly a company such as BP can enhance
its distinctive learning capabilities for future
exploration and development projects, and build
competitive advantage.9 As with BCG's experi-
ence curve, the speed at which learning capa-
bility is acquired determines the likelihood that
that capability might remain a source of advan-
tage (see Box 2).
Box 2
Pace of learning and improved performance
``Its not just the learningÐits not just being able to
sit back after the action and say I learnt the following,
and I will write a recipe book so that someone else
doesn't make the same mistake or that someone else
can do it. The message coming out of Foinaven is its
the pace at which you learn which matters. It is point-
less to have a book at the end of Foinaven with all the
lessons written in itÐthe lessons are learnt daily and
they're put into action immediately. So it's the pace of
learning on Foinaven, which enhances our company's
performance and the next projects we do West of
Shetland. . ..
It's fundamental to our success as a business that
we create the industry in a way, which will provide
more profitable outcomes. The key to this is continual
ongoing education and support of people so they can
take on bigger risks and understand the consequences
of taking these risks.''
Colin MacLean, BP Asset Manager
Structuring Learning to Maximize
Returns
The three case studies demonstrate differences in
the way learning occurs at different stages of the
upstream business which, in their own ways, help
to maximize the overall potential returns to oil com-
panies.
Legally, superior returns and added value for
upstream oil companies seem to derive from the
exclusive rights14 to exploit oil and gas properties.
Such
strategic
assets
are,
however,
depreciating
physical resources, and competitive advantage over
the long run is more likely to be embedded in the
Building a Learning Organization
250

capabilities that enhance an oil company's ability to
acquire new properties in competition with other
bidders. In particular, oil companies have increas-
ingly realized that their most likely sources of com-
petitive
advantage
lie
in
their
acquisition
and
manipulation of private information and knowledge
concerning prospective oil and gas properties. The
competitive advantage from such knowledge asserts
itself during the bidding stages for new exploration
prospects and, later, as the results of exploration are
digested, in trading properties with other companies
or bidding for related properties.
Secrecy surrounding such data and knowledge is
paramount. Learning in this area of activity is there-
fore highly competitive, and, as far as is possible,
secured within the organization. It was, for example,
notable in the study that staff explaining some of
the seismic interpretation, which enabled the identi-
®cation, and speedy appraisal of Foinaven provided
broad outlines only of the techniques.
In the areas of developing discovered properties
and producing oil from them, however, competitive
advantage is less likely to be capable of being
secured. Oil companies have traditionally controlled
such development projects, but relying heavily on
contractors and suppliers. Leakage of private infor-
mation during these activities is always a risk, and
dispersal of any skills-based advantage is highly
likely, therefore, at this stage. BP and its alliance
partners have responded by recognizing that maxi-
mizing returns in these activities does not result
from the pursuit of competitive advantage. Rather, it
is increasingly accepted that maximizing returns to
the industry in these activities is the best route to
improved returns for the company. This is con-
sidered to be a necessary response, also, in an sector
where the pro®tability of assets declined precipi-
tously after the collapse of the crude oil price from
$26 per barrel, to an average $15 to $18 per barrel in
the period since 1986.
There has, therefore, been a restructuring of devel-
opment activities to recognize the bene®ts of a colla-
borative approach. Techniques for partner alignment
have radically restructured the reward and risk pro-
®le of ®elds where alliancing is in place. The
Andrew ®eld in this case study stands as the pio-
neer of this approach in the UK Continental Shelf.
The
strategic
learning
bene®ts
of
alliancing
on
Andrew
included:
the
widening
of
the
expert
opinion that could be drawn on in developing the
®eld; a further increase in the pace of learning as
network learning took the place of hierarchical re-
lationships between client oil companies, prime
contractors and sub-contractors; and the often easier
access
to
technology
that
previously
had
been
guarded as in some way proprietary. These learning
bene®ts helped to deliver the Andrew project six
months ahead of schedule and £80 million (or 21%)
under an already demanding target budget.15 The
collaborative arrangements meant that BP's Alliance
partners shared 56% of this saving.
Alliancing as a capability in its own right has, of
course, become a focus of competitive activity, with
suppliers and oil companies promoting themselves
as preferred allies on the basis of the experience
they
have
gained
on
projects
like
the
Andrew
Alliance. This has led to a shift in the focus of
development projects from the opportunities of tech-
nology, to those of organizational and inter-organiz-
ational process:
BP also acknowledges that any technological lead . . . is likely
to be short-lived in an industry where partnerships and the
sharing of information is the rule . . . ``Anybody can copy a for-
mulation of your technology,'' says Mr Simon (BP's former
CEO), ``but your competitors cannot ape your process''.16
Despite this focus on the unique structures of allian-
cing and the pace of collaborative learning as dis-
tinctive
capabilities
in
their
own
right,
the
distinction between learning in exploration activi-
ties and the collaborative open approach to learning
in the development activity is relatively clear. In the
former
instance,
learning
represents
a
potential
source of advantage, in the latter a means to make
the industry generally more attractive. Companies
like BP can bene®t simultaneously from these two
routes to better returns.
Conclusions
The upsurge in interest in organizational learning is
timely given the current focus in the resource-based
view of strategy on capabilities as the primary
source
of
sustainable
competitive
advantage.
Leavy,13 however, notes that some of the writing on
organizational learning and knowledge is couched
in the language of `a humanistic mission', citing
both Senge1 and Nonaka17 as examples where the
learning organization is said to produce economic
and `more spiritual' bene®ts. Pedler et al.2 draw
heavily on Lessem18 to propose a four-stage organiz-
ational development model culminating in a `devel-
opmental', `integrated' organizationÐthe `Learning
Company'. The danger in such missions, however,
is the tendency to see all learning as of necessity a
good thing. Learning can be as much a core rigidity
as a core competence.
This article has been concerned, however, to draw
lessons from the three case studies in identifying
the strategic signi®cance of learning in the offshore
oil industry.
The cases identify the importance of institutiona-
lizing
appropriate
approaches
to
learning.
Traditional institutional approaches, which do not
take proper account of the uncertainty, risk and
Long Range Planning Vol. 32
April 1999
251

value pro®les of oil ®eld development projects, were
identi®ed and changed.
All the cases demonstrate the signi®cance of pace
of learning as a potential source of advantage for
competition in time. Pace of learning was seen as
signi®cant in all three cases, both for the dramatic
improvement in project value which management
achieved on the projects themselves, and also for
the faster development of strategic learning capabili-
ties which can prove to be an ongoing source of ad-
vantage.
The
strategies
for
learning
developed
for
the
different projects demonstrated a sensitivity to the
best way of improving returns for individual compa-
nies. In the key exploration areas information and
knowledge can be a proprietary source of advantage,
therefore secured organizational learning can also be
valuable. In the appraisal and development activi-
ties, however, a competitive advantage seems more
dif®cult to establish and to sustain, and an open
approach, which embraces alliancing, may do more
to improve company returns by improving industry
returns. This dual competitive and collaborative
approach
to
maximizing
company
returns
has
obvious application to most industries.
References
1. P. M. Senge, The Fifth Discipline, Doubleday, New York (1990).
2. M. Pedler, J. Burgoyne and T. Boydell, The Learning Company, McGraw±Hill, Maidenhead
(1991).
3. A. P. de Geus, Planning as learning, Harvard Business Review 66, 70±74 (1988).
4. B. Henderson, The experience curve revisited, in Perspectives, Boston Consulting Group
(1973).
5. R. M. Grant, The resource-based theory of competitive advantage: implications for strat-
egy formulation, California Management Review, 33(3), (1991).
6. C. K. Prahalad and G. Hamel, The core competence of the corporation, Harvard Business
Review 68, 79±91 (1990).
7. D. Leonard-Barton, Core capabilities and core rigidities: a paradox in managing new pro-
duct development, Strategic Management Journal 13, 111±125 (1992).
8. R. G. Eccles and N. Nohria, Beyond the Hype, Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA
(1992).
9. P.J. Smith, M. Daly and M. Stump, The paradox of a new oil provinceÐFoinaven and
Clair. Presented to The Society of Petroleum Engineers Offshore Europe Conference,
Aberdeen (1995).
10. G. Stalk, Time: the next source of competitive advantage, Harvard Business Review 41±51
(1988).
11. A. Bakshi and E. Cassells, Alliancing and alignment in the offshore oil construction indus-
try (in preparation).
12. R. Stata, Organizational learning: the key to management innovation, Sloan Management
Review 63±74 (1989).
13. B. Leavy, Key Processes in Strategy, International Thomson Business Press, London (1996).
14. J. Kay, The Foundations of Corporate Success, Oxford University Press, Oxford (1993).
15. T. Knott, No Business As Usual, British Petroleum, London (1996).
16. R. Corzine and D. Lascelles, Restored to health with new ambition: David Simon and John
Browne describe BP's business strategy, Financial Times, 12 December (1994).
17. I. Nonaka, The knowledge-creating company, Harvard Business Review 69, 96±104 (1991).
18. R. Lessem, Global Management Principles, Prentice-Hall, Hemel Hempstead (1989).
Eric
Cassells is
Stra-
tegic
Change
Capa-
bility Manager in the
Global
Learning
and
Professional
Develop-
ment Group of Price-
waterhouseCoopers.
The
research
for
this
paper
was
car-
ried
out
when
he
was
a
lecturer
in
Strategy at the Open
University
Business
School, UK. Tel: +44(0)
171-213-2126;
Fax:
+44(0)171-822-4652;
Email:
E.
Cassells
@uk.ewcglobal.com.
Building a Learning Organization
252
