Information & Management 24 (1993) 23-32 
North-Holland 23 
Research 
The career decision of information systems 
people * 
Magid Igbaria and Sidney R. Siegel 
Drexel Uniwrsity, Philadelphia PA, USA 
This study examines the relationships between career deci- 
sions and directions and a set of independent variables includ- 
ing job title, demographic variables, role stressors, boundary 
spanning activities, perceived job characteristics, and career 
outcomes for 348 IS employees. Results show that the major- 
ity had already defined specific jobs they would like to hold in 
the near future. They were also able to define four directions 
for their future careers: IS technical, IS management, busi- 
ness, and consultant. Results show that career decisions and 
directions are related to some of the independent variables. 
IS employees in each of the four career directions could be 
further categorized into groups on the basis of similar charac- 
teristics. Implications of theses findings are discussed. 
Keywords: IS personnel; Career paths; Career decisions; Man- 
agement of IS personnel 
* The authors are grateful to Professor E.H. Sibley and the 
two anonymous referees for their constructive comments on 
earlier versions of this manuscript. 
Correspondence to: Professor M. Igbaria, Department of 
Management, Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA 19104, 
USA. 1. Introduction 
Lately both practitioners and researchers have 
shown increased concern over the career issues of 
information systems (IS) people. Two significant 
Magid Igbaria is a Professor of Man- 
agement Information Systems at 
Drexel University. Formerly, he lec- 
tured at Tel Aviv University, Hebrew 
University and Ben-Gurion University 
in Israel. He holds a B.A. in Statis- 
tics, and a M.A. in Information Sys- 
tems and Operations Research from 
Hebrew University; he received his 
Ph.D. in Management Information 
Systems from Tel Aviv University. He 
has published articles on MIS person- 
nel? economics of computers, com- 
puter performance evaluation, charging of computer services, 
compumetrical approaches in MIS, and microcomputers in 
business in Applied Statistics, Behaciour & Information Tech- 
nology, Communications of the ACM, Computers & Operations 
Research, Decision Sciences, Decision Support Systems, Infor- 
mation & Management, Information Systems and Operational 
Research (INFOR), Information Systems Research, Interna- 
tional Journal of Man-Machine Studies, Omega, MIS Quarterly, 
and others. His current research interests focus upon eco- 
nomics of computers, management of information systems, 
career development of MIS professionals, and end-user com- 
puting. 
Sidney R. Siegel is an Associate Pro- 
fessor of Management and Organiza- 
tional sciences at Drexel University. 
Formerly he was on the faculty of 
Rutgers University and remains affili- 
ated with their Institute of Manage- 
ment and Labor Relations. He holds 
a BS in Mechanical Engineering from 
Duke University. He earned his MBA 
and Ph.D. in Environmental Manage- 
ment from the College of Business 
and Administration at Drexel Univer- 
sity. He has published articles on 
pre-retirement planning, employee rights, age discrimination, 
turnover propensity of engineers, and use of paraprofessionals 
in Public Personnel Management, Journal of Engineering and 
Management Technology, Aging and Work, Compensation and 
Benefits Review, Training and DeL.elopment Journal, and oth- 
ers. Current projects include the management of multicultural 
work forces and a continuing assessment of the status of 
pre-retirement planning for the public and private sectors. Dr. 
Siegel is an O.D. consultant to many corporations throughout 
the US and abroad. 
0378-7206/93/$06.00 0 1993 - Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. All rights reserved 1 
24 Reseurch hformution & Management 
factors behind this interest are: (1) the widening 
gap between supply and demand of IS personnel; 
and (2) their reported high turnover rates. Con- 
siderable research has accumulated on: motiva- 
tion [9,10], satisfaction and turnover [4,8,13,23], 
career planning [18], career pathing [1 11, job de- 
sign [17,21], job performance [5,16], and the dif- 
ferences between IS and non-IS employees 
[12,25]. The focus of these studies and others is 
on the current and past career experience of IS 
employees, but little attention has been directed 
to examining the future career issues of these 
same IS employees. user divisions called business systems analysts. 
Some organizations have retained the technical 
expertise but provide a prestige traditionally asso- 
ciated with managerial positions by creating se- 
nior-level in-house consultants. 
Common to most technically oriented fields, 
decisions (e.g., such as whether to remain in the 
technical arena or move into management) even- 
tually plague IS personnel and create internal 
conflict. Both the organization and the individual 
tend to suffer. Knowing opportunities in the cur- 
rent position, what jobs might be of future inter- 
est, suitability of the employee for these jobs, and 
the organization’s willingness to work with the 
employee during a career planning process are 
pivotal to a successful human resource manage- 
ment system within the IS environment. Only 
limited research has been directed towards these 
issues. The purpose of this study is to better 
understand and document these processes. The population of IS employees is quite di- 
verse. Organizations must recognize that career 
opportunities, rewards, incentives, and organiza- 
tional development programs currently available 
may be irrelevant or even inappropriate for dif- 
ferent segments of this population. Organiza- 
tional reward systems and career path opportuni- 
ties must be flexible enough to accommodate a 
diverse workforce. If this occurs, employees will 
be able to make career decisions leading to more 
compatible job functions with higher levels of 
satisfaction. This should, in turn, lead to a more 
productive work force with reduced turnover. 
Available IS literature on career pathing has 
been somewhat anecdotal and largely based on 
job histories. It typically recommends that organi- 
zations develop a dual career path for IS employ- 
ees [7]. Having a career ladder for technical em- 
ployees, and a separate but equal ladder for 
management was first recognized within the engi- 
neering environment in the mid 1950’s. The con- 
cern at that point was that too many good engi- 
neers were opting for the more lucrative and 
prestigious management jobs. This often resulted 
in loosing technical resources and producing 
less-than-satisfactory managers. Transplanted 
technical personnel were inadequately trained as 
supervisors and soon became disenchanted. Career decision was initially considered the 
ability of a person to choose a specific occupation 
[6]. Employees were either decided or undecided 
defending on their commitment to a specific oc- 
cupational field. Generally, it was assumed that 
employees who are committed to a specific career 
path are more effective in career decision making 
and more successful in managing their careers. It 
follows that organizations able to facilitate career 
commitment of employees will directly benefit 
from it. 
(1) 
(2) 
(31 This study seeks to: 
Another emerging recommendation has been 
the creation of additional career paths which 
recognize the diversity of career desires and pro- 
vides incentives for IS personnel to stay within a 
technical area. Such career ladders are wider and 
allow for horizontal movement at each rung. 
Laudon and Laudon [20] reported that many or- 
ganizations have created new positions within determine if, for IS employees, there are rela- 
tionships between specific career directions 
and demographic characteristics, career suc- 
cess outcomes, role stressors, job characteris- 
tics, boundary spanning activities and perfor- 
mance; 
examine the relationship between career de- 
cisions and job title; that is, the relationship 
between the employee’s current job and the 
desired/ future one: 
identify the degree to which career decisions 
are actively initiated by IS employees or are 
simply reactive responses to situations. 
The study takes a more detailed look at career 
decisions, including career decision status and 
career direction, for a population that has already 
chosen to pursue the specific IS occupation. Ca- 
reer decision status refers to two categories of IS 
employees: Those who have and have not already 
selected career goals. The key issue here is 
Information & Munagement M. I&aria. S. R. Siegel / The career deckion of IS people 25 
whether they are able to develop career plans 
that move from the broad occupational level to a 
more specific set of decisions. For career direction 
we try to establish whether those with specific 
career goals have selected technical, manage- 
ment, business or consultant oriented roles. 
The relationships of intent are: 
Career decisions and demographic variables the 
relationships between career decisions and demo- 
graphic variables. We hypothesize that as employ- 
ees accumulate greater experience (age>, organi- 
zation (level), job (time in position), and occupa- 
tion (years in the IS field), they can presumably 
assess themselves more accurately, gain insights 
into different career positions and work organiza- 
tions, and know what jobs they would like to 
hold. We further propose that for IS personnel 
there is a positive relationship between level of 
education and career decisiveness. 
Career decisions and lertels of role conjlict and 
ambiguity IS employees who are relatively ca- 
reer undecided should report greater levels of 
role ambiguity and role conflict. It is expected 
that people who have a relatively high tolerance 
for both role conflict and role ambiguity have less 
difficulty in processing career-related information 
and making career decisions, having greater con- 
fidence in career decision making. We further 
expect there to be relationships between the de- 
gree of interaction of IS personnel with end users 
and the levels of both role ambiguity and role 
conflict. There should be less role stress for IS 
employees who choose to be in technical posi- 
tions and do not extensively deal with end users. 
Career decisions and boundary spanning actirjities 
Boundary spanning activities require individuals 
to cross departmental or organizational bound- 
aries in performing their job duties [3]. Recent 
research [l] indicates that the functions of system 
analysis and design require continual interaction 
with individuals, necessitating the crossing of 
many intra-organizational boundaries. It is ex- 
pected that individuals intending to hold manage- 
rial or business jobs need to cross departmental 
and organizational boundaries more than techni- 
cal employees. 
Career decisions and job characteristics There is 
a high need for the freedom to be creative and 
original as well as to work on challenging tasks. Since IS employees need to have freedom to be 
creative and original, the lack of challenging tasks 
and autonomy may be related to career decisions. 
Other perceived job characteristics, as reflected 
by rewards, may also be related to current career 
and future job decisions. For example, IS employ- 
ees who wish to hold technical positions may rely 
more heavily on the intangible rewards (freedom 
and autonomy, challenge, etc.). By examining the 
relationships between perceived job characteris- 
tics and career decisions we expect to find that 
employees who are assigned to challenging tasks 
and are able to pursue their ideas may be more 
comfortable making career decisions. 
Career decisions and work attitudes We hypothe- 
size that career decisions and work attitudes are 
related. IS employees who view their jobs or 
careers with a great deal of ambivalence are more 
likely to be undecided about their future careers. 
In addition, IS employees who are unsure whether 
to continue with their present organizations may 
alienate themselves from these organizations [6]. 
Since IS employees currently involved in supervi- 
sion or considering shifts into management jobs 
perform a wide variety of work, they may be more 
satisfied with their jobs and careers, and be more 
committed to their organization. We expect that 
career decisions and future career jobs and salary 
levels are related. 
2. Method 
2.1. Sample and procedure 
In early 1990, a sample copy of an MIS Career 
Attitude Surzley was mailed to presidents of 20 
Mid Atlantic chapters of the Data Processing 
Management Association (DPMA). Seven of these 
agreed to participate in this research project. 
Each chapter provided the authors with member- 
ship mailing lists, and a copy of the survey was 
mailed to each member. The survey was accom- 
panied by a cover letter from the president of the 
chapter strongly encouraging participation. A 
postage-paid envelope was enclosed for return of 
completed surveys to the university address. Par- 
ticipation was strictly voluntary and members were 
assured that individual responses to the survey 
would be treated confidentially. 
26 Reseurch Information & Management 
Surveys were mailed to 1152 DPMA members. 
Thirty one were returned because of incorrect 
addresses. Four hundred and fourteen completed 
surveys were received by the researchers for a 
36.9% response rate. The elimination of surveys 
with missing data as well as surveys from respon- 
dents in non-MIS positions resulted in a final 
sample of 348 IS employees representing a broad 
cross-section of DPMA chapters in the Mid At- 
lantic Region. A summary of chapter representa- 
tion and the demographic characteristics of the 
sample are presented in Tables I and 2. 
2.2. Measures 
Demographic items were included in the back- 
ground information section of the survey. Partici- 
pants indicated their job titles in an open-ended 
item. Age, organizational tenure, job tenure, and 
tenure in the DP/MIS field were all measured in 
years. 
Career decision Respondents were asked wheth- 
er they had decided what work position they 
would like to hold within the next 1 to 3 years 
period. Those who had not decided were coded 1 
and the ones who already decided on a particular 
job were coded 2. In addition, those having fur- 
ther decided on a specific work function were 
classified into 4 different categories: Technical 
jobs (programmers), IS management, non-IS 
management (business), and consultants. 
Role stressors Two types of role stressors were 
measured. Role ambiguity refers to the extent to 
which an employee is unclear about the job du- 
ties, performance standards, or level of perfor- 
mance. Role conflict refers to incompatible ex- 
Table 1 
Membership represented in the sample 
Chapter name N (memhersl Percentage 
Baltimore 
Central Pennsylvania 
Cumherland valley 
Lehigh valley 
Montgomery county 
Pocono northeast 
Schuykill valley 
Total 130 
4Y 
I5 
29 
70 
18 
37 
348 37.4 
14.1 
4.3 
x.3 
20.1 
5.2 
IO.6 
100.0 Table 2 
Demographic characteristics of the sample in percentages of 
total (N = 348). 
Gender 
Male (1) d 75.0 
Female (2) 25.0 
Job title 
Programmer (1) 14.3 
Analyst (2) 9.8 
Project leader (3) 7.9 
MIS manager (4) 56.7 
Other MIS (5) 11.3 
Organizational level 
Professional staff or consultant (1) 37.3 
First level supervisor (2) 10.x 
Middle management (3) 38.8 
Strategic management (4) 13.1 
Education 
Some high school or less (I) 0.0 
High school (2) 4.3 
Some college (3) 27.3 
Bachelor’s degree (4) 23.0 
Some graduate school (5) 17.1 
Graduate degree (6) 28.3 
Annual salary categories 
Below $25 000 (1) 4.9 
25 000 - 34 999 (2) 10.7 
35 000 - 44 999 (3) 21.0 
45 000 - 54 999 (4) 26.2 
55000 - 64999 (5) 15.6 
65 000 or above (6) 21.6 
Size of the computer department (No. of employees) 
I- 5(l) 14.5 
6-10 (2) 9.6 
11-20 (3) 12.2 
21-40 (4) 12.7 
Above 40 51.0 
” The numbers in parentheses represent the coding for the 
value of the specific variable. 
pectations of a work role. This often arises when 
two or more demands occur together. 
Both role ambiguity and role conflict were 
measured with six and eight items respectively 
from scales developed by Rizzo et al. [24]. Each 
was scored on a 5-point scale ranging from (1) 
very false to (5) very true. The responses were 
coded so that the greater the score, the greater 
the perceived ambiguity or conflict. The six role 
ambiguity items (e.g., “1 know exactly what is 
expected of me”; “I receive a clear explanation of 
what has to be done”) were averaged to obtain an 
overall index of role ambiguity. The internal con- 
lnformution & Management M. Igbaria, S.R. Siegel / The carrer decision of IS prople 27 
sistency reliability (alpha) of the scale was 0.82. 
Similarly, the eight role conflict items (e.g., “I 
receive incompatible requests from two or more 
people;” “ I have to do things that should be done 
differently”) were also averaged to create an 
overall role conflict score (alpha = 0.87). 
Perceived job characteristics Thirteen items were 
used to assess the extent to which an employee’s 
current job provided opportunities and rewards. 
The response options were anchored on a five- 
point scale ranging from (1) not at all to (51 to a 
great extent. Eight items were adapted from Allen 
and Katz [2], and five were added to measure 
different aspects of the job. A factor analysis of 
the thirteen items produced two factors which 
explained almost 60% of the total variance. 
Factor 1, tangible rewards, included: Work on 
projects leading to advancement, receive substan- 
tial annual salary increases, and receive a promo- 
tion within the next year or two. Responses to 
these three items were averaged to create a scale 
tapping the tangible component of the job (alpha 
= 0.79). 
Factor 2, intangible rewards, included: Pursue 
your ideas, build a professional reputation, work 
with competent colleagues, work on technically 
challenging tasks, work on professionally impor- 
tant projects, have freedom to be creative and 
original, be highly respected by your peers, work 
on projects important to the organization, be 
highly respected by top management, and have a 
great deal of power and influence on the job. 
Responses to the ten items were averaged to 
create a scale representing the intangible compo- 
nent of the job (alpha = 0.90). 
Boundary spanning acticities A three-item 
scale was developed to assess boundary spanning 
activities: The degree to which employees inter- 
act and communicate with others outside their 
department. Each item (e.g., “assist other units in 
determining appropriate uses of information 
technology”; “recommend new applications of in- 
formation technology to top management”) was 
scored on a five-point scale ranging from (1) not 
part of my job to (5) a very significant part of my 
job. The three items were averaged to create the 
boundary spanning activities score (alpha = 0.89). 
Job inr~olcement This refers to the degree to 
which an employee identifies psychologically with the present job, and the extent to which the job 
situation is central to the employee’s self-identity. 
Job involvement was measured by an eight-item 
scale adapted from Kanungo 1191. Individuals in- 
dicated their agreement or disagreement with 
each statement (e.g., “I consider my job to be 
very central to my existence”; “most of my inter- 
ests are centered around my job”) on a five point 
Likert-type scale ranging from (1) strongly dis- 
agree to (5) strongly agree. Responses to the 
eight items were averaged to create a job involve- 
ment score (alpha = 0.85). 
Perceirled performance IS employees responded 
to: “How would you rate your current perfor- 
mance?” Responses were made on a five-point 
scale with the following anchors: Unsatisfactory; 
marginal; good; excellent; and outstanding. 
Career satisfaction This refers to the emotional 
reactions of employees to the progress they have 
achieved in their career. It was measured by a 
five-item scale adapted from prior research [14], 
with appropriate changes to make the items more 
relevant to the present sample. Individuals indi- 
cated their agreement or disagreement (e.g., “I 
am satisfied with the success I have achieved in 
my career”; “ I am satisfied with the progress I 
have made toward achieving my overall career 
goals”) on a five point Likert-type scale ranging 
from (1) strongly disagree to (5) strongly agree. 
Responses were averaged to create a career satis- 
faction score (alpha = 0.90). 
Job satisfaction Job satisfaction refers to the 
emotional reactions of individuals to their jobs 
and their job experience. It was assessed with a 
three-item scale [15] reflecting overall satisfaction 
with the job. Each item (e.g., “Generally speaking 
I am satisfied with my job”) required the respon- 
dents to indicate their feelings on a five point 
scale ranging from (1) strongly disagree to (5) 
strongly agree. Responses were averaged to pro- 
duce a total job satisfaction score (alpha = 0.70). 
Organizational commitment This variable, de- 
fined as the identification with a particular orga- 
nization and the desire to maintain membership 
in that organization, was measured by an abbrevi- 
ated version of the organizational commitment 
questionnaire (OCQ> developed by Porter et al. 
28 Research Information & Management 
[22]. The shorter version used in this study repre- 
sents a more ‘pure’ measure of the affective 
dimensions of commitment to the employing or- 
ganization. Sample items are “I really care about 
the fate of my organization”; and “I feel very 
little loyalty to my organization”. The response 
options ranged from (1) strongly disagree to (51 
strongly agree. They were coded so that high 
scores reflected greater commitment to the orga- 
nization. The coefficient of reliability of this mea- 
sure was 0.88. 
3. Results and discussion 
3.1. Career decisions 
Results of the study show that 266 IS employ- 
ees (76.4%) indicated they had a particular job 
position they would like to hold within the com- 
ing 1 to 3 years period. Only 82 (23.6%) of the IS 
employees were undecided. 
3.2 Career direction 
For those having decided about their future 
career directions, our data show that 23 (8.6%) 
indicated that they would like to hold technical 
positions (programmers), 33 (12.4%) would like 
to be consultants, 26 (9.8%) preferred non-IS 
(e.g., other business functional areas). The major- 
ity of IS employees, 184 (69.2%), indicated a 
desire to hold IS management positions. This 
indicates that the majority of IS employees prefer 
to stay in the IS field either holding technical or 
managerial positions (77.8%). Interestingly, few 
would like to cross to other business areas. 
Results indicate that careers primarily fall into 
one of four categories. Two are within the IS area 
(technical and managerial), one within the more 
general organizational area (non-IS), and lastly, 
one outside the organization (consultant). Many 
of the IS employees would also like to be consid- 
ered for management positions in such functional 
areas. It is apparent that organizations need to 
place greater emphasis on dual career paths 
within the IS department. Those options would 
provide greater incentives to IS employees to stay 
with their current organizations instead of seek- 
ing opportunities elsewhere. 3.3. Career decisions and career direction ~1s. job 
title 
Table 3 shows the cross-tabulation of the ca- 
reer directions and job titles. Results show that 
there is no relationship between them. For those 
decisive IS employees who have indicated a spe- 
cific job goal, Table 3 presents the frequency that 
these people desire to remain in each of the four 
career directions. As expected, a majority of peo- 
ple holding a consulting job would like to stay 
within the area (59%). It is also important to note 
that some employees currently in IS management 
would like to move to senior management posi- 
tions outside the department. This re-inforces the 
earlier suggestion that organizations should not 
restrict IS employees from non-IS jobs and should 
consider training and educating these managers 
in other business functions. This would encour- 
age them to remain in the organization where 
they could still achieve their non-IS positions. 
The organization could identify the educational 
and training requirements for these jobs and de- 
termine the fit between the employee and the job 
position. Based on previous findings, if there is a 
match between the employee job desire and the 
job title, there will be: More motivation, produc- 
tivity, and satisfaction with the job and career; as 
well as loyalty to the current organization; and 
eventually less likelihood to leave. 
3.4. Career decisions and career directions 1’s. de- 
mographic characteristics 
Gender and career decisions are unrelated. 
About three quarters of the IS male and female 
Table 3 
The relationships between career directions and job title. ‘r.h 
Job title Career directions 
IS Busi- Consul- 
Tech- Manage- ness tant 
nical ment 
Programmers 20 23 8 9 
Analysts 0 35 I 2 
Project leaders 1 16 0 I 
IS managers 2 113 15 8 
Consultants 0 7 2 13 
” The relationship between career directions and job title was 
found to be statistically significant at level 0.001. 
h The values presented in this table are the number of people 
in a job title who would like to hold different jobs. 
Information & Management M. Igbaria, S.R. Siegel / The career decision of IS people 29 
employees had made decisions regarding their 
future careers. Among these, more females 
wanted to hold technical positions than males 
(15.2% vs. 6.5%), but fewer females would like to 
be consultants (4.5% vs. 11.5%). These results 
may be a reflection of the reported difficulty that 
females encounter in seeking senior management 
positions or becoming entrepreneurs. The demo- 
graphic data on gender also suggests a general 
under-representation of females. While they rep- 
resent 45% of the employed US labor force, they 
only account for approximately 25% of positions 
in this study. 
Table 4 indicates that age, job tenure and 
number of years in the IS field are unrelated to 
career decisions, but education and organiza- 
tional tenure are related. Highly educated em- 
ployees and those with fewer years of tenure with 
the organization decided what jobs they would 
like to hold more frequently than their counter- 
parts. 
Furthermore, Table 5 shows that age, educa- 
tion, job tenure and number of years in the IS 
field are also related to decisions regarding ca- 
Table 4 
The relationships between career decisions and the study 
variables. 
Independent variables Career Career F-test a 
decisions indecision 
Demographic variables 
Age 
Education 
Organizational tenure 
Job tenure 
Number of years in the IS 41.59 
4.52 
8.66 
4.41 
15.87 
Role stressors 
Role ambiguity 
Role conflict 2.38 
2.86 
Boundary spanning activities 3.25 
Perceived job characteristics 
Tangible rewards 
Intangible rewards 3.07 
3.92 
Career outcomes 
Job satisfaction 
Career satisfaction 
Organizational commitment 
Job involvement 
Salary 
Perceived performance 3.77 
3.81 
3.79 
2.84 
4.07 
3.95 41.12 0.17 
4.09 8.60 l *- 
10.60 3.99 l 
4.65 0.19 
14.59 1.33 
2.57 4.21 l 
2.93 0.39 
3.09 0.99 
2.79 3.71 l 
3.72 5.50 l 
3.59 3.95 l 
3.68 1.49 
3.58 6.05 l 
2.56 3.55 l 
3.67 3.82 l 
3.83 7.20 l * 
a l P 2 0.05; l - p Io.01; l -- p 5 0.001. reer directions. Results indicate that those em- 
ployees preferring to hold technical positions are 
typically older and have longer tenure in their 
jobs than those desiring other positions. This may 
be due to their lack of adequate management and 
business skills required for non-technical posi- 
tions. It is interesting to note that the more highly 
educated employees would like to be consultants 
and the less educated ones would like to move to 
technical positions. This confirms the idea that 
highly educated employees typically see more op- 
tions. Corporate human resource managers often 
refer to a perceived relationship between mobility 
of employees and educational level. Many organi- 
zations find that relocation of valuable employees 
away from their home area generates reluctance 
to accept offers from the less educated workers. 
Furthermore, a high percentage of those who 
accept the move eventually either leave the com- 
pany or request transfers back to the original 
location. The physical and intellectual exposure 
at the college level is clearly more broadening 
than high school, and certainly there is a relation- 
ship between resistance to change and fear of the 
unknown. 
3.5. Career decisions and career directions vs. role 
stressors and boundary spanning activities 
Role ambiguity is related to career decisions 
but role conflict is unrelated. IS employees who 
experience low levels of role ambiguity tend to 
know what job they would like to hold. IS em- 
ployees who would like to move into the business 
category experience lower levels of ambiguity than 
others. These employees may consider their jobs 
and performance objectives to be clearly defined 
by their supervisors. Both the technical and man- 
agerial IS employees experienced similar low lev- 
els of role ambiguity. 
On the other hand, IS employees who would 
like to be consultants reported having experi- 
enced higher levels of ambiguity. This may be due 
to the nature of their jobs. In consultant type 
positions, people frequently present a problem 
that is not precisely defined and consequently 
may serve as a source of ambiguity. Also, expec- 
tations from consultants are often intentionally 
vague - “study what you like as long as you help 
us”. It is not unusual for them to be presented 
with the management’s estimate of the problem, 
30 Research Information & Management 
only to find that entirely different issues are at 
work. Furthermore, since their work involves a 
great deal of creativity and autonomy, there is 
additional opportunity for role ambiguity. 
Boundary spanning activities are unrelated to 
career decisions. Conversely, among the IS em- 
ployees who had decided what type of jobs they 
would like to hold, boundary spanning activities 
and career directions are related. IS employees 
who would like to hold IS management positions 
or business positions are engaged in more exten- 
sive boundary crossing than others. Their jobs 
require them to have continuous interaction with 
individuals both internal and external to the IS 
department. These employees are more likely to 
come in contact with individuals from a variety of 
functions and organizational levels. However, IS 
employees who would like to hold technical posi- 
tions feel there is little need to cross departmen- 
tal or organizational boundaries in order to per- 
form their duties. 3.6. Career decisions and career directions vs. per- 
ceived job characteristics 
Both tangible and intangible rewards are re- 
lated to career decisions. Results indicate that 
employees who had decided what jobs they would 
like to hold perceive that these jobs would pro- 
vide them with both tangible and intangible re- 
wards. They evidently believe they know what 
those jobs offer and accordingly have decided on 
their course of action. 
Intangible job rewards, such as autonomy and 
challenge, are related to career directions. IS 
employees desiring business jobs expressed the 
strongest relationship, followed by those seeking 
management and technical positions. IS employ- 
ees who would like to be consultants were found 
to be the group least interested in intangible 
rewards. Possibly tangible rewards (money, ad- 
vancement, and promotion) are more important 
to them. Conversely, those who desire technical 
Table 5 
The relationships between career directions and the study variables. 
Independent variables Career directions 
IS Business Consultant F-test a 
Technical Management 
Demographic variables 
Age 47.33 
Education 4.00 
Organizational tenure 9.09 
Job tenure 7.78 
Number of in the IS years 19.83 
Role stressors 
Role ambiguity 2.39 
Role conflict 2.86 
Boundary spanning activities 2.53 
Perceived job characteristics 
Tangible rewards 2.76 
Intangible rewards 3.71 
Career outcomes 
Job satisfaction 3.17 
Career satisfaction 3.73 
Organizational commitment 3.73 
Job involvement 2.73 
Salary 2.83 
Perceived performance 3.87 
>’ l p 5 0.05: l * p 5 0.001; l -* p IO.001. 40.07 43.14 41.37 4.53 l - 
4.37 4.52 5.28 5.04 l * 
9.01 9.60 9.68 1.02 
3.80 4.55 4.00 4.79 l - 
15.24 16.45 13.59 2.71 l 
2.39 2.10 2.62 2.52 l 
2.89 2.66 2.93 0.57 
3.34 3.33 3.18 2.83 l 
3.02 3.18 3.01 0.75 
3.97 4.20 3.59 4.77 l - 
3.76 4.07 3.52 2.78 l 
3.84 4.00 3.49 1.71 
3.77 3.89 3.77 0.24 
2.78 2.55 2.66 0.86 
4.17 3.57 4.56 8.82 l -* 
3.95 3.96 4.04 0.3 I 
Information & Management M. Igbaria, S. R. Siegel / The career decision of IS people 31 
positions may perceive that they had no chance 
for advancement. For those who see more ad- 
vancement opportunities, moving up to either IS 
management or other functional areas is an ap- 
propriate direction. Note that, inconsistent with 
our expectations, there are no significant differ- 
ences among the four career directions and their 
relationships to tangible rewards. It appears that IS employees earning relatively 
high salaries were most likely to be consultants, 
and least prefer an IS technical career direction. 
This perceived relationship between future career 
direction and salary level remained significant 
after controlling for role stressors, perceived job 
characteristics, and demographic characteristics. 
These independent variables do not appear to 
explain the differences in this relationships. 
3.7 Career decisions and career directions vs. ca- 
reer outcomes 
4. Summary and conclusion 
Result show that five out of the six indepen- 
dent career outcome variables are related to ca- 
reer decisions. Table 4 shows them to be: Job 
satisfaction; organizational commitment; job in- 
volvement; salary; and performance. Highly paid 
IS employees who are more satisfied and involved 
with their jobs, and more loyal to their organiza- 
tions have a more decided attitude to their future 
careers. Those employees may have been receiv- 
ing the feedback and information needed to help 
them in initiating future career plans. Surpris- 
ingly, a significant relationship was not found 
between career satisfaction and career decisions. 
Since career outcomes and some of the other 
independent variables, such as role ambiguity, 
demographics, and perceived job characteristics, 
are related, we decided to control these predic- 
tors and test for differences in satisfaction, com- 
mitment, salary, involvement, and perceived per- 
formance. No significant differences were found, 
except in performance. This suggests that differ- 
ences between the decisive and undecisive IS 
employees may be partially due to differences in 
variables of role ambiguity, demographic charac- 
teristics, and tangible and intangible rewards. 
Those IS employees who are more satisfied 
with their jobs and careers would prefer career 
directions involving business (non-19 jobs. On 
the other hand, consultants were found to be 
least satisfied with their jobs and careers. It is 
important to note that when controlling for role 
stressors, perceived job characteristics and demo- 
graphics characteristics, these differences in both 
job and career satisfactions across the four career 
directions become non-significant. This suggests 
that the initial differences in job satisfaction and 
organizational commitment are due to differ- 
ences in role stressors, perceived job characteris- 
tics and demographic characteristics. This study has investigated the relationships 
between the independent variables of role stres- 
sors, boundary spanning activities, perceived job 
characteristics, career outcomes, and demograph- 
ics, and the two dependent variables of career 
decisions, and future career directions of IS em- 
ployees. 
The major finding was that a majority of IS 
employees had already defined the specific jobs 
they would like to hold within the next one to 
three years. Furthermore, these decisive IS em- 
ployees were able to define 4 directions in which 
they sought future careers: The IS technical area, 
IS management, non-IS area (business), and con- 
sultant areas. Whether we use these terms or the 
broader framework of: Working for an organiza- 
tion or working for themselves, is not the key 
issue. Of greater importance is the need for orga- 
nizations to recognize that in order to retain and 
keep current IS personnel performing at high 
levels there need to be multiple career paths. 
There must be recognizable, attainable and rele- 
vant incentives and rewards. The danger lies in 
the possibility that many of these and future IS 
employees may not find a match between their 
career decision goals and directions, and the po- 
tential opportunities within the organization. 
There are clear implications regarding human 
resource issues in managing IS employees. At a 
minimum, management should frequently moni- 
tor the progress of IS employees and provide 
them with the opportunity to advance within the 
organization. Concurrently, it is also important to 
incorporate dual career paths for those IS em- 
ployees desiring to remain within the IS depart- 
ment. Career paths need to be designed with 
wider rungs on each step of the ladder. Organiza- 
tions should encourage IS employees indicating 
32 Research Information & Management 
an interest in moving up to senior management 
outside the IS department. This requires a proac- 
tive human resource intervention and not just a 
“go for it” attitude. 
Although the DPMA members surveyed in this 
study represent a wide variety of organizations 
and functional areas, they were all members of 
one association and do not necessary represent 
the population of IS employees. Therefore, the 
transferability of these results to employees in 
other companies and other geographical areas is 
not proved. Finally, although bivariate analyses 
identified a number of relationships between ca- 
reer directions and decisions and job satisfaction, 
organizational commitment and intention to stay, 
and other variables, the observed relationships 
may be more complex than the present findings 
indicate. 
References 
[l] Ahituv, N and S. Neumann. Principles of Information 
Systems for Management, Third Edition, Wm. C. Brown 
Publishers, Dubuque, IA, 1990. 
[2] Allen, T.J. and R. Katz, “The Dual Ladder: Motivational 
Solution or Managerial Delusion?“, R & D Management, 
Vol. 16, No. 2, 1986, pp. 185-197. 
[3] Baroudi, J.J., “The Impact of Role Variables on IS 
Personnel Work Attitudes and Intentions”, MIS Quar- 
terly, Vol. 9, No. 4, December 1985, pp. 341-356. 
[4] Bartol, K.M., “Turnover Among DP Personnel: A Causal 
Analysis”, Communications of the ACM, Vol. 26, No. 10, 
October 1983, pp. 807-811. 
[5] Bartol, K.M. and D.C. Martin, “Managing Information 
Systems Personnel: A Review of the Literature and Man- 
agerial Implications”, MIS Quarterly, Special Issue, 1982, 
pp. 49-70. 
[6] Callanan, G.A. and J.H. Greenhaus, “The Career Indeci- 
sion of Managers and Professionals: Development of a 
Scale and Test of a Model”, Journal of Vocational Behat,- 
ior, Vol. 37, 1990, pp. 79-103. 
[7] Chesebrough, P.H. and G.B. Davis, “Planning a Career 
Path in Information Systems”, Journal of Systems Man- 
agement, Vol. 34, No. 1, Jan. 1983, pp. 6-13. 
[8] Compton, T.R., “Job Satisfaction Among Systems Per- 
sonnel”, Journal of Systems Management, Vol. 38, No. 7, 
July 1987, pp. 28-31. 
[9] Couger, D.J., “Motivating Analysts and Programmers,” ComputerWorld, Vol. 14, No. 3, January 15, 1990, pages 
73, 76. 
[lo] Couger, D.J. and R.A. Zawacki, Moticating and Manag- 
ing Computer Personnel, Wiley. New York, NY, 1980. 
[ll] Davis, G.B. and .M.H. Olson, Management Information 
Systems: Conceptual Foundations. Structure, and Decelop- 
ment. McGraw-Hill, New York, NY, Second Edition, 
1985. 
[12] Ferratt. T.W. and L.E. Short, “Are Information Systems 
People Different: An Investigation of Motivational Dif- 
ferences”, MIS Quarterly, Vol, 10, No. 4, December 
1986, 377-387. 
[13] Goldstein, D.K. and J.F. Rockart, “An Examination of 
Work-Related Correlates of Job Satisfaction in Program- 
mer/Analysts”, MIS Quarterly, Vol. 8, No. 2. June 1984, 
pp. 103-115. 
[14] Greenhaus, J.H., S. Parasuraman, and W.M. Wormley, 
“Effects of Race on Organizational Experiences, Job 
Performance Evaluations, and Career Outcomes”, 
Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 33, No. 1, March 
1990, pp. 64-86. 
[15] Hackman, J.R. and G.R. Oldham, “Development of the 
Job Diagnostic Survey”, Journal of Applied Psychology, 
Vol. 60, 1975, pp. 159-170. 
[16] Igbaria, M., “Job Performance Evaluations of MIS Em- 
ployees: An Examination of Antecedents and Conse- 
quences”, Journal of Engineering and Technology Man- 
agement, 1991 (Forthcoming). 
[17] Igbaria, M. and J.H. Greenhaus, “The Work Attitudes of 
MIS Personnel: A Survey of DPMA Members”, Informa- 
tion Executive, Vol. 4, No. 2, Spring 1991, pp. 48-53. 
[18] Igbaria, M., J.H. Greenhaus, and S. Parasuraman, 
“Career Orientations of MIS Employees: An Empirical 
Analysis”, MIS Quarterly, 1991 (Forthcoming). 
[19] Kanungo, R., “Measurement of Job and Work Involve- 
ment”, Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 67, 1982, pp. 
341-349. 
[20] Laudon, K.C. and J.P. Laudon, Management Information 
Systems: A Contemporary Perspective, 2nd edition, 
Macmillan Publishing Company, New York, NY, 1988. 
[21] Lucas, H.C., Jr., Managing Information Sercices, Macmil- 
lan Publishing Company, New York, NY, 1989. 
[22] Porter, L.W.. W.J. Crampon, and E.J. Smith, “Organiza- 
tional Commitment and Managerial Turnover: A longitu- 
dinal Study”, Organizational Behavior and Human Perfor- 
mance, Vol. 15, 1976. pp. 87-98. 
[23] Rifkin, G., “Finding and Keeping DP/MIS Profession- 
als”, ComputerWorld. June 3. 1985, pp. 3-7, 10, 14-16, 
18-21. 
[24] Rizzo, J.R., R.J. House, and S.I. Lirtzman, “Role Con- 
flict and Abiguity in Complex Organizations”, Adminis- 
tratiue Science Quarterly, Vol. 15, 1970, pp. 150-163. 
[25] Woodruff, C.K., “Data Processing People-Are They Re- 
ally Different?“, Information & Management, Vol. 3, No. 
4, October 1980, pp. 133-139. 