From bureaucratic machines to
inter-organizational networks
Characterizing the response to the World
Trade Center crisis
J.RamonGil-Garcia
University at Albany State University of New York, Albany,
New York, USA and Centro de Investigacion y Docencia Economicas,
Mexico City, Mexico
TheresaA.Pardo
Center for Technology in Government, University at Albany, SUNY,
Albany, New York, USA, and
DjokoSigitSayogo
Center for Technology in Government, University at Albany, SUNY,
Albany, New York, USA, and Department of Economics,
University of Muhammadiyah at Malang, Malang, Indonesia
Abstract
Purpose – This paper aims to argue that the structure of the response to the World Trade Center
(WTC)crisiscanbecharacterizedasaninter-organizationalnetworkandthemajorityoftheactivitiescanbeidentifiedasnetworkmanagement.
Design/methodology/approach – Usingamixed-methodresearchstrategyencompassingin-depth
interviews and a sociometric survey, the authors characterize the response as an inter-organizationalnetworkanddescribesignificantfactorsthatfacilitatetheeffectivefunctioningandmanagementofanemergencyresponse.
Findings – TheresultsprovideempiricalsupportfortheclaimthatthemanagementoftheWTCresponse
wasverydifferentfromnormalgovernmentoperationsinmanyrespects.However,itwasalsofoundthatcompletedetachmentofthenetwork-formoforganizationfrombureaucratichierarchyisnotalwayspossibleinanemergencyresponse,particularlyintermsofleadershipandtheavailabilityofresources.
Originality/value – The authors argue that bureaucratic leadership exists in political layers and is
sometimesneededtoprovidesocialvaluetothegeneralpublicandpromotetheirengagement.Finally,theauthorsfoundevidencethattheeffectivenessofnetworksinanemergencyresponseisinfluencedbycertain enabling conditions, such as the severity of events, and suggest some implications forgovernmentoperations.
Keywords Bureaucracy,Emergencyresponse,Bureaucratichierarchy,
Inter-organizationalnetworks,Networkgovernance,WorldTradeCentercrisis
Paper type Research paper
The authors want to thank Hyuckbin Kwon for his helpful assistance in the development of the
initialliteraturereviewforthispaper.ThisstudywaspartiallysupportedbytheNationalScienceFoundation(NSF)GrantNo.EIA-0221927.TheviewsandconclusionsarethoseoftheauthorsanddonotnecessaryreflecttheviewsoftheNSF.ThecurrentissueandfulltextarchiveofthisjournalisavailableonEmeraldInsightat:
www.emeraldinsight.com/1750-6166.htm
TG
10,4
568
Received13February2016
Revised13May2016Accepted30August2016
TransformingGovernment:
People,ProcessandPolicyVol.10No.4,2016pp.568-590©EmeraldGroupPublishingLimited1750-6166DOI
10.1108/TG-02-2016-0011
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tg/article-pdf/10/4/568/2353745/tg-02-2016-0011.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
1. Introduction
Disaster and emergency response increasingly involves coordination of multipleorganizations across different levels of government, as they handle incidents that arebeyondthenormalcapabilityandjurisdictionofanysingleorganization(
Curninetal.,
2015). The World Trade Center (WTC) emergency response in 2001, for instance,
involved – directly and indirectl y – a total of 1,607 organizations, including 73 federal
organizations ( Kapucu, 2006 ). For situations like this one, some scholars argue that a
dynamicandflexiblenetworkstructureismorefavorablethanthetraditionaltop-down,command-and-control bureaucratic model (
Waugh and Streib, 2006 ;Moynihan, 2009 ).
Thus,recentresearchhasbeguntostudythefactorsthatdeterminetheeffectivenessofnetwork governance in an emergency response, including leadership (
Donahue, 2006 ;
Waugh and Streib, 2006 ), awareness building and participation ( Comfort, 2005 ;Kiefer
and Montjoy, 2006 ), flexible guidelines and rules ( Donahue, 2006 ), scenario-based
planning ( Comfort, 2005 ;Donahue, 2006 ) and coordination and trust relationships
(Kapucu,2006 ).
Disasters have become increasingly regular ( Curninet al., 2015). The International
Disaster Database[ 1] shows that the number of disasters that occur each year across
every continent rose significantly in the 1990s and 2000s. Average annual damagesfrom such disasters are staggering; for instance, total losses from climate- andweather-related disasters in 2011 alone are close to US$200bn (
Smith and Katz, 2013 ).
Analystsestimatedapproximately$3mindamagesfromUSweather-relateddisastersaloneintheearlypartof2015[
2].Suchdisastersnotonlyresultinsignificanteconomic
losses but also immeasurable human suffering. Effective emergency response couldminimize potential losses and suffering inflicted by these disasters. Thus, anunderstanding of the critical factors and lessons learned from a successful responsecouldcontributetothedevelopmentofamoreeffectiveemergencyresponse.
Thispapercharacterizesanemergencyresponseasaninter-organizationalnetwork
and describes critical factors that facilitate effective management of an emergencyresponse,usingtheSeptember2001WTCcrisisasthecase.Itspecificallyaddressesthefollowingquestions:
Q1. Howisaneffectiveemergencyresponseorganizedandmanaged?
Q2. What are the critical factors affecting effective management of emergency
response?
Q3. Aresomeofthosecharacteristicsrelatedtoanetworkformoforganization?
The WTC response provides a rich research setting to understand factors that
contribute to the effectiveness of an emergency response; in this paper, we highlightlessons learned, which remain salient today more than a decade after the crisis. AsconveyedinanewsletterfromtheCenterforTechnologyinGovernment,the2001WTCresponse:
[…] provides a unique and unrivaled research setting for increasing our understanding, and
measuring the value of, collaboration, and essential information- and technology-intensive
policiesandfunctionsofgovernment[ 3].
Based on rich interview data and a sociometric survey, we suggest that the dominant
organizing form of the WTC emergency response resembles a network structure. Weadopt
Powell’s (2003) argument and define network structure as a form of social569WorldTrade
Centercrisis
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tg/article-pdf/10/4/568/2353745/tg-02-2016-0011.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
exchange based on relationships, mutual interests and reputation. To support our
proposition,wecriticallyexamineresultsfrominterviewsandasociometricsurveybycontrastingthefindingstothecharacteristicsofbureaucratichierarchy.Asarguedby
Tirole(1986) ,hierarchiescontainverticalstructureswithcascadinglayersthatconnect
the principal and the agent. In this paper, we adopt Weber’s (1946) definition and
specificallyrefertohierarchyasbureaucratichierarchy;ahierarchicalstructurethatisgovernedbyformalrulesandregulations.
We present our arguments based on the main characteristics of network structure
and assess the extent to which these characteristics contributed to the success of theresponse efforts. This paper is organized in six sections including the foregoingintroduction.Section2presentsareviewoftheliteraturethatsystematicallycompareshierarchiesandnetworks,emphasizingsomeofthemaincharacteristicsofnetworksasanorganizingform.Thissectionattemptstocharacterizebureaucratichierarchiesandnetworks as distinct forms of organization and contrast their main features. Section 3delineatestheresearchdesignandmethodsandincludesabriefdescriptionofthedatacollectionandanalysisprocedures.Section4presentstheresultsofanalysisofboththeinterview data and the sociometric survey using several social network analysistechniques. Section 5 presents our discussion of the results, theoretical and practicalimplications of the study and a few areas for future research on this topic. Finally,Section6providessomeconcludingremarks.
2. Understanding hierarchies and networks as organizational forms
Rich discussion of alternative forms of organizing started with
Coase’s (1937) seminal
paperTheNatureoftheFirm ,whereheassertsthatcommandsystemsweresometimes
better than price mechanisms ( Coase, 1937 , p. 387). Williamson (1975) revisits the
concept of organizational forms and proposes a dichotomy between market andhierarchyastheonlypossibleformsoforganizing.Movingfrommarkettohierarchyasorganizing forms depends on the frequency and build-up of knowledge and thefrequencyandnatureoftransactions.Forinstance,transactionswillbegovernedunderhierarchy when they occur frequently and thus require specific investments(
Williamson, 1975 ). The discussion becomes broader when Granovetter (1985)
challenges this dichotomy by expounding the importance of social relations. Powell
(2003, p. 300) subsequently argues for a form of organizing that neither represents
marketnorhierarchy,hasitsownlogicandisgovernedby“certainformsofexchange[that] are more social–that is more dependent on relationships, mutual interests, andreputation – as well as less guided by a formal structure of authority”, later coined asnetworkorganization.
Scholars have since elucidated elements that distinctively characterize the three
forms of organizing. In contrast to the other two, the market view does not propose aspecificstructureasaformoforganizingandeconomistsgenerallyviewthefluidityofprice as the organizing mechanism (
Williamson and Winter, 1991 ). Hierarchy and
network,ontheotherhand,suggestcertainstructuresthatcharacterizeeachofthemasa particular organizing form. Scholars argue that hierarchy is a form of organizationcharacterizedbytheemploymentofgradedauthoritytoinfluenceresourceallocationsin the organization where the higher offices supervised lower ones (
Weber, 1946 ,
pp.196-197).Thissimplifiedstructureisparticularlyefficienttomitigatecomplexitiesdue to “the limits of human intellective capacities” (
March and Simon, 1958 , p. 169).TG
10,4
570
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tg/article-pdf/10/4/568/2353745/tg-02-2016-0011.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
Hierarchyisefficientinreducingorganizationalcomplexitybecauseitsimplifiestasks
andauthorityintoaclearandgradedstructure,andthus,itreducesthecognitiveloadofindividuals.Incontrast,networkasaformoforganizationischaracterizedbyflexibilityand adaptability to the complexity of environmental changes (
Fulop, 1996 ) and
particularly apt for circumstances that require efficient, reliable information ( Powell,
2003).
Buildingfromareviewoftheexistingliteraturestudyingbureaucratichierarchyand
network structure, this paper identifies and compares ten features that characterizenetwork structure as an organizational form. We use these ten features to understandthe WTC emergency response and assess to what extent the response was a networkand whether these characteristics were important for a more effective and successfulresponse. Considering the dichotomy between network and hierarchy in terms ofstructure,wearguethatiftheresponsedoesnotfullyconformwiththetenfeaturesofnetwork structure, then the differences could represent some characteristics related tobureaucratichierarchy.
We also propose that the characteristics of a network structure can be categorized
intofourimportantaspectsoforganizing:generatinggoals,managingfunctions,settingthe structure and promoting coordination and communication. The first step oforganizingisgeneratingorganizationalgoals,whichinthecaseofanetwork,areframedthroughthealignmentofmembers’goals.Thegoalswillbeimplementedthroughsetsofmanagement functions in forms of leadership and authority and the development oftrusted relationships. The management of functions will be organized in a particularstructurethatdefinesthedivisionoftasksanddeploymentofresources.Inthenetwork,thestructureischaracterizedbylean,flatanddynamicstructureandflexiblerolesandresponsibilities. Often, network structures need redundancy in terms of rules andrequirements.Theirflexibilityfrequentlyneedstherelaxingofrulesandthebypassingofredtapetoachievethenetworkgoals.Finally,thecommunicationandcoordinationoftasksiscrucialinanetworkstructure.Inalooselycoupledorganizationalstructuresuchas a network, it is crucial to maintain the collaborative environment. Hence, decisionmaking is performed taking into account the different views of network members.Boundaryobjectsandtheroleofboundaryspannersarecrucialinaccommodatingthedifferent views and in communicating and coordinating the tasks. Often in atime-constrained situation such as an emergency response, communication andcoordination are strengthened and accelerated through the co-location of networkmembers.Belowweprovideabriefdescriptionofeachofthetennetworkfeaturesfoundintheliterature.Theyareorganizedinthefourcategoriesmentionedabove.Asummaryofthereviewispresentedin
TableI.
2.1 Generating goals
2.1.1Framingsharedgoals. Asanetworkstructurereliesonconnectinglooselycoupled
relationships,thedevelopmentofacommonpurposebecomesaprerequisite( Chisholm,
1996), such that framing goal alignment among members is a crucial function of
network managers ( Agranoff and McGuire, 2001 ). This is important because many
timesactorsarecollaboratingforthefirsttimeorinanewcontext.Inaddition,asformalauthority develops gradually (
Moynihan, 2009 ), networks use goal alignment to
establish authority and legitimacy ( Rethemeyer and Hatmaker, 2008 ). Therefore, for571WorldTrade
Centercrisis
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tg/article-pdf/10/4/568/2353745/tg-02-2016-0011.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
Table I.
Comparing
hierarchiesandnetworks
Attribute Hierarchy Network References
Generating goals
Framingsharedgoals Individualgoalsandinterestsarepreserved
andforcedtoalignwithorganizationgoalsAdistinctivecharacterofanetwork
ascomparedtohierarchyisindevelopmentofcollectivepurposesFramingcollectivepurposesisnecessarytoforgeauthorityandlegitimacy,providemotivationformembersandconvincethestakeholderstoparticipateChisholm(1996) ,Agranoff
andMcGuire(2001) ,
Moynihan(2009) .
RethemeyerandHatmaker(2008)
Managing functions
Leadershipandauthority Thelocusofleadershipisclearinthe
hierarchyThecascadingdelegationofauthorityispre-definedbyitsleaderTheleader’sroleistosuperviseLeadershipresidesinoneindividualLeadershipisbasedonsocial
relationsandsituationsandoftenobscureThestructureofanetworkinfluencestheemergenceofaleader;thus,leadershipisconceptualizedasinfluenceoverprocessesTheleaders’rolesareasbrokersandmediatorsTherecouldbemultipleleadersinanetwork.Leadershipissharedordistributed
Brassetal.(2004),
BalkundiandKilduff
(2006),DalyandFinnigan
(2011),Sutantoetal.(2011),
Carsonetal.(2007),Weber
(1946),Curninetal.(2015)
Theroleoftrust Trustislowduetothestandardizationand
codificationofrulesinhierarchyInterpersonaltrustisdiminishedthroughtheadministrativefiatAhigherdegreeoftrustisneeded
tocurbpossibleopportunisticbehaviorAffective-basedtrustisimportantforpartnerselectionandretention
Thompson(2003) .
Granovetter(1985) ,Van
Alstyne(1997)Rousseau etal.(1998)
,
McKnightetal(1998) ,
LewisandWeigert(1985) ,
RethemeyerandHatmaker
(2008)
Setting the structure
Leanandflatorganizationstructure Hierarchyinbureaucraticgovernance
representsasteeppyramidstructurewhereacentralunitissupportedbymanylevelsNetworkgovernancehasaflatter
structureduetotheeliminationofmiddlelayers Leibenstein(1987) ,Van
Alstyne(1997) ,Podolny
andPage(1998)
(continued )TG
10,4
572
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tg/article-pdf/10/4/568/2353745/tg-02-2016-0011.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
Table I.Attribute Hierarchy Network References
Flexibilityinrolesandresponsibilities
anddynamicstructureHierarchyemploysstandardizationand
taskspecializationFormalrelationsandauthoritydominatehierarchyTheboundaryisfixed,rigidanddefiniteandinvolvesstabletiesInformalrelationsandpersuasive
authorityaredominantinanetworkTheboundaryofanetworkisflexible,permeableanddynamic
Binz-Scharf(2003) ,Van
Alstyne(1997) ,Agranoff
andMcGuire(2001)
RegulatoryenvironmentandbypassingredtapeLawisthesourceofrationalityandthe
primaryvirtueisreliabilityHighlyregulatedenvironmentCultureisthesourceofrationality
andtheprimaryvirtueisflexibilityAuthorityandlegitimacyisnegotiatedAnetworkrespondingtoamajordisastermightbypassmanyformalrulestodirectlyrespondtoagivensituation
ConsidineandLewis(2003)
,KoontzandThomas
(2006),VanAlstyne(1997) ,
Benini(1999 ).
Theroleofredundancy Redundancyisequatedwithinefficiency,
henceavoidedAnetworkhasalessdefinite
timeframeandnogeneralexpectationofpermanenceNetworkformsoftenactivelybuiltinsomeredundancyFulkandDeSanctis(1995) ,
Thompson(2003) ,
Semlinger(2008)
Promoting coordination and communication
Collaborativedecision-making Centralizationofdecisionmakingand
authorityCommunicationsarepersistent,throughformalchannels,andintheformsofone-to-many(ormany-to-one)Top-downdecisionmakingDecentralizationofauthorityand
decisionmakingThecommunicationpatternismany-to-manyandlessformalizedCollegialnatureofdecision-makingprocess
Binz-Scharf(2003) ,Waugh
andStreib(2006)
BoundaryobjectsandboundaryspannersBoundaryspannersarenotpreferredin
hierarchywhererolesandpositionsareclearlydefinedAboundaryobjectisneededto
bridgethedifferencesbetweenmembers,whileboundaryspannersactasbrokerstofacilitateintergrouptransactions
Pawlowski etal.(2000),
CallisterandWall(2001) ;
Richteretal.(2006)
Importanceofco-location Hierarchyandco-locationofferpotential
financialbenefitsthroughresourcespoolingandsharing,suchassharingadministratorsandofficeinfrastructureCo-locationincreasesthelikelihood
andeaseofinteraction,whichenhancesnetworkgovernanceICTcouldfacilitatedistantconnectionsandinvokea“perceivedproximity”
Jonesetal.(1997),Cannella
etal.(2008),Polzeretal.
(2006),Wilsonetal.(2008),
EggsandEnglert(1999) 573WorldTrade
Centercrisis
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tg/article-pdf/10/4/568/2353745/tg-02-2016-0011.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
networks,generatingcommongoalsisveryimportantandawaytostartformingand
consolidatingthenetworkasawholeandtherelationshipsamongmembers.
2.2 Managing functions
2.2.1 Leadership and authority. Bureaucratic hierarchy favors leadership built upon
formalauthoritywithacascadingdelegationofauthorityalongthehierarchicalladder(
Weber, 1946 ). In a network structure, leadership is transformational; it is obscure
(BalkundiandKilduff,2006 )andsharedordistributedamongtherelationships( Carson
etal.,2007).Leadershipisnotappointedbutemergesfromitsstructureandisaffected
bythestructureitself( BalkundiandKilduff,2006 ;Brassetal.,2004;Sutantoetal.,2011).
Meaning, while its formation constitutes a contested process that is influenced by itsmembers(
Brassetal.,2004),thepositionofamemberinanetworkstructureinfluences
theselectionoftheleader.Forexample,acentralactor[ 4]ismorelikelytobechosenas
leader,asacentralpositionisassociatedwithhigherpower( Brassetal.,2004).Leaders
inanetworkassumevariousrolesdependingonthenetworkstructure,asbrokers( Daly
and Finnigan, 2011 ), boundary spanners ( Balkundi and Kilduff, 2006 ), mediators
(Sutantoetal.,2011)orliaisons( Curninetal.,2015).
2.2.2Roleoftrust. Trustisthebackboneofanetworkstructure( Thompson,2003 );it
sustains collaborative actions ( Granovetter, 1985 ) and curbs opportunistic behavior
(VanAlstyne,1997 ).Trustmattersinanetworkstructurebecausethegovernanceofa
networkisnotbasedonadministrativefiatthroughrules,systemsandstructure( Van
Alstyne, 1997 ). Formal authority develops gradually in a network ( Rethemeyer and
Hatmaker, 2008 ). As argued by Rousseau et al.(1998), trust is a multi-dimensional
concept and the development of trust through the formation of relationships isinfluenced by the interchange of affective and cognitive factors (
Lewis and Weigert,
1985).Forexample,trustmightbeinfluencedbycognitiveaspectssuchasreputation,
credentials and affiliations at the initial stage of building relationships because ofmissingaffectivefactorssuchaspersonalaffection(
McKnight etal.,1998).
2.3 Setting the structure
2.3.1 Lean and flat organizational structure. While bureaucratic hierarchy has a steep
structure with many intermediate levels ( Leibenstein, 1987 ), a network has a flatter
structure due to fewer intermediate layers (e.g. fewer middle managers, levels orauthority and oversight). The lean and flat structure is necessary for maintainingcollegial coordination and participative decision-making (
Van Alstyne, 1997 ;Podolny
andPage,1998 ).
2.3.2 Flexibility in roles and responsibilities and dynamicity of structure. In
bureaucratichierarchy,rolesandresponsibilityaregovernedbytaskspecializationandrules and procedures (
Binz-Scharf, 2003 ), with fixed task and organization boundaries
based on authority and stable ties ( Binz-Scharf, 2003 ;Van Alstyne, 1997 ). Roles and
responsibilities are flexible and dynamic in network structures and they are governedby the process of activation, deactivation and mobilization of ties and connections(
Agranoff and McGuire, 2001 ). Consequently, structure and boundary in networks are
flexible,permeableandrelativeasshapedbydynamicties( VanAlstyne,1997 ).
2.3.3Regulatoryenvironmentandbypassingredtape. Thegoverningofbureaucratic
hierarchyisachievedthroughlaw,rulesandregulationsinwhichdeviationfromthemisstrictlydiscouraged(
KoontzandThomas,2006 ).Thevirtueofanetworkstructure,onTG
10,4
574
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tg/article-pdf/10/4/568/2353745/tg-02-2016-0011.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
the other hand, is flexibility ( Considine and Lewis, 2003 ;Powell, 2003 ). Tasks in a
networkstructureareproject-orientedandthusoftentheorganizationalstructuresarenotpermanentandstableovertime(
VanAlstyne,1997 )withtheobjectivetogetthejob
done.Insituationssuchasanemergencyresponse,theobjectivetogetthejobdoneoftenprevails over formal rules. Responders, dictated by urgency, occasionally bypass redtapetothebenefitoftime-sensitiveefforts(
Benini,1999 ).
2.3.4Theroleofredundancy. Asthestructureofbureaucratichierarchyisbuiltupon
rigid formal rules and regulations, bureaucratic hierarchy equates redundancy as adeviationfromrulesandascontributingtoinefficiency(
Thompson,2003 ).Themeritof
anetworkstructure,ontheotherhand,isflexibility.Asaresult,built-inredundancyisoftenanecessityinthenetworktoavoidtheproblemsofoverload,vulnerability(
Fulk
and DeSanctis, 1995 ) and “lock-in ” – a situation where a network structure cannot
expandbecauseofstrongtiesorfullconnections( Semlinger,2008 ).Acertaindegreeof
built-inredundancyisnecessarytoprovideanentrypointforpotentialmembersorexitoptions for existing members so that the network can maintain flexibility (
Semlinger,
2008).Itisalsocrucialtofactorinredundancyincreatingextremeevent-readyresilient
informationinfrastructure( SchollandPatin,2014 ).
2.4 Promoting coordination and communication
2.4.1 Collaborative decision-making. Hierarchy favors a centralized structure where
authorityandinformationflowsverticallyincascadingformsfromthetopleveltothebottom (
Binz-Scharf, 2003 ). While such a structure permits decisiveness in the
decision-making process, it lacks flexibility and collaborative processes. In anemergency response involving multiple organizations, lack of flexibility can hindereffective relief effort. As argued by
Waugh and Streib (2006) , goal conflicts are very
commonindisasterandemergencyresponse.Anetworkstructurepermitsflexibleandparticipative decision-making. In multi-organizational settings such as an emergencyresponse, where each organization might have different goals and agendas, flexibilitythrough the process of participatory decision-making could minimize conflicts.Collaborativepartnershipsareessentialfortheacceptanceofchangesandcouldsupportmoretargetedandeffectiveactivitiesinthecaseofemergency(
Higginsetal.,2015).
2.4.2 Boundary objects and boundary spanners. Boundary objects and brokers are
seen as the two important tools to facilitate coordination, particularly in a networkstructure (
Pawlowski et al., 2000). A boundary object is necessary for bridging
communicationacrossdifferentboundariestocreatesharedandmutualunderstanding(
Pawlowski et al., 2000), a vital aspect in framing shared goals. Broker or boundary
spannersareimperativeinbrokeringintergrouptransactionandmanagingintergroupconflicts(
CallisterandWall,2001 ;Richteretal.2006).
2.4.3 The importance of co-location. Although information and communication
technologies (ICTs) could facilitate interchanges and communication acrossgeographically dispersed locations (
Wilsonet al., 2008), geographical proximity
enhances the effectiveness of a network ( Joneset al., 1997). The importance of
co-location,orgeographicalproximity,increaseswhenuncertaintiesintheenvironmentintensify(
Cannellaetal.,2008).Co-locationincreasesthelikelihoodandeaseofnetwork
interactions ( Joneset al., 1997); encourages the development of trust and inhibits
possibleconflicts( Polzeretal.,2006);andimprovesthecompetitiveabilityofanetwork
(EggsandEnglert,1999 ).575WorldTrade
Centercrisis
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tg/article-pdf/10/4/568/2353745/tg-02-2016-0011.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
3. Research design and method
This study uses a mixed-method research strategy, combining both quantitative andqualitative approaches. More specifically, we complement the results from in-depthinterviewswithresultsfromasocio-metricsurvey.Theuseofmultiplemethodsallowstriangulation and cross-validation of results. Multi-method approaches “neutralize orcancel the biases of other methods” (
Creswell, 2009 , p. 15). By using multiple methods
within a single study, the weaknesses of individual methods can be identified andpartiallysolved(
Gil-GarciaandPardo,2006 ).Thismixedmethodologyalsoenablesus
tobothunderstandthestructuralcharacteristicsofcrisisresponsegovernance,mainlythrough the social network analysis, and identify the underlying drivers for theemergenceofthisstructureincrisisresponse,mainlythroughtheinterviews.Overall,amulti-methodstrategyprovidesamorecompleteunderstandingofthecharacteristicsoftheresponseasanorganizationalformandtheimportanceofthosecharacteristicstothesuccessoftheresponse.Wheneverpossible,weprovideevidencefromthetwomethodsineachvariable.
3.1 Data collection
3.1.1 Semi-structured interviews. We conducted face-to-face semi-structured
interviews and one video interview. This approach enabled researchers to gainunderstanding of emergency responders’ experiences, focusing on the geographicinformation systems (GIS) team, a sub-network within the larger network ofrespondersinvolvedintheWTCcrisisresponse.Researchersfrom[ Deletedforpeer
reviewprocess ]conductedinterviewswith29firstrespondersin2002and2003.We
alsoanalyzedavideointerviewwithprominentmembersoftheresponseteaminthecommand center at Pier 92. Pier 92 was the location of the emergency operationcenter (OEC) during the response to the WTC crisis, where the GIS team, amongotherresponderstothecrisis,waslocated(
Harwood,2001 ).Pier92wasselectedas
the focus of data collection activities because it was the center of the responseefforts. Interviewees were team members of the GIS sub-network and came from avariety of different professions and affiliations, including government agencies,non-profit organizations, consultants, academics and private firms. Interviewsubjectswereselectedbasedontherolestheyplayedintheresponseandhowtheywererecognizedbyothersasinstrumental.Thediversityofthebackgroundsoftheinterview participants enabled us to build an in-depth understanding of theresponse situation by comparing interviewees’ different perspectives and rolesduring the WTC crisis.
3.1.2 Sociometric survey data collection. A sociometric survey was also conducted
duringtheinterview.Attheendofeachinterview,intervieweeswereasked,“Pleasename 5 individuals who were instrumental in resourcing, facilitating, managing,leading, supporting, or inspiring your response efforts”. Based on the interviewresults, we created a one-mode network of reputation-based relationships. Theone-mode network represents person-by-person relationships. If person iidentifies
personjasinstrumentalintheWTCcrisisresponse,thenweassignavalueof1(and
0 otherwise). This research did not symmetrize the relationship; if actor isays that
actorjwasinstrumentalduringtheresponse,itdoesnotautomaticallyindicatethat
actorjwill think the same thing about actor i.TG
10,4
576
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tg/article-pdf/10/4/568/2353745/tg-02-2016-0011.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
3.2 Analysis techniques
Thisresearchusestwocomplementaryanalyticalapproaches:
(1) qualitativeanalysisbasedonsemi-structuredinterviews;and(2) social network analysis of the relationship pattern within the GIS
sub-network.
Informationprovidedduringtheinterviewisusedtoperformapreliminaryanalysisof
the network characteristics behind the successful WTC response. Some directquotations are used to provide evidence in terms of the network characteristics of theWTC crisis response. Social network analysis of the relationship structure within theGISsub-networkisusedtoprovidebetterunderstandingofhowthesocialstructureintheWTCcrisisresponseinfluencedtheeffectivenessoftheresponse.Thesocialnetworkanalysis presents a visualization of the network structure and related measurementroutines, focusing on the cohesion, centrality, core/periphery and the ego-networkbrokeragemeasurements.
4. Analysis and results
The WTC emergency response is regarded as a success story of a collaborativenetwork where scores of organizations across different sectors, jurisdictions andlevels of government worked collaboratively in the relief efforts (
Kapucu, 2006 ;
Moynihan,2009 ).Basedoncontentanalysisofnewsandotherpublicationsinthe21
days after the attack, Kapucu (2006) identified 1,607 organizations that were
involved in the response, including 73 federal organizations. Judging from thenumber of organizations involved and the ways they were coordinating, it isreasonabletoarguethattheWTCemergencyresponsetypifiesanetworkstructureas opposed to a bureaucratic hierarchical structure. Based on the interviews andsociometric survey with the GIS response team, we provide evidence in thefollowing two sections that the response had a network structure. The first sectiondescribes the network structure of the GIS team based on the sociometric survey.Thesecondsectiondescribestheorganizingformoftheresponsewherewecombineresultsfromourin-depthinterviewswiththeresultsfromthesociometricsurveytostrengthen and cross-validate the arguments.
4.1 Overview of the network structure: a GIS sub-network perspective
We analyzed the interpersonal coordination and communication of the GIS team.Our social network analysis results confirm and enrich the findings from
Kapucu
(2006)in that we found that the GIS team had diverse and heterogeneous members
consistingofactorsfromdifferentorganizationsandgovernmentlevelsasindicatedfrom the visualization (
Figure 1) and the density values ( Table II). This resulted in
lesscohesiveandlessdenserelationshippatternswithlowdensityvaluesof0.0554,a high standard deviation of 0.2288 and low compactness of 0.161.
These results indicate a sparse network which, as argued by
Walteret al.(2007),
could lengthen communication channels, create the possibility of communicationdistortion and pose a coordination challenge. However, these challenges were not anissuefortheGISteam,astheresultsindicate;theGISteamresemblesacore-peripherynetwork structure. This means that the GIS team’s structure has a strong core with acohesive sub-group that connects sparse and unconnected nodes in the periphery. In577WorldTrade
Centercrisis
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tg/article-pdf/10/4/568/2353745/tg-02-2016-0011.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
generalterms,thestructureoftheGISteamisduetothecombinationofthepre-existing
NYC GIS members as the core and the “newcomers” added later to the team as theperiphery.
In terms of the centrality of actors, we identified contrasting results from
Kapucu’s(2006) findings.WefoundthattheGISnetworkhaslowin-andout-degree
centralitywithavalueof1.77,meaningthat,onaverage,themostcentralactoronlyreceives and gives two ties with other members. In other words, the networkmemberssawthemselvesasequalsintermsofpower,influenceandconveyanceofinformation.Ontheotherhand,wefoundhighvarianceofbetweennesscentralityof1,543.98,meaningthattherearefewactorswhowereskilledinactingasboundaryspanners or liaisons connecting members to one another. We found a subset ofseveral actors with high brokerage value (
Table II) in their role as liaison.
Figure 1.
Visualizationofnetworkbasedonattributes
Table II.
Density,centrality
andbrokeragemeasurementresultsCentralitymeasures
Measurement Mean SD Variance Centralization(%)
Out-degreecentrality 1.767 1.802 3.246 22.24
In-degreecentrality 1.767 2.642 6.979 40.07Betweennesscentrality 18.567 39.294 1,543.98 19.29
Densitymeasures Brokeragemeasures
Measurement Mean SD Actors Liaison
Density 0.055 0.229 RL 58Coredensity 0.500 OK 6Peripherydensity 0.020 DO 14Compactness 0.161 NC 20Averagedistance 2.793
Source:UCINETresultsofWTCsociometricdataTG
10,4
578
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tg/article-pdf/10/4/568/2353745/tg-02-2016-0011.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
4.2 Characterizing the response to the WTC crisis
Inthissection,wediscussthemanagementoftheWTCemergencyresponseintermsofthetenfeaturescharacterizingnetworkstructure,asidentifiedintheliteraturereview.Whenappropriate,weuseandcombinetheresultsfromtheinterviewsandtheresultsfromthesocialnetworkanalysistostrengthenourarguments.
4.2.1Framingsharedgoals. TheGISnetworkstructureindicatessparseconnections
amongtheactorsinvolvedintheteam(
TableIIandFigure1).Thesparseconnections
might indicate distant relationships and a higher possibility of conflict. In suchsituations, prompt development of shared goals diminishes the risk of conflict.Subsequently, adopting participative and collaborative approaches is more desirablethanbureaucratichierarchy,consideringthattheactorswithsparseconnectionsmighthave different agendas and political settings. Swift development of agreed-upon goalsand curtailing individual political agendas can lead to efficient management ofresponse.IntheWTCcase,thepossibledamagingeffectofpoliticswasmitigatedbythegravityandseverityofthecrisis.Asoneoftheintervieweepointsout:
We’redealingwithreallybadthingsthathavehappened[…].Peoplearemuchmorewilling
todotheirbesttohelpthesituation[…].Therewasnopolitics.
4.2.2 Leadership and authority. Our analysis identifies two types of leadership that
manifested at two different ways; political and operational. First, the leadership roleassumed by the NYC Office of the Mayor existed at a political level. This leadershipcamefromthebureaucratichierarchyandtheirrolewastoprovidetheoverallvisionforthe response and to reassure the public about the progress of the relief activities. Asindicatedbyoneinterviewee“They[OfficeoftheMayor]reallycalmedthecityandtheygavepeopleafaiththatwecouldgetthroughthis”.TheMayor,asthehighestlevelofhierarchy for NYC, was recognized as the ultimate leader who served to ensure thecontinuity of the relief response network. We also found the existence of leadership attheoperationallevelintheformofnetwork-basedleadership.Astheinterviewresultsshow,thisleadershipisfluidandisgeneratedfromexpertiseandknow-how.Wefoundthat the role of leaders at the operational level was to provide resources, to bridgeconnectionsasboundaryspannersandtoactivate(oradd)relationshipstothenetwork.
The network leadership was focused on getting the job done. For instance, one of theinterviewees from Citywide GIS for the NYC DoITT described how the GIS Managerfrom the city’s Department of Parks and Recreation immediately delivered computerterminals and networking capability to build the infrastructure needed to support theemergencymappingcenter.
4.2.3Theroleoftrust. Ourinterviewresultsilluminatethesignificantroleoftrustin
supportingthesuccessoftheWTCemergencyresponse.Weidentifiedthatbothformsof trust – affective and cognitive – played an important part in the response.Cognitive-based trust emerged in the political setting of the response, particularly forthe relationship between the Office of the Mayor and the public. Cognitive-based trustmanifested in terms of the reputation and bureaucratic position of the Mayor and wasnecessarytoassurethepublicthattherewascontinuoussupportfortheresponse.Itisparticularly challenging to achieve a strong sense of public security using a networkstructurebecausethepublicoftenseeksformalandlegitimateassurancethatcanbestbe provided by political leadership and bureaucratic hierarchy. At the network level,cognitive-basedtrustisapparentintheuseofexpertisetonegotiaterelationships.The579WorldTrade
Centercrisis
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tg/article-pdf/10/4/568/2353745/tg-02-2016-0011.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
network structure used expertise as a frame of reference to activate new actors in the
network. We also found evidence of affective-based trust that facilitated coordinationanddecision-makingprocesses.Thisaffective-basedtrustmanifestedintwoforms:thehistory of relationships and the culture of the GIS community of practice. AnintervieweefromCitywideGISforNYCDoITTindicated:
It’sjustinthenatureofpeoplewhoworkwithgeographicinformation,thatwejustnaturally
coalesced together and worked cooperatively and shared data; maybe it’s our instinct to do
that.
ThesharingandcooperativecultureintheGIScommunityofpracticedrovethecreation
ofaffective-basedtrustinthegovernanceoftheresponse.Theinterviewsalsopointtothe cultivation of prior individual relationships as the basis for trust creation in thenetwork. As mentioned by one of the interviewees, the response was “just the widenetworkofpeopleandfriendsandassociatesthatwehadcultivatedoverthepastsevenyears[…][andwe]allcametoplay”.
4.2.4 Lean and flat organizational structure. Our social network analysis results
clearlyshowanemergencyresponsenetworkwithaflatstructurewithfewintermediatelayers. We found the existence of a core-periphery structure with high core density of0.500,highaveragedistanceof2.793andlowperipherydensityof0.020.Wealsofoundin-andout-degreecentralityof1.77which,afterconsideringthenumbersofnodes(30actors),signifieslowcentrality.Thislowcentralityindicatesaflatstructurewithlittlepowerdifferencesamongtheactors.TherewaslittleornohierarchyintermsofpowerandinfluenceamongtheactorscomprisingtheGISnetwork.
4.2.5Resiliencyofroles,responsibilitiesandstructure. Ourinterviewresultsindicate
thatthemanagementoftheresponsedemonstratesahigherdegreeofflexibilityintermsofroles,responsibilitiesandevenstructure.Rolesandresponsibilitieswerenotformedbasedonformalauthoritybutmostlybasedonneedsandexpertise.Theneedtogetthejob done superseded the bureaucratic disposition of the actors in the WTC emergencyresponse. The interviewees alluded to the case where a GIS Manager from New Yorkchangedhisroletobeingalogisticsproviderduetohislocalknowledgeandtheneedofthe network to get the job done. The interview results also indicate how dynamic thenetwork structure was in terms of activation (or engagement of new members) andmobilization (the acquisition of resources). Activation and mobilization in the WTCresponsewasacceleratedbytheneedtofulfillparticulartasksbasedontheexpertiseofselectedparticipants.Forinstance,oneoftheintervieweesmentioned:
Whenweidentifiedtheneedfor[…]thermal[images]ofthesite,theyimmediatelyaddedthat
totherosterofservicesandtheytoobecameaparticipantfrom128milesaway,upinAlbany.
4.2.6 Regulatory environment and bypassing red tape. In concurrence with extant
literature ( Daweset al., 2004), our interview results indicate that in an emergency
response, rules and regulations are often negotiated in exchange for rapid delivery.Thereiswillingnesstoforgoorrelaxroutineproceduresandcircumventredtapeforthebenefit of achieving immediate relief or certain outcomes in the response process. Theinterview results clearly show that critical needs dictated immediacy of response andhelped to overcome bureaucratic red tape. The important thing in an emergencysituation is to get the necessary work done. For instance, the GIS team built theemergency mapping center from the scratch and everyone contributed and broughtTG
10,4
580
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tg/article-pdf/10/4/568/2353745/tg-02-2016-0011.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
whatever materials they had available. As one of the interviewees, then the GIS
ManagerfromtheNYCDepartmentofParksandRecreation,pointedout:
One of the big issues at the first emergency operation center at the police academy was we
didn’thaveaprinterthatwascapableofsupportingthemapproduction.SoIwentuptomy
officeandcamedownwiththeprinterfrommyoffice.
Less clear, however, is what impact bypassing bureaucratic red tape had on the
accountabilityofresourcesinthelongterm.
4.2.7 The role of redundancy. The case of the WTC response demonstrates the
resilient properties of a network structure – the decentralized structure and lateralpower relations – that can adapt to disruption and interference. Conversely, the caseindicates the limitations of a bureaucratic hierarchy to adapt in the same way todisruption. The leaders of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey PoliceDepartment (PAPD) perished in the collapse of the WTC tower during the crisisresponse. However, the loss of these leaders did not obstruct the response efforts. Ourinterview results show, and as denoted by
Daweset al.(2004), that due to the
decentralizedstructureandlateralpowerrelationsinPAPD,otherleadersquicklyfilledthe void and carried the relief efforts forward. As indicated in
Table IIandFigure 1,
decentralizedandlateralrelationsarealsomanifestintheGISnetworkstructure,whichhassparseanddiverseconnections.Thelowoveralldensity(0.0554),thehighstandarddeviation of density (0.2288) and the low compactness (0.161) indicate a less cohesivestructure.
4.2.8Collaborativedecision-making. Ouranalysisresultssuggestthesignificanceof
collaborative decision-making during the WTC crisis response. Collaborativedecision-makingisnecessarytomakecoordinationmoreefficient.Therearetwofactorsthatinfluencedthesuccessofcollaborativedecision-makinginthiscase,namely:
(1) thecultureoftheGIScommunityofpractice;and(2) theaffective-basedtrustbuiltfrompreviousrelationships.
The interview results indicate the existence of a strong culture of cooperation and
coordination embedded in the GIS community of practice. As stated by one of theintervieweesfromCitywideGISforNYCDoITT,itiscustomaryforthepeopleintheGIScommunityofpracticetoworkcooperativelyandsharedata,sothisalmostbecomesanorm for them. This cooperative culture became the key element in makingcollaborative decision-making possible. Affective-based trust was built upon years ofrelationships and experience working together, as described in our discussion of trustabove.
4.2.9 Boundary objects and boundary spanners.
Agranoff and McGuire (2001)
suggesttheimportanceofsynthesizing[ 5]inthemanagementofanetworkstructure,in
particularforcoordinatingandintegratingthevariousnetworkmembers.Ourfindingsfrom the interviews and sociometric survey indicate the creation and use of twosignificant tools for synthesizing the network, namely, boundary spanners andboundary objects. Our analysis identifies the use of GIS maps as one of the boundaryobjects that facilitated communication and coordination within and beyond thenetwork. One of the interviewees indicated how GIS maps helped to create sharedunderstanding even in hectic situations: “Even in the chaos of the early moments,becausewehadthebase[GIS]map,itgreatlyfacilitatedourresponseandultimatelyour581WorldTrade
Centercrisis
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tg/article-pdf/10/4/568/2353745/tg-02-2016-0011.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
ability to communicate with each other”. This finding complements the argument put
forwardinthepaperby Harrison etal.(2007)ontransformationofGISintoadynamic
decision-makingtoolinemergencyresponse.Ourfindingfurtherelucidatestheroleofboundary objects in helping the responders bridging the differences among them andimprovingtheabilityfortheresponderstocommunicatewithoneanother.
In addition, coordination and communication were also significantly facilitated by
theemergenceandexistenceofboundaryspanners.Boundaryspannersaremembersofanorganizationwhobridgetheboundaryoftheirorganizationtoconnecttothelargerexternalenvironment(
Burt,1995 ;Williams,2002 ).Theresultsfromoursocialnetwork
analysis show a high mean of betweenness centrality (18.567) and high variation(1543.89)inthebetweennesscentrality(
TableII),whichsignifiesthatafewactorswere
veryeffectiveinactingasboundaryspanners.Inaddition,ouregocentricanalysisalsoidentifies several responders with high brokerage value, particularly in their roles asliaisons to bridge and connect the GIS network with the larger response network(
TableII).TheintervieweecitedearlierfromCitywideGISforNYCDoITTdescribedthe
emergence of a boundary spanner in the story about how the GIS Manager from theDepartment of Parks and Recreation used his local knowledge to identify the neededcritical resources for the network and acted as a liaison. The GIS Manager from theDepartmentofParksandRecreationdescribedhisrolesinhisownwords:
Yeah,Iwasscrounging.Oneofmyroleswaspeoplewouldtellme,“Hey,Paul,weneedthisoff”
or“Hey,Paul,weneedthispieceofhardware”.I’dsay,“O.K.”andI’dgetit.
4.2.10Theimportanceofco-location. Ourresultsalsoidentifytheimportanceofhavinga
physical center located in the same vicinity of the crisis, a co-location for responders. Theemergency mapping center for the WTC crisis response was initially set-up at the PoliceAcademy, but was later moved into the emergency command center (EOC) at Pier 92.Co-location at the EOC facilitated sharing among the responders. As one of intervieweesstated:
Ifwewouldhavebeenco-located[fromthebeginning],itwouldhavebeeneasierforustoshare
[…]. There are things that I would have been able to easily help them with that they had to
learnontheirown.
This excerpt signifies that co-location was crucial for two objectives. First, co-location
facilitated the sharing of knowledge, information and expertise among responders.Second, co-location made it easier for the responders to educate others about thesituation.Plausibly,co-locationcanlessenthelearningcurveandpotentiallyacceleratecertainresponseactivities.
5. Discussion and implications
This paper describes how diverse actors managed an emergency response. We positthat the 2001 WTC emergency response demonstrates the use of both bureaucratichierarchy and network structure into organizing a response. We present a summarycomparingtheuseofanetworkstructureagainstabureaucratichierarchyin
TableIII.
This section discusses findings and provides some theoretical and practicalimplicationsofthework.TG
10,4
582
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tg/article-pdf/10/4/568/2353745/tg-02-2016-0011.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
5.1 Discussion
Using results from interviews with the responders of the WTC crisis response andsociometricsurveydataevaluatingtheirrelationships,wefoundevidenceoftheuseofa network structure in every aspect of the response activities. Yet, we also foundindicationsthatthenetworkstructurewasnotcompletelydetachedfrombureaucratichierarchy,particularlyintermsofleadershipandresources.Thus,thisstudyprovidesfurther support for the hybrid model of organization that combines hierarchy andnetwork(
FeiockandJang,2009 ).Wealsofoundsupportfortheattachmentofanetwork
structure on a bureaucratic hierarchy ( Rethemeyer and Hatmaker, 2008 ). Our findings
furthersupport Kolibaetal.’s(2011)argumentthatthecombinationofformalauthorityTable III.
Comparing
hierarchies,networks
andtheWTC
responseAttribute WTCresponse H N
Framingsharedgoals Thegravityofthecollectivegoalsleadsto
developmentofsharedauthorityandavoidanceofconflicts✓
Leanandflatorganizationstructure Thelowin-andout-degreecentralityindicatesa
flatstructurewithlittleornohierarchyintermofpowerandinfluencesamongtheactorscomprisingtheGISnetwork✓
Flexibilityinrolesandresponsibilitiesand
dynamicstructureThestructure,rolesandresponsibilitiesare
builtbasedonneedandexpertisetogetthejobdone.Thehierarchicalpositionandrolesarechangedtofitwiththeneedofthenetwork✓
Leadershipandauthority Thenetworkisnestedwithinthehierarchy.The
networkacknowledgesthecertainroleofthepoliticalleaderforpublicengagement.Thepoliticalleaderandnetworkleaderoperateatdifferentlevels✓✓
Regulatoryenvironmentandbypassing
redtapeThereiswillingnesstoforgoorrelaxroutine
proceduresandskirtaroundredtapeforthebenefitofachievingimmediaterelief✓
Theroleoftrust Thereisclearevidenceoftheuseofbothhigh
levelsofaffective-basedandcognitive-basedtrust,basedonthehistoricalrelationsandexpertise✓✓
Theroleofredundancy Theresponsenetworkisnotdependentona
centralfigureforsustainability.Thereareseveralactorswhopresumesimilarroles✓
Boundaryobjectsandboundaryspanners TheWTCcrisisresponseusesboththe
boundaryobject(GISmap)andboundaryspannerstoensuresmoothcoordination✓
Importanceofco-location Co-locationatPier92helpedsmooththe
coordinationprocess,facilitatinglearningandsharing✓
Collaborativedecision-making Thelowcentralizationmeasurementindicates
thattheworkcommitmentinthesub-groupisbasedoncollegialitysupportedbyahistoryofworkingtogetherandculture/identity✓583WorldTrade
Centercrisis
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tg/article-pdf/10/4/568/2353745/tg-02-2016-0011.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
andcollaborativeinitiative,infact,positivelycontributestotheeffectivenessofnetwork
governance.
Ontheotherhand,wealsofoundtheuseofanetworkstructureversusabureaucratic
hierarchyvariesatdifferentlevelsinemergencyresponse.Wefoundthatbureaucratichierarchy manifested at the political level and the network form was used at theoperationallevel.While
RethemeyerandHatmaker(2008) arguethattheintersectionof
network and hierarchy is for resource fulfillment, we found that each had differentfunctions.Havingresourcesaloneisnotsufficienttomanageandmaintaincollaborativeefforts(
SorrentinoandSimonetta,2012 ).Bureaucratichierarchywasprimarilyusedfor
public-facingactivitiesandstrategies,whereasanetworkstructurewasusedtogetthejobdone.Ourargumentthatnetworkandbureaucratichierarchystructuresco-existatdifferent levels is clearly evidenced in terms of leadership. In the WTC response, theOffice of the Mayor, supported by bureaucratic legitimacy, assumed the role of astalwart champion and provided reassurance to the public during a difficult time. Inconcurrencewith
Caro’s(2015) argument,thecommunityneedsreassurancewhenthere
iswidespreaddistress.AlthoughwedifferslightlyfromCaro’sopinionwithregardtowhere this leadership role exists between network and bureaucratic hierarchystructures, we concur with
Waugh and Streib (2006) that this leadership role requires
bureaucratic support because the bureaucratic position is more permanent. Thepressure for security during a disaster propels the public to seek assurance from thebureaucratic hierarchy (
Waugh and Streib, 2006 ). The type of assurance from formal
legitimacyandauthority–aspointedoutby RethemeyerandHatmaker(2008) –might
notbereadilyavailableinanetwork.
Finally, in addition to the structure, the effective functioning and management of
emergencyresponseissignificantlyaffectedbycertainenablingconditions.Wearguethat the enabling conditions influence the efficiency and effectiveness of emergencyresponse.Oneoftheenablingconditionsisthegravityoftheevent.Forinstance,whenthegravityoftheeventincreases,theroleofthebureaucraticleaderinprovidingsocialvalueviaengagementwiththepublicbecomesmoreefficient.Thegravityoftheeventcouldalsoacceleratetheformationofsharedgoals.TherespondersweremorewillingtoworktogetherandabandontheirpoliticalagendasbecausetheWTCsituationwasanextremeevent;hence,sharedgoalsdevelopedmoreeasily.
5.2 Theoretical and practical implications
Our results from both the interview and social network analyses enable us to putforward several possible theoretical and practical implications. This study foundthat a network structure cannot be completely detached from bureaucratichierarchy even in a crisis situation. This finding supports the assertion of themutual co-existence of a network and bureaucratic hierarchy structure foremergency response (
Kapucu, 2006 ;Moynihan, 2009 ;Rethemeyer and Hatmaker,
2008). We posit that the connection of a network structure to a bureaucratic
hierarchymanifestsinthebureaucraticleadershipandinthemanagementofpubliccommunication. In emergency response, the intrusion of political leaders becomesnecessary and does not hinder the operational progress when the specification oftasksisclear.Wefoundevidenceofcleardistinctionintheleadershiprolebetweenbureaucratic hierarchy and network structures. While the political leader assumesthe role of providing assurance to the citizens on the success of the response, thisTG
10,4
584
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tg/article-pdf/10/4/568/2353745/tg-02-2016-0011.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
leaderprovidesnetworkmanagersattheoperationallevelwithmoreflexibilityand
discretion to get the job done.
We have to emphasize that such collaboration is possible when there is clear
distinctionandbalanceinthedifferentleadershiprolesandwhenbureaucraticleadersprovide network leaders with more leeway to innovate during the response. In suchsituations,thecoexistenceandevenintrusionofbureaucratichierarchywillnotcreateconflict and disintegrate the cohesiveness of the network; instead, it supplements theeffectiveness of a network. However, as argued by
Garrett (2010) , continuous and
excessive exertion from the executive level to the network could stymie collaborativeinitiatives. Future research can study the roles of different leaders in response effortsand assess how their influence is related to their formal position and their level ofinvolvementwithothermembersofthenetwork.
From a practical perspective, the clear distinction and balance of leadership in
network and bureaucratic hierarchy structures is crucial to frame network authorityand control within the network. For instance,
Bate (2000) found that involvement in a
networkcouldmakeseniormanagersfeelthattheyhavetosurrendertheirpower,statusandauthority.Whenanemergencyresponseislargeandthecomplexityoforganizingitisimmense,thereisincreasedlikelihoodofhigherpoliticalcontrolandintrusionfrompolitical figures who seek to control the network and prevent fragmentation (
Davies,
2005).Asweargue,higherpoliticalintrusionscouldinsteadresultindisintegrationof
thenetwork.Hence,weneedamoreeffectivewayofframingauthorityandcontrolinanetworkstructure.Ourfindingspointtotheimportanceofthegravityoftheevent.Theseverity and impact of the event could ease the process of framing authority in thenetwork.Moreresearchisalsoneededintermsofsystematicallycomparingtherolesofformalleadersinemergenciesinwhichthegravityoftheeventisdifferentandhowthiscouldimpacttheoverallresultsoftheresponse.
Afinalpointworthmakingisthatmoreattentionshouldbeplacedoncollaboration,
not only for emergency response, but also for strategies and activities to prepare forthose emergencies and to ameliorate their devastating effects. It is worth noting thatwith the rapid advancement of ICTs and the rich data collected by public and privateorganizations, a more systematic approach to decision making in emergency responsecouldbepossible.Thecurrentchallengeistobetterunderstandthecriticalfactorsandcapabilities for creating such a systematic approach for timely and flexible decisionmaking through collaborative activities and data integration, such as workingcollaboratively for data analytics in an emergency response. Future research shouldfocusonthisandothertopicsrelatedtodata,collaborationanddataanalytics.
6. Conclusion
We provide evidence in our paper that working collaboratively through the use ofnetworkstructureforemergencyresponseanddisasterreliefisachallengingendeavorandassessingthecriticalfactorsnecessaryforcollaborativeworkcouldbecrucialforasuccessfulresponse.Theresultsofouranalysisindicatethatthegovernancestructureof the WTC crisis response resemble an inter-organizational network in which thefunctions and activities were mainly performed based on network management.However, our results also indicate that it is not always possible to have completedetachment from bureaucratic hierarchy, particularly in terms of leadership andresources allocation and deployment. The response to the WTC crisis could be585WorldTrade
Centercrisis
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tg/article-pdf/10/4/568/2353745/tg-02-2016-0011.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
characterizedasaninter-organizationalnetwork,butmoreresearchisneededinterms
oftheintersectionsbetweenhierarchiesandnetworksasformsoforganization.Insteadof thinking about dichotomies or clear distinctions between different forms oforganizing,inourcasenetworksandbureaucratichierarchies,amoreusefulperspectivewould be to understand the similarities, differences and intersections among differentorganizational forms and which combinations could be better alternatives for specificsituations and contexts. Our paper is a first step in this direction and we hope otherresearchersusetheseinitialideasinthenearfuture.
Notes
1.www.emdat.be/natural-disasters-trends
2.www.emdat.be/publications
3.www.ctg.albany.edu/publications/newsletters/innovations_2002_summer?chapter /H110051
4. Acentralactorisanactorwithmanytiestootheractorsinthenetwork.
5. Synthesizingreferstothecreationofconditionsfavorableforco-activitiesamongthenetwork
members.Formorediscussion,see AgranoffandMcGuire(2001) .
References
Agranoff, R. and McGuire, M. (2001), “Big questions in public network management research”,
Journal of Public Administration Policy Research and Theory , Vol. 11, pp. 295-326.
Balkundi,P.andKilduff,M.(2006),“Thetiesthatlead:asocialnetworkapproachtoleadership”,
LeadershipQ ,Vol.17,pp.419-439.
Bate, P. (2000), “Changing the culture of a hospital: from hierarchy to networked community”,
PublicAdministration ,Vol.78No.3,pp.485-512.
Benini, A.A. (1999), “Network without center? A case study of an organizational network
responding to an earthquake”, Journal of Contingencies and Crisis Management , Vol. 7,
pp.38-47.
Binz-Scharf, M.C. (2003), “Bureaucratic Networks or networked bureaucracies? Knowledge
sharing in ICT-enabled innovation projects”, October 1, 2003, available at SSRN: https://
ssrn.com/abstract /H110052503998orhttp://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2503998
Brass, D.J., Galaskiewicz, J., Greve, H.R. and Tsai, W. (2004), “Taking stock of networks and
organizations: a multilevel perspective”, Academy of Management Journal , Vol. 47, No. 6,
pp.795-817.
Burt,R.S.(1995), StructuralHoles:TheSocialStructureofCompetition ,HarvardUniversityPress,
Cambridge.
Cahan,B.andDucat,S.(2001), RemappingGroundZero:HowNYC’sEmergencyMapping&Data
Center was Built and Responded to 9/11 , Urban Logic, Inc. and Council for Excellence in
Government,NewYork,NY;Washington,DC.
Callister,R.R.andWall,J.A.,Jr.(2001),“Conflictacrossorganizationalboundaries:managedcare
organizationsversushealthcareproviders”, JournalofAppliedPsychology ,Vol.86.
Cannella, A.A., Park, J.H. and Lee, H.U. (2008), “Top management team functional background
diversity and firm performance: examining the roles of team member colocation andenvironmentaluncertainty”, AcademyofManagementJournal ,Vol.51,pp.768-784.
Caro, D.H.J. (2015), “Code red: towards transformational leadership of emergency management
systems”, JournalofHospitalAdministration ,Vol.4No.5,pp.67-78.TG
10,4
586
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tg/article-pdf/10/4/568/2353745/tg-02-2016-0011.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
Carson,J.B.,Tesluk,P.E.andMarrone,J.A.(2007),“Sharedleadershipinteams:aninvestigation
of antecedent conditions and performance”, Academy of Management Journal , Vol. 50,
pp.1217-1234.
Chisholm, R.F. (1996), “On the meaning of networks”, Group & Organization Management ,
Vol.21.
Coase,R.H.(1937),“Thenatureofthefirm”, Economica ,Vol.4,pp.386-405.
Comfort, L.K. (2005), “Risk, security, and disaster management”, Annual Review of Political
Science,Vol.8,pp.335-356.
Considine,M.andLewis,J.M.(2003),“Bureaucracy,network,orenterprise?”, Comparingmodels
of Governance in Australia, Britain, the Netherlands, and New Zealand. PublicAdministrationReview ,Vol.63,pp.131-140.
Creswell,J.W.(2009), ResearchDesign:Qualitative,Quantitative,andMixedMethodsApproaches ,
SAGEPublications.
Curnin,S.,Owen,C.,Paton,D.andBrooks,B.(2015),“Atheoreticalframeworkfornegotiatingthe
pathofemergencymanagementmulti-agencycoordination”, AppliedErgonomics ,Vol.47,
pp.300-307,doi:
10.1016/j.apergo.2014.10.014 .
Daly,A.J.andFinnigan,K.S.(2011),“Theebbandflowofsocialnetworktiesbetweendistrict
leaders under high-stakes accountability”, American Educational Research Journal ,
Vol. 48.
Davies, D.J.S. (2005), “Local governance and the dialectics of hierarchy, market and network”,
PolicyStudies ,Vol.26,pp.311-335.
Dawes, S.S., Birkland, T., Tayi, G.K. and Schneider, C. (2004), Information, Technology, and
Coordination: Lessons from the World Trade Center Response , Center for Technology in
Government,UniversityatAlbany,StateUniversityofNewYork,Albany,NY.
Donahue,A.K.(2006),“ThespaceshuttleColumbiarecoveryoperation:howcollaborationenabled
disasterresponse”, PublicAdministrationReview ,Vol.66,pp.141-142.
Eggs, H. and Englert, J. (1999), “Inter-organizational networking of small and medium-sized
enterprises-a framework and hypotheses-based case studies”, Albert-Ludwigs-University
ofFreiburg,Freiburg,Germany.
Feiock, R.C. and Jang, H.S. (2009), “Nonprofits as local government service contractors”, Public
AdministrationReview ,Vol.69,pp.668-680.
Fulk,J.andDeSanctis,G.(1995),“Electroniccommunicationandchangingorganizationalforms”,
OrganizationScience ,Vol.6,pp.337-347.
Fulop, L. (1996), “Small firm networks in Western Sydney”, Working paper, Department of
Management,UniversityofWollongong,Wollongong,NSW.
Garrett, T.M. (2010), “Interorganizational collaboration and the transition to the department of
homeland security a knowledge analytic interpretation”, Administration & Society ,4 2
No.3,pp.343-360.
Gil-Garcia,J.R.andPardo,T.A.(2006),“Multi-methodapproachestodigitalgovernmentresearch:
value lessons and implementation challenges”, Proceedings of the 39th Annual Hawaii
InternationalConferenceonSystemSciences(HICSS’06) ,Vol.4,Honolulu,HI ,p.67,http://
doi.org/10.1109/HICSS.2006.356.
Granovetter, M. (1985), “Economic action and social structure: the problem of embeddedness”,
American Journal of Sociology , pp. 481-510.
Harrison, T.M., Pardo, T., Gil–Garcia, J.R., Thompson, F. and Juraga, D. (2007), “Geographic
informationtechnologies,structurationtheory,andtheworldtradecentercrisis”, Journalof587WorldTrade
Centercrisis
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tg/article-pdf/10/4/568/2353745/tg-02-2016-0011.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
theAmericanSocietyforInformationScienceandTechnology ,Vol.58No.14,pp.2240-2254,
http://doi.org/10.1002/asi.20695.
Harwood,S.(2001/2002),“ManagingChaosreliesonfast,accurateinformation:NewYorkCity–
creating a disaster management GIS on the fly”, ArcNews: Esri New York City Satellite
Office,availableat: www.esri.com/news/arcnews/winter0102articles/tofc-winter0102.html
Higgins, E., Taylor, M., Francis, H., Jones, M. and Appleton, D. (2015), “Transforming fire
prevention: a case study”, Transforming Government: People, Process and Policy , Vol. 9
No.2,pp.223-236, http://doi.org/10.1108/TG-05-2014-0017.
Jones, C., Hesterly, W.S. and Borgatti, S.P. (1997), “A general theory of network governance:
exchange conditions and social mechanisms”, Academy of Management Review , Vol. 22
No.4,pp.911-945.
Kapucu,N.(2006),“Interagencycommunicationnetworksduringemergencies”, AmericanReview
ofPublicAdministration ,Vol.36,pp.207-225.
Kiefer, J.J. and Montjoy, R.S. (2006), “Incrementalism before the storm: network performance for
theevacuationofNewOrleans”, PublicAdministrationReview ,Vol.66,pp.122-130.
Koliba, C., Mills, R. and Zia, A. (2011), “Accountability in governance networks: implications
drawnfromstudiesofresponseandrecoveryeffortsfollowingHurricaneKatrina”, Public
AdministrationReview ,Vol.71No.2(March/April),pp.210–220.
Koontz, T.M. and Thomas, C.W. (2006), “What do we know and need to know about the
environmental outcomes of collaborative management?”, Public Administration Review ,
Vol.66,pp.111-121.
Leibenstein,H.(1987), InsidetheFirm:TheInefficienciesofHierarchy ,HarvardUniversityPress,
Cambridge,MA.
Lewis,J.D.andWeigert,A.(1985),“Trustasasocialreality”, SocialForces ,Vol.63,pp.967-985.
McKnight, D.H., Cummings, L.L. and Chervany, N.L. (1998), “Initial trust formation in new
organizational relationships”, Academy of Management Review , Vol. 23, pp. 473-490, doi:
10.5465/AMR.1998.926622 .
March,J.G.andSimon,H.A.(1958), Organizations ,JohnWiley&Sons.
Moynihan, D.P. (2009), “The network governance of crisis response: case studies of incident
commandsystems”, JournalofPublicAdministrationPolicyResearchandTheory ,Vol.19,
pp.895-915.
Natural Disasters Trends|EM-DAT [WWW Document] (2016), available at: www.emdat.be/
natural-disasters-trends (accessed13October2015).
Pawlowski, S.D., Robey, D. and Raven, A. (2000), “Supporting shared information systems:
boundary objects, communities, and brokering”, CIS 2000 Proceedings. Paper 30 ,
Brisbane,10-13December,pp.329-338.
Podolny, J.M., Page, K.L. (1998), “Network forms of organization”, Annual Review of Sociology ,
Vol.22.
Polzer, J.T., Crisp, C.B., Jarvenpaa, S.L. and Kim, J.W. (2006), “Extending the faultline model to
geographicallydispersedteams:howcolocatedsubgroupscanimpairgroupfunctioning”,AcademyofManagementJournal ,Vol.49,pp.679-692.
Powell, W.W. (2003), “Neither market nor hierarchy”, The Sociology of Organizations: Classic,
Contemporary,andCriticalReadings ,Vol.315,pp.104-117.
Rethemeyer, R.K. and Hatmaker, D.M. (2008), “Network management reconsidered: an inquiry
intomanagementofnetworkstructuresinpublicsectorserviceprovision”, JournalofPublic
Administration Policy Research and Theory , Vol. 18, pp. 617-646.TG
10,4
588
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tg/article-pdf/10/4/568/2353745/tg-02-2016-0011.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
Richter, A.W., West, M.A., Van Dick, R. and Dawson, J.F. (2006), “Boundary spanners’
identification, intergroup contact, and effective intergroup relations”, Academy of
ManagementJournal ,Vol.49,pp.1252-1269.
Rousseau, D.M., Sitkin, S.B., Burt, R.S. and Camerer, C. (1998), “Not so different after all: a
cross-disciplineviewoftrust”, AcademyofManagementReview ,Vol.23,pp.393-404.
Scholl, H.J. and Patin, B.J. (2014), “Resilient information infrastructures: criticality and role in
responding to catastrophic incidents”, Transforming Government: People, Process and
Policy,Vol.8No.1,pp.28-48, http://doi.org/10.1108/TG-12-2012-0015.
Semlinger,K.(2008),“Cooperationandcompetitioninnetworkgovernance:regionalnetworksin
aglobalisedeconomy”, Entrepreneurship&RegionalDevelopment ,Vol.20,pp.547-560,doi:
10.1080/08985620802462157 .
Smith, A. and Katz, R. (2013), “US billion-dollar weather and climate disasters: data sources,
trends,accuracyandbiases”, NaturalHazards ,Vol.67,pp.387-410.
Sorrentino, M. and Simonetta, M. (2012), “Assessing local partnerships: an organisational
perspective”, Transforming Government: People, Process and Policy , Vol. 6 No. 2,
pp.188-205, http://doi.org/10.1108/17506161211246926.
Sutanto, J., Tan, C.H., Battistini, B. and Phang, C.W. (2011), Emergent Leadership in Virtual
CollaborationSettings:ASocialNetworkAnalysisApproach ,LongRangePlanning ,Vol.44
No.5-6,pp.421-439.
Thompson, G.F. (2003), Between Hierarchies and Markets: The Logic and Limits of Network
Organization ,OxfordUniversityPress.
Tirole,J.(1986),“Hierarchiesandbureaucracies:ontheroleofcollusioninorganizations”, Journal
ofLaw,Economics,&Organization ,Vol.2No.2,pp.181-214.
Van Alstyne, M. (1997), “The state of network organization: a survey in three frameworks”,
Journal of Organizational Computing and Electronic Commerce , Vol. 7, pp. 83-151.
Walter, J., Lechner, C. and Kellermanns, F.W. (2007), “Knowledge transfer between and within
alliance partners: private versus collective benefits of social capital”, Journal of Business
Research,Vol.60,pp.698-710.
Waugh, W.L. and Streib, G. (2006), “Collaboration and leadership for effective emergency
management”, Public Administration Review , Vol. 66, pp. 131-140. doi: 10.1111/
j.1540-6210.2006.00673.x .
Weber,M.(1946),“Bureaucracy”,inGirth,H.H.andMills,C.W.(Eds), FromMaxWeber:Essaysin
Sociology,OxfordUniversityPress,NewYork,NY.
Williams, P. (2002), “The competent boundary spanner”, Public Administration , Vol. 80,
pp.103-124.
Williamson,O.E.(1975), MarketsandHierarchies:AnalysisandAntitrustImplications ,TheFree
Press,NewYork,NY.
Williamson, O.E. and Winter, S.G. (1991), The Nature of the Firm: Origins, Evolution, and
Development ,OxfordUniversityPress,NewYork,NY.
Wilson, J.M., Boyer O’Leary, M., Metiu, A. and Jett, Q.R. (2008), “Perceived proximity in virtual
work:explainingtheparadoxoffar-but-close”, OrganizationStudies ,Vol.29,pp.979-1002.
About the authors
J. Ramon Gil-Garcia is an Associate Professor of Public Administration and Policy and theResearch Director of the Center for Technology in Government, University at Albany, StateUniversity of New York (SUNY). Dr Gil-Garcia is a member of the Mexican National System ofResearchers as Researcher Level III and of the Mexican Academy of Sciences. In 2009, he was589WorldTrade
Centercrisis
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tg/article-pdf/10/4/568/2353745/tg-02-2016-0011.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
consideredthemostprolificauthorinthefieldofdigitalgovernmentresearchworldwide,andin
2013,hewasselectedfortheResearchAward,whichis“thehighestdistinctiongivenannuallybytheMexicanAcademyofSciencestooutstandingyoungresearchers”.DrGil-Garciaistheauthororco-authorofarticlesinprestigiousinternationaljournalsinpublicadministration,informationsystemsanddigitalgovernment,andsomeofhispublicationsareamongthemostcitedinthefieldofdigitalgovernmentresearchworldwide.J.RamonGil-Garciaisthecorrespondingauthorandcanbecontactedat:
jgil-garcia@ctg.albany.edu
Theresa A. Pardo, PhD, is the Director of the Center for Technology in Government at the
University at Albany, State University of New York, where she also holds Research AssociateProfessorappointmentsinPublicAdministrationandPolicyandInformatics.DrPardoservesasOpenNYAdvisertoNewYorkState’sGovernorCuomoandisamemberoftheUSEnvironmentalProtection Agency’s National Advisory Committee and the User Working Group of NASA’sSocioeconomic Data and Applications Center, among others. Dr Pardo is founder of the SmartCities, Smart Government Research-Practice Consortium and is Past-President of the DigitalGovernmentSociety.
DjokoSigitSayogoisaSeniorLecturerintheDepartmentofEconomicsandBusinessatthe
UniversityofMuhammadiyahatMalang(UMM),Indonesia.Additionally,DjokoistheDirectoratthe Center for Economics, Business and Entrepreneurships Development at the Department ofEconomics,UniversityofMuhammadiyahatMalang.HeiscurrentlyaPostdoctoralAssociateattheCenterforTechnologyinGovernment.HewasworkingontheCTGteamthataimstodevelopa proof of concept for global information systems using Semantic Web technologies based onOWLontology,calledI-Choose.HeisaformerFulbrightPresidentialScholarfromIndonesia.
Forinstructionsonhowtoorderreprintsofthisarticle,pleasevisitourwebsite:
www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htm
Orcontactusforfurtherdetails: permissions@emeraldinsight.comTG
10,4
590
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/tg/article-pdf/10/4/568/2353745/tg-02-2016-0011.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026