NOTE TO USERS
Page(s) not included in the original manuscript and are 
unavailable from the author or university. The manuscript 
was scanned as received.
viii-ix
This reproduction is the best copy available.
®UMI
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
TRUST BASED COLLABORATION FOR SUPPLIERS AND EMPLOYEES IN AN 
INTERNET-BASED WORLD: AN INVESTIGATION OF THE RELATIONSHIPS 
AMONG ETHICAL WORK CLIMATE, TRUST, COMMITMENT AND 
INNOVATION IN INTERNET-ENHANCED MANUFACTURING FIRMS
By
Mang-Ling Lo
A DISSERTATION
Submitted to
H. Wayne Hulzenga School of Business and Entrepreneurship 
Nova Southeastern University
in partial fulfillment of the requirements 
for the degree of
DOCTOR OF BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION
2003
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
UMI Number: 3119763
Copyright 2004 by 
Lo, Mang-Ling
All rights reserved.
INFORMATION TO USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy 
submitted. Broken or indistinct print, colored or poor quality illustrations and 
photographs, print bleed-through, substandard margins, and improper 
alignment can adversely affect reproduction.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript 
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if unauthorized 
copyright material had to be removed, a note will indicate the deletion.
®UMI
UMI Microform 3119763 
Copyright 2004 by ProQuest Information and Learning Company. 
All rights reserved. This microform edition is protected against 
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code.
ProQuest Information and Learning Company 
300 North Zeeb Road 
P.O. Box 1346 
Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
A Dissertation 
entitled
Trust based Collaboration for Suppliers and Employees in an Internet-based World: 
An Investigation of the Relationships among Ethical Work Climate, Trust, 
Commitment and Innovation in Internet-enhanced Manufacturing Firms
By
Mang-Ling Lo
We hereby certify that this Dissertation submitted by Mang-Ling Lo conforms to 
acceptable standards, and as such is fully adequate in scope and quality. It is 
therefore approved as the fulfillment of the Dissertation requirements for the degree
of Doctor of Business Administration.
Approved:
..AX'
Frank Cavico, J.D.
Chairp^fs i on,,/'
I/ . »  j t j f
Pedro F. Pellet, Ph. D. 
Committee Member
A'Moshe Levin, Ph. D. 
v6omm|ttee Member , s ? /A
! W  A  A T
AC AASAl-
/  r/IbsepJt'L. Balloun, Ph.D. /  
' DirectbrJof Research Rehear
/ f
,/ff: Preston lonlsf D.B.A.
¥Associate Dean, H. Wayne Huizenga School of 
Business and EntrepreneurshipDate
Date
/  ' 
Date
*2-
Date
Nova Southeastern University 
2003
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
ABSTRACT
Trust based Collaboration for Suppliers and Employees in an Internet-based World:
An Investigation of the Relationships among Ethical Work Climate, Trust, 
Commitment and Innovation in Internet-enhanced Manufacturing Firms
By
Mang-Ling Lo
This study examined Hosmer’s (1994) proposition that an ethical approach to 
management engenders stakeholder trust, which, in turn, brings about commitment 
and innovation from the perspectives of traditionally out-group  suppliers and in-group  
employees, respectively. Boundary-spanning employees of the Internet-enhanced 
manufacturing companies participated in the study in their roles as either suppliers or 
employees. A sample of 54 buyer-supplier inter-organizational relationships and 54 
employer-employee intra-organizational relationships were used to test the 
proposition.
Hosmer’s (1994) proposition was partially supported by the study. Suppliers 
had higher levels of trust in customer firms with higher level of perceived 
principle-cosmopolitan work climate, and lower levels of trust in customer firms with 
higher level of perceived egoism work climate. However, level of trust in customer 
firms was not a significant predictor of the existence of commitment and innovation 
in suppliers.
In contrast, employees had higher levels of trust in employing firms with higher 
levels of perceived benevolence work climate. Moreover, level of trust in employing 
firms was a significant predictor of the existence of commitment and innovation in 
employees. As such, trust matters more in intra-organizational relationships.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to take this opportunity to thank my committee member, Professor 
Frank Cavico, Professor Pedro Pellet and Professor Moshe Levin for their guidance 
and encouragement in conducting this research. I am very lucky to have many caring 
and talented members on my committee.
Moreover, I am indebted to the many people who are not on my committee, but 
who supported me along the way. Dr. Bill Johnson and Dr. Barry Bames lent me 
extra support on data collection. Dr. Tindall and Dr. Doreen gave me their advice on 
statistical analysis. Dr. Tamara Terry edited my dissertation to ensure its adequacy.
Finally, I would like to dedicate my dissertation to my parents, who have 
always encouraged my continuing education. Their prodding and support enabled 
me to obtain a Bachelor of Commerce degree from the University of the 
Witwatersrand in South Africa, a Master’s degree specializing in accounting from 
Keio University in Japan, a Specialist in Education degree from Pittsburg State 
University in the U.S. and a Doctoral of Business Administration degree from Nova 
Southeastern University in the U.S. Every degree encompasses my parents’  
blessing and love; I could not say enough to thank them.
Maybe without knowing, my practical experiences have inspired me to select 
this dissertation topic. I acknowledge the extraordinary experiences I have 
encountered, which have enabled me to comprehend ethics, not as a concept, but as a 
reality, and to empathize with studies addressing the issues of ethics and trust. Here 
are a few words to a group of CPAs (CPA Chang, CPA Lin, CPA Chu and fellow 
CPAs). Ethical climates explain why a group action may not necessarily be right. 
As such, actions cannot be justified on the basis that they are done “together as a 
group”. Based on the ethical principle of analysis, it is definitely wrong to forge 
documents and commit embezzlement.
As we approach Christmas, among the many things I wish for, is a just 
city-state with order, subordination and regulation, and most importantly, justice.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
CERTIFICATION STATEMENT
I hereby certify that this paper constitutes my own product, that where the 
language of others is set forth, quotation marks so indicate, and that appropriate 
credit is given where I have used the language, ideas, expressions or writings of 
another.
Signed:
pig-Ltig Lo
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
page
List of Tables ................................................ ............ ........... .............  x
List of Figures. ...........................................  xi
Chapter
I . IN T R O D U C T IO N ............................................. ..........   1
Introduction. ..........     1
Domain of the Study. .................. . 3
Background of the Study................................................. 4
Research Questions....................................................... 8
Theoretical Framework................................................... 8
Purpose of Study .............. ........... .......... 14
Justification of the Study. ............ ........... 15
Importance of Study ......................... .................. 16
Scope of the Study. ........................ ..................... ...............  17
Definition of T e rm s ..................... .......................... . 19
Organizational Plan. .........................  21
Chapter Summary......................................................... 21
II. LITERATURE REVIEW ................................................ 23
Introduction.  ..............................................................................  23
An Ethical Approach to Management: Ethics and Stakeholders’
Interests..................... 24
Trust based Collaboration  .................................... . 38
Commitment and Innovation. .... 52
Sum m ary....   61
III. METHODOLOGY.. ................. . 66
Introduction .......................................... .................................................  66
Research Questions and Hypotheses .......................... ........................  67
Survey Instruments. ....................................  74
Sample and Setting. ....... 83
Data Collection  .................... . 86
Pretest. .......................... ................. ...................  86
Data Analysis.  ....... 87
Summary. ............................... . 87
IV. ANALYSIS AND PRESENTATION OF FINDINGS. ...... 89
Introduction................................................................. 89
Pretest Findings.  .......... . 90
Survey Data Collection Results.......................................... 91
Descriptive Statistics of the Samples .................................. . 93
Hypothesis Testing. .................................   109
Summary. .......    124
V. SUMMARY AND C O N C L U S IO N ....................... .................   127
Introduction. ........     127
Overview of Significant Findings....................................... 128
vi
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
Implication of this Study................................................. 132
Limitation of this Study   133
Recommendation for Future Research ................................. 135
Conclusion. .............    136
Appendices
A. PERMISSION LETTER TO USE SURVEY INSTRUMENT.  138
B. COVER LETTER TO P R O F E S S IO N A L S .............................. 140
C. SURVEY INSTRUMENT USED IN THE STUDY.................. 142
D. SPSS OUTPUT OF FACTOR ANALYSIS............................ 163
E. SPSS OUTPUT OF RELIABILITY ANALYSIS...................... 170
R E FE R E N C E S............ ..............     178
BIBLIOGRAPHY........  ..............................   182
vii
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
LIST OF TABLES
Table Page
1. Theoretical Ethical Climate Types.  ............ ......................... . 36
2. Survey Data Collection Results  .................. . 92
3. Gender * Role Cross Tabulation. .............. . 94
4. Organizational Form * Role Cross Tabulation ............................ 95
5. Internet Application in Job Performance* Role Cross Tabulation...... 96
6. Customer Firms Interaction * Role Cross Tabulation ..................... 98
7. Length of Relationship * Role Cross Tabulation........................... 99
8. Job Level * Role Cross Tabulation   100
9. Cronbach’s Alphas and Item-to Total Correlations for Corporate
Work Climates Identified in this Study  ........................   105
10. Descriptive Results for Variable Items  ...........   106
11. Person Correlation Coefficient  .......          108
12. Results of Stepwise Multiple Regression (Suppliers’ Perspective)...... 110
13. Results of Stepwise Multiple Regression (Employees’  Perspective).... I l l
14. Results of Logistic Regression (Suppliers’  Perspective) ...............   121
15. Results of Logistic Regression (Employees’  P erspective)........... ...... 122
x
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure Page
1, A Conceptual Model of Ethical Climate, Trust, Commitment and
Innovation  ......... ..................... .......... 74
xi
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTION
Introduction
A study conducted by IBM Corporation shows that more than two thirds of 
those who want to start a business planned to use the Internet extensively for a variety 
of purposes, (Plaster, 2002) Yet, Porter (2001) suggests that falling to deploy the 
Internet, or falling to deploy it strategically, will pose the greatest threat to established 
companies. These studies imply that the way people do, or should do, business has 
changed significantly.
The development of Internet technology has impacted our world in such a way 
that it has been compared to the Industrial Revolution of the 19th century, and 
accordingly referred to as “The Internet Revolution” (Amichai-Bamburger, 2002). 
Drucker (2000) suggests that what e-commerce {the explosive emergence o f the  
Internet ) is to the Information Revolution is similar to the emergence of what the 
railroad was to the Industrial Revolution - a new, unprecedented, and unexpected 
development, (p. 11) In our mental “geography,” the development of the railroad 
enabled us to master distance, while the development of e-commerce enabled us to 
eliminate distance. (Drucker, 2000) In addition, the latter directs us towards an 
“endo-world,” a virtual space Inside the interface of the virtual and the physical world
1
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
2
(Morath & Schmidt, 1999), wherein communication, creation, and transaction can 
take place.
The organization, in a traditional sense, has stable boundaries and makes 
relatively clear distinctions between inside  and outside.  (Morath & Schmidt, 1999) 
However, the advent of the Internet introduces another dimension, the endo-world, to 
our real world, which leads to the “mutation” of our business environment. Sharma
(2000) points out that traditional organizations are having trouble competing today 
due principally to the fact that stable boundaries restrict their ability to move quickly 
enough for the new e-business economy. To be competitive, businesses must begin 
assigning initiatives that transcend traditional organizational boundaries. Levy 
(1999) suggests that our success in a highly competitive environment hinges on our 
ability to open-mindedly form intelligent communities  as well as our ability to initiate, 
imagine, and respond. Hence, collaboration across boundaries, i.e., 
inter-organizational or intra-organizational collaboration via the Internet, has become 
much more important.
Collaboration across boundaries via the Internet, however, may involve greater 
diversity and greater risk. The Internet means that we may collaborate in real time 
with known or unknown people in different countries, and different locations, with 
different types of knowledge and different moral values. Ciancutti & Steding (2001)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
3
suggest that, in order to transform the power of diversity into a source of higher 
intelligence rather than conflict, a culture of trust is required. Real commitments 
(i.e., intent to behave accordingly) from the parties involved generate trust among 
them, which, in turn, engender greater commitment and greater creativity. On the 
contrary, a culture driven by risk aversion may hamper the development of mutual 
trust and innovation.
Levy (1999) posits that “when global relation and social interactions create a 
situation in which competition is based on common interest, then competition shift to 
the domain of ethics” (p. 32). It is interesting for us to see whether ethical firms will 
win the race in an Internet-based world where trust, commitment and innovation are 
determinant factors of success.
Domain of the Study
This study focuses on examining whether suppliers’  and employees’  perceptions 
about Internet-based company’s ethical climate influence their respective trust in the 
company. It also looks at whether such trust influences their respective perceptions 
of commitment and innovation. Finally, this work ascertains whether trust impacts 
the traditionally out-group  suppliers the same way as it impacts the in-group  
employees of the company.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
4
Background of the Study
Barnard (1938) proposes the need for the executive of the company to “inspire 
cooperative personal decisions by creating faith in common understanding, faith in the 
probability of success, faith in the ultimate satisfaction of personal motive, and faith 
in the integrity of common purpose” (p. 259). The importance of the leader’s role in 
creating faith or trust is, once again, in the spotlight due to the prevalence of the 
Internet and the intrinsic, as well as extrinsic nature thereof.
A recent Internet domain-name system survey, conducted by the Internet 
Software Consortium (2002), shows that there were 147 million computer “hosts” on 
the Internet in January 2002, as opposed to 1  million in January 1993. This growth 
Indicates a spectacular increase in the Internet usage, since the breakthrough of the 
World Wide Web (WWW) in 1993. The global usage rate of the Internet is shown 
clearly in another survey conducted by Nua Ltd. (2002). It indicates that a total of 
581 million people worldwide were “online” as of May 2002. Of these, Europe 
accounted for 32%, Canada and USA accounted for 31%, the Asia-Pacific region 
accounted for 29%, and the rest of the world -  Latin America, Africa and the Middle 
East -  accounted for 8%. According to Pohjola (2002), the overwhelming effect of 
the Internet springs from an essential technical idea embodied in it, i.e., open  
architecture networking,  (p. 138) This concept enables the integration of markets
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
5
and the connection of people to take place irrespective of all kinds of traditional 
boundaries. A new economy, defined by business globalization and an information 
and communication technology revolution, thereby has emerged. Carayannis & Sagi
(2001) argue that, although the new economy may involve the same “players,” e.g., 
government, industry, and firms, the relation and methods are different. A new 
transformation that impacts competitiveness consequently has taken place.
Soft issues or the intangibles, which are difficult to measure and quantify, and 
thus often neglected, have become the critical success factors in the new economy. 
(Sonnenberg, 1994) A study conducted by Dutta & Biren (2001), based on the 
Fortune  Global 500 list, shows that the priority of most companies is to foster 
customer relationships via the Internet. The North American companies excel in 
e-commerce innovation, such as product-inspiring games, while their European 
counterparts have taken the lead in general advancement, such as worldwide online 
purchasing. A growing trend towards customization of product, customer 
involvement in the process of product design, as well as the fact that companies 
undertake alliances to better serve customers’  expanding set of needs, have been 
observed. Companies strive to differentiate themselves from their competitors by 
intangible means, such as innovation, reputation, and excellence of service in an 
economy driven by information. (Sonnenberg, 1994)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
Wilder & Soat (2001) suggest that the dynamic of corporate collaboration, in 
the new economy, calls for a change of mindset for parties involved. For example, 
historically, retailers have tried to get a better price from manufacturers, while 
manufacturers have tried to “push” products on retailers. Data sharing based on such 
a “win-lose” mentality could be deceptive, or not happening at all. From the 
viewpoint of retailers, sales data are to be kept secret. Contrarily, from the 
viewpoint of manufacturers, sales data should be presented accurately, so as not to 
deceive. Today, retailers and manufacturers are striving for a “win-win” mentality, 
where parties try to create an environment for collaboration. Realistic data are shared 
between retailers and manufacturers (e.g., Kmart and Kimberly-Clarks) in order to 
synchronize demand and supply more closely and thus to reduce overall cost. 
(Wilder & Soat, 2001)
Companies that are still unwilling to practice data sharing with supply chain 
vendors today, however, argue that this creates vulnerabilities. “It opens us up to a lot 
of opportunities by competitors” (Wilder & Soat, 2001, p. 36). A broader set of 
ethics that takes into consideration the values of business partners and an 
unprecedented level of trust are required for collaborative business to work. (Wilder 
& Soat, 2001)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
7
The same points could be made about the employees of the company. 
According to Drucker (2000), the mindset that shareholders are the “bosses,” while 
employees are “bribed” to work for the company, needs to be changed in the new 
economy, it is critical to attract, maintain, and motivate knowledge workers in a 
knowledge driven economy. However, this objective can be achieved only by 
“turning them from subordinates into fellow executives, and from employees, 
however well paid, into partners” (Drucker, 2000, p. 12).
Boverie & Kroth (2001) emphasize the importance of trust and ethics within an 
organization. Their interviews with employees show that employees feel betrayed 
and unwilling to trust their bosses or supervisors when their creative ideas and 
proposals were claimed by their “bosses” or supervisors as their own. They lose 
passion in their work as a result. Creativity and commitment dwindle in an 
environment that lacks ethics and trust.
The Internet provides suppliers, customers, and employees with the opportunity 
to share their ideas, desire, and knowledge on a common platform and in real time. 
To seize the opportunity of collective intelligence, however, “broader ethics” that 
includes all members of the network and “stronger trust” that glues all members 
together will be of vital importance.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
Research Questions
The following research questions are proposed:
1. Do suppliers5  perceptions of ethical climate influence their trust in the company?
2. Do suppliers’  trust in the company influence their perceptions of commitment and 
innovation?
3. Do employees’  perception of ethical climate influence their trust in the company?
4. Do employees’  trust in the company influence their perceptions of commitment 
and innovation?
5. Does ethical climate influence suppliers’  level of trust the same way it does 
employees?
6. Does level of trust influence suppliers the same way if does employees in their 
perceptions of commitment and innovation.
7. Is the commitment and innovativeness of employees, acting as boundary-spanning 
agents of the manufacturing firm and playing the role of both suppliers and 
employees, affected by the ethical climate, and hence the level of trust of the 
customer and the manufacturing firms?
Theoretical Framework
Hosmer’s (1994) propositions establish an ethics-trust-commitment and
innovation linkage. The following four propositions were made to support his
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
9
viewpoint that “it is essential in any competitive sense to be moral” (Homer, 1994, 
p.25):
Proposition 1  Companies operating in a competitive global economy are 
dependent upon a wide range of stakeholders
Proposition 2  Companies are dependent upon their stakeholder groups not 
only for cooperative actions but also for innovative development
Proposition 3  It is difficult to motivate behavior that is both cooperative 
and innovative by ali the stakeholder of the firm
Proposition 4  It is possible to build trust, commitment and effort on the 
part of all of the stakeholders by including the ethical principles in the 
strategic decision processes of the firm. (P.25-28)
Hosmer’s (1994) propositions are in line with Herbert Spencer’s social 
evolution theory and Adam Smith’s theory of moral sentiments. According to 
Spencer, as societies evolve from simple to complex, human beings undergo parallel 
differentiation and specialization to adapt to the environments. Highly differentiated 
and specialized individuals, institutions, and societies manifest greater mutual 
dependence. (Werhane, 2000) Adam Smith argues that human beings’  propensity to 
cooperate motivates them to divide and specialize their labor, and then to barter. 
Justice is essential, in a viable political economy, since economic exchanges often 
take place between strangers. Mutual and reciprocal gains will result from the good 
will of honoring the exchange. (Werhane, 2000)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
Hosmer (1994) suggests that the application of ethical principles to strategic 
decisions results in a “good society” where members of the society cooperate 
willingly for the benefit of all. For example, conflicts of interest arise when it comes 
to dividing surplus derived from cooperation. The gain of one member represents 
the loss of another member. A distribution that is perceived to be equitable and fair 
thus has to be arrived at to ensure the amity of members. (Griffiths & Lucas, 1996) 
The application of ethical principles in decision-making ensures equitable and fair 
allocation of “benefits” and “harms.” Ethical principles “are objective statements 
that transcend countries, religions, and times” (Hosmer, 1994, p. 20). According to 
Griffiths & Lucas (1996), members of business enterprises are linked together by 
values held in common which are referred to as sharahle reasons for action,  (p. 5) 
To create faith in the integrity of common purpose is thus of vital importance. 
(Barnard, 1938)
In a fast evolving environment, companies must be able to invent a variety of 
options, such as developing new products, improving processes, and restructuring the 
organization to compete in the markets. Best options must be identified and 
implemented rapidly to create value. (Means &Faulkner, 2000) Collaborative 
networking speeds the innovation created on the part of any and all of the 
stakeholders, since “each innovation is a platform for yet another innovation to launch
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
1 1
from” (Kelly, 1998, p. 142). Therefore, it is critical for a company to have a 
business environment that is conductive to both cooperation and innovation.
Marshall (2000) suggests that, in a transaction-based organization, power and 
control are the heart of the business; people are “incented” to cooperate to get the 
tasks done. Motivation and commitment come from economic incentives and 
benefits. The organization is unable to trigger the creativity, pride, commitment, and 
innovation of its workforce, because workers are afraid of making mistakes, are not 
well informed, or “do not feel ownership in the result” (p. 10). An organization in 
quest of innovation and speed has to transform itself to enable its workforce to go the 
“extra mile”. Marshall (2000) suggests that a relationship-based approach, which is 
grounded on relationships of trust and values organizations’  relationships with their 
suppliers, customers, and employees, is required to energize people to realize their 
full intellectual potentials, as well as to create, and to react quickly to changes.
Hosmer (1994) stresses the importance of deriving creativity and improvisation 
from any and all of the organization’s stakeholders. This list would include 
stakeholders inside the organization, e.g., employees, and those outside the 
organization, e.g., suppliers. The relationships between the organization and its 
stakeholders can be viewed as that of principal-agent relationships. (Hosmer, 1994) 
Agency theory illuminates such a relationship as “one party (the principal) delegates
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
1 2
work to another (the agent) who performs that work” (Eisenhardt, 1989. p. 58). Top 
managers acting as the organization’s contracting agents, enter into various contracts, 
formal or informal, with the organization’s stakeholders. (Jones, 1995)
Evaluation of agents’  innovative efforts can be based on either behaviors or 
outcomes. However, difficulties occur since behaviors involving creativity and 
improvisation cannot be measured with accuracy. Measurable but uncertain 
outcomes, e.g., outcomes influenced by social and economic changes, unreasonably 
shift the risk to the agents. Other outcomes may be difficult to measure, e.g., those 
taking a long time to complete. Therefore, it is not justifiable to invest in 
information systems or management structures to detect acts related to joint moral 
hazards, i.e., lack of effort and self-serving acts. (Demski & Feltham, 1978, quoted in 
Eistenhardt, 1989 & Hosmer, 1994) Nijhof, Krabbendam, and Looise (2002) 
propose that having trust in the potential of those generating ideas, and trust that they 
will not abuse the freedom given to them, are essential, especially given that strict 
regulatory control cannot be used to monitor the progress of innovation.
Hosmer (1994) suggests that trust on the part of stakeholders is important 
because stakeholders who have trust in the company will commit themselves to the 
company’s future. Commitment to the company’s future will ensure both 
cooperative and innovative efforts, which are critical to the company’s success.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
Begue’s (2002) study suggests that an individual’s belief in a just world is highly 
related to interpersonal trust. Therefore, to build trust on the part of all the 
stakeholders, it is important to meet their expectations of “right,” “just,” and “fair” 
treatment concerning explicit and implicit terms of the contracts. Meeting their 
expectation is accomplished by applying ethical principles of analysis in 
decision-making that would affect their interests. (Hosmer, 1994)
Jones (1995) proposes that a sincere manner and reputation are indication of 
corporate morality. Corporate morality also is reflected in the company’s policies 
and decisions, and its direct dealing with stakeholders. Policies and decisions made 
by top managers will affect stakeholders’  perceptions of the company, and the 
company’s reputation and relationship with immediate and potential stakeholders.
According to Victor and Cullen (1988), fundamental ethical criteria, i.e., egoism, 
benevolence, and principle, can be used to define “climates” for organizations. 
Ethical reasoning centered on consideration of self-interest would prevail in an 
organization characterized by an egoistic climate; whereas, ethical reasoning centered 
on consideration of the well-being of others would prevail in an organization 
characterized by a benevolent climate. An organization characterized by a 
principled climate would use the application and interpretation of rules or laws as a 
major form of ethical reasoning.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
Jones (1995) suggests that since costs resulted from opportunism, costs incurred 
to prevent or reduce opportunism could be curtailed by grounding economic 
relationships on mutual trust and cooperation. Accordingly, “the substantially 
increased eligibility to take part in certain types of economic relationships and 
transactions that will be unavailable to opportunistic firms” gives moral firms a 
competitive advantage (Jones, 1995, p. 422).
Purpose of the Study
The purposes of this study are as follows:
1. To examine whether broader ethics  that include the interests of both 
traditionally out-group  suppliers and in-group  employees in organizations’  
strategic decision-making are essential in an Internet-based world.
2. To examine whether trust plays a powerful role in producing commitment and 
innovative efforts on the part of employees within the organization and on the 
part of suppliers outside the organization in an Internet-based world.
3. To examine whether the commitment and innovativeness of employees, acting 
as boundary-spanning agents of the organization and playing the role of both 
suppliers and employees, in an Internet-based world, are both affected by both 
the ethical climate, and hence level of trust of the customer firm, and the 
ethical climate, and level of trust of the organization.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
15
Justification of the Study
Ample research has been conducted to address the importance of customer 
relationships. The effects of trust and commitment on the quality of customer 
relationships, and customer intentions to remain in the relationships have been studied 
to a great extent. (Schoenbachler & Gordon, 2002; Wong & Sohal, 2002; Ruyter et al, 
2001 )
There is a lack of research, however, addressing the relationships from the 
perspectives of suppliers and employees. According to Kandampully and Duddy 
(1999), the assistance and partnership of stakeholders, such as employees and 
suppliers in product and service improvement as well as innovation contribute to 
customer loyalty and hence competitive advantage.
Hosmer (1994) stresses the importance of addressing what is “right,” “ just,” 
and “fair” in the critical relationships between the company and its suppliers and 
employees. This study will provide insight into the relative importance of company 
ethics from the perspective of the traditionally out-group  suppliers and in-group  
employees. In addition, it is meaningful to examine the importance of trust from 
both the supplier and employee perspectives, as well as its relationship to 
commitment and innovation, in an environment where the greatest potential for 
collective intelligence exists, i.e., an Internet-based world.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
16
Importance of Study
The Internet has the effect of reducing barriers to entry and creating new 
substitutes, hence it Intensifies the rivalry among competitors and creates greater 
pressure on price competition. (Porter, 2001) Porter (2001) suggests that companies 
must be able to differentiate themselves and deliver unique values to customers to 
shift their focus away from prices to gain sustainable competitive advantage. Since 
the ability to Innovate is critical to success in an Internet-based world, it is important 
to examine the antecedents of innovative efforts of stakeholders In an Internet-based 
world.
Porter (2001) argues that established companies must deploy the Internet to 
“enhance the distinctiveness of their strategies”(p.76). This study should be of 
benefit to established companies, since It examines the relationships between ethics, 
trust and stakeholders’  perceptions of commitment and innovation based on surveys 
conducted in established companies that make use of the Internet.
From managers’  perspective, the “real world” applications of this study would 
be the importance of bringing back ethics to the strategic planning process (Hosmer, 
1994), to build trust and elicit innovative efforts on the part of all the stakeholders. 
The moral aspect of human qualities will become a determinant factor in selecting 
employees and business partners.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
17
From suppliers’  perspective, they might consider matching their most 
innovative workforce to their most ethical customers in collaborative projects, such as 
joint product development, since the creativeness embedded in the workforce is most 
likely to be explored in this context.
From customers’  perspective, broadening their ethics to encompass their 
suppliers by sharing realistic data is needed to elicit innovative efforts of suppliers to 
create a “win-win” situation, where overall cost is reduced by synchronizing demand 
and supply more closely. Unique value is created via continuous innovation.
From employees’  perspective, selecting moral companies that will honor the 
explicit and implied terms of the employment contracts is Important since It affects 
their willingness to meet their commitments to the companies and to realize their 
intellectual potential.
Scope of the Study
The inhabitants of an Internet based world consist of the dot-coms and 
traditional organizations that make use of the virtual space created by the Internet to 
conduct business. This study focuses on traditional organizations In the 
manufacturing sector that conduct business over the Internet.
Traditional organizations are represented by their Web sites in the virtual space. 
To be effective, the Web sites need not only be attractive but also have to be easy for
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
1 8
visitors to find and use (Lewis, 2003), In this study, survey questionnaires will be 
distributed to manufacturing companies that appear in the top 240 positions of the 
search-engine listings.
Employees of the manufacturing company who interact with customers for the 
accomplishment of the purposes, or tasks under the contracts entered into between the 
manufacturing company and its customers, are viewed as agents of the company.
They will be asked to fill out a survey questionnaire in their role as “supplier” for the 
purpose of this study. They will evaluate the ethical climates of their current or 
previous customers, levels of trust between them and the customers, and their 
commitment and innovative efforts towards accomplishing the purposes and tasks 
required of them under the contracts. Employees of the manufacturing company, 
other than those viewed as “suppliers”, will be asked to answer the survey 
questionnaire in their role as employees. They will evaluate the ethical climates of 
the companies they currently or previously worked for, levels of trust between them 
and the companies, and their commitment and innovative efforts towards 
accomplishing the purposes, or tasks required of them under the contracts entered into 
between them and the companies.
The projected sample size for this study will be 325 suppliers and 325 
employees. The survey instrument will be based on the ethical climate questionnaire
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
19
developed by Victor & Cullen (1998), the trust questionnaire developed by Rempel & 
Holmes (1986) and modified by Zaheer et ai. (1998), to measure trust at the 
macro-level, and Yeung, Brockbank and Ulrich’s (1991) competing value instrument, 
tested by Ruppel & Harrington (2000), to measure the perception of commitment and 
innovation.
Definition of Terms
Stakeholder: Individuals or groups' who are influenced by and can in turn 
influence the accomplishment of the organizational objectives of the company. 
(Freeman, 1984)
Trust:  “The reliance by one person, group, or firm upon a voluntarily accepted 
duty on the part of another person, group, or firm to recognize and protect the rights 
and interests of all others engaged in a joint endeavor or economic exchange” 
(Hosmer 1995, p. 393).
The ethical principles of analysis:  The application of the basic rules or first 
principles that are objective in nature and do not vary with culture, social, and 
economic conditions in decision-makings that involve the allocation of benefits  and 
harms  to ensure the achievement of “fair,” “right,” and “just” treatment of the parties 
involved. (Hosmer, 1994)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
20
Ethical climates:  The general and pervasive characteristics of organizations 
perceived by organizational members that have an impact on a broad range of 
decision-makings. Ethical work climates are “the prevailing perceptions of typical 
organizational practices and procedures that have ethical content” (Victor & Cullen, 
1988, p. 101).
Commitment: “An intentional decision to stick with a situation or person” 
(Boverie & Kroth, 2001); the long-term aspect of which is to “maintain the 
relationship” (Sternberg, 1987, cited in Boverie & Kroth, 2001, p. 197).
Innovation: Any idea, practice, or object perceived to be new by an organization 
(Zaltman et ai. 1973; Rogers & Shoemaker, 1971), the implementation of which 
increases “the yield of resources” or increases “the value and satisfaction obtained 
from resources by the customer” (Drucker, 1985, p. 33).
Value chain: The series of activities that is necessary to produce and deliver 
goods and services. (Porter, 2001)
Boundary-spanning agents: Individuals acting on behalf of their firm, who tend 
to interact more extensively with their counterparts in the partner firm, and are more 
involved in the interorganizational relationship than other organization members. 
(Friedman and Podolny, 1992, cited in Zaheer et al, 1998)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
Organizational Plan
Chapter two provides an introduction of the importance of trust-based 
collaboration in an Internet-based world and a review of pertinent literature on the 
ethical approach to management, trust-based collaboration, and commitment and 
innovation.
Chapter three elaborates on the methodology of this research, encompassing an 
overview of the research, research design, development of hypotheses, 
instrumentation and data analysis.
Chapter four presents the analysis of the results of the research and its findings. 
Chapter five, the final chapter, discusses the findings of the research, its practical 
implications, suggestions for future research and limitations of the study.
Chapter Summary
This chapter provides an introduction of how people do, or should do, business 
which now has changed as a result of the Internet revolution. The advent of the 
Internet introduces a virtual “endo” world to our business environment.
The Internet’s essential characteristic of “open architecture networking” enables 
stakeholders, such as suppliers and employees, to collaborate their innovative efforts 
irrespective of traditional organization boundaries. The quest for “broader ethics”
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
22
that takes into consideration all parties in the network, and stronger trust as that which 
glues all parties together, are discussed in the background of the study.
Hosmer’s (1994) propositions, which establish an ethics-trust-commitment and 
innovation linkage, serve as the theoretical foundation of this study. According to 
Hosmer (1994), ethical decision-making engenders trust on the part of all stakeholders, 
which in turn leads to commitment and innovation that are critical to success. 
Fundamental ethical criteria, i.e., egoism, benevolence, and principle, which are used 
by Victor and Cullen (1988) to define climates for organizations, also are discussed in 
a theoretical framework.
Finally, the purpose, justification, scope, domain, importance and organizational 
plan of the study are illuminated in this chapter. A list of technical terms is also 
presented to show how each is defined and will be used for this study.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
CHAPTER II 
LITERATURE REVIEW
Introduction
The prevalence of the Internet and its essential characteristic of open  
architecture networking  (Pohjola, 2002, p. 138), which allows for the integration of 
markets and connection of people to take place irrespective of all kinds of traditional 
boundaries and In real time, have changed the nature of conducting business. 
Companies that deploy the Internet to conduct business often attempt to attract 
customers with “consumer surplus,” i.e., the difference between the amount a 
customer is willing to pay and the actual price paid. (Camp, 2000) However, 
companies’  inability to differentiate themselves in the fast-changing environment of 
the world of the Internet has shifted the basis of competition ever more towards price, 
and hence decreases the profitability of average competitors in the industries (Porter, 
2001).
According to Porter (2001), it is difficult to outperform average competitors by 
operational effectiveness, i.e., doing the same things better, since it could be Imitated 
easily. To create economic value using the Internet, companies must be able to do 
things differently and deliver a unique type of value to customers. This objective is 
in line with Drucker’s (1985) view of innovation in demand terms, i.e., “changing the 
value and satisfaction obtained from resources by the customer” (Drucker, 1985, p.33).
23
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
24
It could be achieved by establishing a distinctive strategic positioning that involves 
the configuration of a tailored value chain. More importantly, to sustain the 
competitive advantage, the value chain needs to be highly integrated. (Porter, 2001) 
Collaboration among the parties involved is key to such integration. (Mahoney, 2001) 
Therefore, in addition to a company’s primary relationship with its customers, 
managers must aim to develop, nurture, and maintain a company’s relationships with 
internal and external stakeholders. (Kandampulty & Duddy, 1999) Hosmer (1994) 
suggests that trust is required to unleash and actualize the committed innovative 
efforts of stakeholders both within and outside an organization. In order to build 
trust on the part of all the stakeholders, ethics must be brought back to the strategic 
planning process. Based upon the above arguments, it seems logical to infer that 
trust-based collaboration in an Internet based world is pivotal to success.
An Ethical Approach to Management: Ethics and Stakeholders’  interests
Hosmer (1994) suggests that business management, in a global context, 
involves more than considering a simple matter of profit maximization under market, 
legal, and ethical constraints. Instead, maintaining a competitive posture and 
maintaining an ethical stance are Issues that need to be considered jointly. Hosmer 
(1994) argues that it Is effective in a competitive sense to be moral. This argument is 
supported by the following four propositions:
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
25
Proposition 1  Companies operating in a competitive global economy are 
dependent upon a wide range of stakeholders.
Proposition 2  Companies are dependent upon their stakeholder groups not 
only for cooperative actions but also for innovative development.
Proposition 3  It is difficult to motivate behavior that is both cooperative 
and innovative by all the stakeholder of the firm.
Proposition 4  It is possible to build trust, commitment and effort on the 
part of all of the stakeholders by including the ethical principles in the 
strategic decision processes of the firm. (p. 25-28)
According to Hosmer (1994), an ethical approach to strategic management is 
important in that it benefits the company by ensuring cooperation, commitment, and 
innovative efforts on the part of all of the stakeholders of the company, which in turn 
will result in success.
Child (2001) points out that, In a global economy, it Is hard to envisage a 
company carrying out all or most of its value-chain activities in-house, as described 
by the old model. The wave of globalization taking place, during the past decade in 
the form of the global merger, strategic alliance, global network, etc, has multiplied 
the need for effective collaboration across national boundaries. As a result, 
companies have become much more dependent on “the trust of workers, specialists, 
managers, suppliers, distributors, customers, creditors, local institutions, national 
governments, venture partners, and international agency” (Hosmer, 1996, p.501). 
People in any of these groups may be seen as stakeholders of the company (Hosmer,
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
26
1994), since they are affected by, and can in turn influence the attainment of the 
objectives of the company. (Freeman, 1984)
The relationships between the company and its stakeholders can be depicted 
using the contract as a metaphor. (Jesen & Meckling, 1976, cited in Eisenhardt, 1989) 
A company could be seen as a nexus of contracts (Jesen & Meckling, 1976, cited in 
Jones 1995) entered into between top managers acting as the contracting agents for 
the company and its stakeholders. (Jones, 1995) More specifically, according to 
Boatright (2002), a company could be viewed as a nexus of real contracts, which are 
determined by means of negotiation with each stakeholder, and hypothetical  contracts, 
which are created by law to “fill in the gaps” of “incomplete” contracting where 
judicial interpretations are needed. Moreover, Boatright (2002) claims that contracts 
may be explicit or implied. Implied contracts are also a part of the nexus-of-contracts, 
although they are legally unenforceable, yet morally binding.
According to Boatright (2002), stakeholders bargain over the terms of their 
compensation in exchange for some asset or input required by the company. 
Through bargaining, stakeholders could protect their interests by selecting the most 
appropriate means, such as obtaining control rights or becoming beneficiaries of the 
fiduciary duties of management, with the consent of others. However, these means 
are not ends in themselves. From the perspective of contractual theory, the major
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
27
concern should be the creation of “the most efficient forms of economic 
organization”(Boatright, 2002, p. 1842).
To achieve this aim, Hosmer (1994) suggests that the principles of ethical 
analysis, which are “objective statements that transcend countries, religions, and times, 
should be applied in strategic decision-makings to ensure a “good society” where 
members of the society are willing to cooperate for the benefit of all (p.2G). For 
example, conflicts of interest are apparent when it comes to apportioning cooperative 
surplus. In this instance, the gain of one member represents the loss of another 
member. A distribution that is perceived to be equitable and fair has to be arrived at to 
ensure the amity of members. (Griffiths & Lucas, 1996) Applying the principles of 
ethical analysis under the circumstances helps a person to objectively determine what 
is a “right,” “just,” and “fair” allocation of “benefit” and “harms”. (Hosmer, 1994) 
Although members’ interests also could be protected at the system  level by means of 
the general framework of law and institutions (Boatright, 2002), in certain countries 
the implementation of law could be arbitrary in nature and provide only limited 
protection. (Child, 2001) In this instance, members’  interests are better protected at 
the level of managerial decision-making  (Boatright, 2002).
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
28
Hosmer (1995) provides a brief summary of ten of the most cited ethical 
principles as follows:
1. Self-interests (Protagoras and others). Never take any action that is 
not in the long-term self-interests of yourself and the organization to 
which you belong.
2. Personal virtues (Plato and Aristotle). Never take any action that is 
not honest, open, and truthful, and which you would not be proud to 
see reported widely in national newspapers and on network television.
3. Religious injunctions (St. Augustine). Never take any action that is 
not kind, and that does not build a sense of community, a sense of all 
of us working together for a commonly accepted goal.
4. Government requirements (Hobbes and Locke). Never take any 
action that violates the law, for the law represents the minimal moral 
standards of our society.
5. Utilitarian benefits (Bentham and Mill). Never take any action that 
does not result in greater good than harm for the society of which you 
are a part.
6. Universal rules (Kant). Never take any action that you would not be
willing to see others, faced with the same or a closely similar
situation, also be encouraged to take.
7. Individual rights (Rousseau and Jefferson). Never take any action that 
abridges the agreed-upon rights of others.
8. Economic efficiency (Adam Smith). Always act to maximize profits
subject to legal and market constraints and with full recognition of
external costs, for maximum profits under those conditions are the 
sign of the most efficient production.
9. Distributive justice (Rawls). Never take any action in which the least 
among us are harmed in some way.
10. Contributing liberty (Nozick). Never take any action that will 
interfere with the rights of others for self-development and 
self-fulfillment, (p.396-397)
The ethical principles of personal virtues, utilitarian benefits, and distributive 
justice could be applied in determining whether decisions or actions are “fair,”
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
29
“right,” or “just.” According to the personal virtues principle, to offer “fair” 
treatment of one another, honesty, openness, and truthfulness need to be present. 
The utilitarian benefits principle suggests that an action is “right” if it results in “the 
greatest good for the greatest number” or “ greater net social benefits than social 
harm” (Hosmer, 1994, p. 2!). Based on the principle of distributive justice, an 
action would be considered “ just” if the least among us were not harmed in some way. 
Furthermore, the ethical principle of universal rules indicates that the self-interest of 
the person who decides on how the benefits and harms are to be distributed should be 
eliminated, and this rule needs to be followed by everyone. (Hosmer, 1994, 1995)
The need for a company to build a sense of community and pursue economic 
efficiency is addressed in the ethical principle of religious injunctions and economic 
efficiency. According to the ethical principle of religious injunctions, compassion 
and kindness towards others in terms of reciprocity, i.e., “do unto others as you would 
have them do unto you”, are required to build a sense of community and hence form a 
real “good” society. (Hosmer, 1994, p. 21) Yet, the ethical principle of economic 
efficiency suggests that our essential needs for food, clothing, and shelter need to be 
satisfied; otherwise, basic rights are meaningless. Therefore, a company should 
operate as efficiently as possible to maximize its profits. (Hosmer, 1994, 1995)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
30
A company needs to pay attention to legal requirements and individual rights as 
well. The ethical principle of government requirements suggests that, in order to 
maintain peace in our society and prevent people from taking advantage of others in 
efforts to compete for property and position, we have to obey the law, because it 
stands for the minimal moral standards of our society. Moreover, according to the 
ethical principle of individual rights, to protect the rights of individuals, a list of 
agree-upon rights for everyone should be made and upheld by everyone. Agreed 
upon rights should never be abridged. (Hosmer, 1994, 1995)
A company needs to take into consideration the self-interests of its members. 
According to the ethical principle of contributive liberty, since “self-development will 
eventually contribute to the welfare of society,” the liberty of members, i.e., “freedom 
to follow one’s own self-interests,” should not be interfered. (Hosmer, 1994, p. 22) 
However, the ethical principle of “self-interest” suggests that since our short-term 
interests could differ from our long-term interests, we should always take actions that 
are in accord with our long-term interests. (Hosmer, 1994, 1995).
Corresponding with the ethical principle of economic efficiency mentioned 
above, Herbert Spencer coined the term “ survival of the fittest” and applied it to 
individuals, societies and political economies. (Spencer, 1886, pp.389-466, cited in 
Werhane, 2000) Spencer proposes that, as societies evolved from simple to complex,
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
31
human beings underwent parallel differentiation and specialization to adapt to the 
changing environment. Highly differentiated and specialized individuals, 
institutions, and societies exhibited greater mutual dependence. (Werhane, 2000)
The increasing trend towards mutual dependence poses a great challenge in the 
design of organizational architecture. According to Brickley et al. (2002), since the 
CEO might not possess the expertise or the important information required for making 
sound decisions, the CEO might operate more efficiently by assigning decision rights 
to more equipped individuals in the company. Therefore, in designing organizational 
architecture, it is important to ensure that decision-makers have both the relevant 
information and the incentives to make good decisions in their roles as employees or 
managers. However, Brickley et al. (2002) points out that, in many cases, 
employees and managers do not know the appropriate decisions to make to promote 
the interests of the company, because they are uncertain about the ethical standards of 
the company and how to apply them in practice.
Brickley et al. (2002) suggests that corporate reward and performance 
evaluation systems, corporate culture, codes of ethics, and training programs play a 
pivotal role in directing employees and managers to behave in desired ways by 
effectively communicating corporate expectations and values to them. For example, 
Procter & Gamble overhauled its compensating system in the mid-1990 to encourage
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
32
collaboration. The company relinquished sales quotas and compensated its product 
managers by evaluating the overall success of the entire supply chain rather than the 
amount a particular product pushed into the retail channel. (Wilder & Soat, 2001) 
BankWest explicitly conveys its expectation of integrity and objectivity by setting 
standards to be followed by employees in a Code of Ethics. (Small & Dickie, 1999)
Jones (1995) argues that the formal and informal rules embodied in a 
company’s incentives and sanction system will reflect the values and, hence, the 
moral sentiments of its top management. Employees, acting as agents of their top 
managers in their dealings with a company’s external stakeholders, such as customers 
and suppliers, tend to have moral sentiments compatible with those of their top 
managers. A study conducted by Sim & Keon (1999) shows that corporate 
expectations significantly influence employees’  choices of ethical or unethical 
decision-makings. Their findings also suggest that since the situation moderates the 
relationship between the employee’s decision and the organizational environment, 
“formal/written policies alone may not be sufficient in some situations to guide the 
decision making of the employee” (p.399). Managers need to pay attention to 
informal/un written policies as well.
According to agency theory, principal-agency relationship could be illuminated 
as “one party (the principal) delegate work to another (the agent) who perform the
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
work” (Eisenhardt, 1989, p. 58). The notion of a charter,  i.e., a statement of 
purposes, which includes the task, market and the customer to be dealt with, is 
adopted to describe the delegation of the work in a study conducted by Galenic and 
Eisenhardt (2001). In their study, the process of charter change became a critical 
dynamic capability of the company. Brickley et al. (2002) points out that job 
delegations involve at least two aspects: (1) the variety of tasks and (2) the level of 
decision-making authority. In the face of decentralization, lower-level employees 
need to be able to make decisions to perform their jobs.
Hosmer (1994) points out that ethical decision-making involves three different 
concepts: (1) moral standards, (2) value judgments, and (3) ethics. Moral standards 
are “the means by which we judge our actions and those of our neighbors” (Hosmer 
1987, p. 96). They also can also be seen as “the expectations of society relative to 
the conduct of an individual that affects the interests of other people” (Beauchamp 
and Bowie, 1979, p. 3). Since judgments and expectations vary with personal 
backgrounds and the culture of the society, moral standards are subjective measures of 
conduct. People resort to value judgments when confronted with more complex 
issues. (Hosmer, 1994) According to Hofstede (1984), “a shorthand definition of a 
value is a broad preference for one state of affairs over others” (p. 389). Value 
management, or the setting of priorities, should be the paramount task of senior
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
34
executives, since making decisions and setting policies requires making choices 
between competing purposes. (McCoy, 3985 cited in Hosmer, 1994) For example, 
Galinic & Eisenhardt (2001) claim that economics and social arguments sometimes 
reinforce one another, yet sometimes suggest different alternatives; accordingly, 
corporate executives need to weigh both perspectives to make a decision. Since 
value judgments involve personal preferences and judgments, they also are subjective 
measure of conduct. De George (1982) defines ethics as “ a systematic attempt 
through the use of reason to make sense of our individual and social moral experience 
in such a way as to determine the rules which ought to govern human conduct and the 
values worth pursuing in life” (p. 12). Therefore, objective measures - the ethical 
principles of analysis- should be used to examine the appropriateness of our moral 
standards and value judgments applied in decision-making to ensure a “good” society. 
(Hosmer, 1994)
Although organizations are composed of individuals with different moral 
standards and value judgments, Victor & Cullen (1988) argue that organizations have 
distinct types of ethical climates, i.e., “general and pervasive characteristics of 
organizations, affecting a broad range of decisions” (p. 101). Types of ethical 
climates, which influence the identification and resolution of ethical problems, for 
organizations or groups within organizations, are defined by ethical criteria (i.e.,
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
35
egoism, benevolence, and principle) and loci of analysis (i.e., individual, local and 
cosmopolitan). A total of nine theoretical ethical climate types are identified as a 
result (see Table 1). Ethical reasoning dominated by consideration of self-interest 
would prevail in an organization characterized by an egoistic climate. The loci of 
analysis identify the “self’  referred to in ethical decision-making. For example, at 
the individual locus, personal gain and self-defense may be the primary concern. 
Ethical reasoning dominated by consideration of the well-being of others would 
prevail in an organization characterized by a benevolent climate. The loci of 
analysis identify the frame of reference used in defining “others” (Brower & Shrader,
2000). For example, at the local locus, the organizational collective, such as 
team-play, may become the primary concern. Ethical reasoning centered on the 
application and interpretation of rules or law would prevail in an organization 
characterized by a principled climate. In this context, the loci of analysis specify 
sources of principles to be applied in the organization. For example, at the 
cosmopolitan locus, an extraorganizational source of principles, such as the legal 
system or professional organizations, would apply. (Victor & Cullen, 1988)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
36
Table 1
Theoretical Ethical Climate Types
ETHICAL LOCUS OF ANLYSIS
CRITERION Individual^) Local (L) Cosmopolitan(C)
Egoism (E) Self-Interest (El) Company Profit (EL) Efficiency (EC)
Benevolence(B) Friendship (BI) Team Interest (BL) Social Responsibility (BC)
Principle (P) Personal 
Morality (PI)Company Rules 
and Procedures(PL)Laws and
Professional Codes (PC)
From Victor and Cullen, 1987, 1988; Cullen, et al, 1993  
Victor & Cullen’s (1988) study shows that organizations are discriminated by 
strong and identifiably different ethical climates. “A strong organizational climate 
suggests that the organizational norms are well known” (p. 115). According to Victor 
& Cullen (1988), the antecedents for ethical climates are sociocultural environment, 
organizational form, and firm-specific factors. The finding that organizations 
participating in their study show similar levels of caring climates indicates that 
organizations need to develop at least a minimal level of caring environment to meet 
the societal norm. Victor & Cullen (1988) suggest that, although not found in the 
study, an instrumental climate would dominate commissioned sales since, in this 
instance, self-interested behavior is more in congruence with societal norms. The 
principled climates that stress rale and law and code prevail in the geographically 
separate subunits of the organizations under study. This factor is an example of
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
37
managerial practices designed to reduce the risk of decentralized decision-making. 
The study also shows that firm-specific factors, such as tenure, relate positively with 
the perception of caring climate, except for very new workers. This result may be 
attributable to the fact that more extensive socialization for longer tenured workers 
increased their feeling of “fit” with organizational community. (Victor &Cul!en, 
1988).
The types of ethical climates prevailing in an organization influence the ethical 
attitude and ethical standards of individuals. (Singhapakdi et al., 2001) Individual 
employees’  actions, in turn, impact on organizations’  reputations for ethical or 
unethical behavior. (Chami et al, 2002) For example, in 1992, the entire chain of 
Sear’s Automotive Centers in California acquired an unethical reputation for cheating 
its customers, due to the misconduct of a handful of operators. (Patterson, 1992 cited 
in Chami et al., 2002) Fostering an ethical environment beyond organizational 
boundaries to include business partners is important because a company’s reputation 
rests largely on its “upstream” and “downstream” business relationships in marketing 
channels (Svensson, 2001). For example, a company’s downstream business 
relationships with tax evaders or a company’s upstream business relationships with 
poisonous or erroneous product providers would damage the company’s reputation. In 
a global context, companies should scout for partners with similar organizational
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
38
ethical values to ensure better business relations and interactions. (Singhapakdi et al.,
2001) “The substantially increased eligibility to take part in certain types of 
economic relationships and transactions that will be unavailable to opportunistic 
firms” gives ethical firms a competitive advantage (Jones, 1995, p.422).
Trust based Collaboration
Zand (1972) defines trusting behavior as “actions that (a) increase one’s 
vulnerability, (b) to another whose behavior is not under one’s control, (c) in a 
situation in which the penalty (disutility) one suffers if the other abuses that 
vulnerability is greater than the benefit (utility) one gains if the other does not abuse 
that vulnerability” (p. 230). It is clear that trusting behavior is not based on simple 
economic rationality, since the penalty one suffers is greater than the benefit one gains. 
(Hosmer, 1995) Moreover, the result of trusting behavior is dependent upon the 
uncontrollable behavior of another person. For a person to increase his or her 
vulnerability and to become dependent upon another willingly, positive expectations 
related to the intention or behavior of another person (Rousseau et al. 1998), and 
hence, the outcome of the event are required. (Hosmer, 1995)
Rempel & Holmes (1986) identify three fundamental elements of trust on 
which a person’s feelings of confidence in another can be built, namely predictability, 
dependability, and faith. Predictability implies consistency. For confidence to
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
39
grow, one must have knowledge that his or her partner behaves in consistently 
positive ways. Dependability refers to reliability in situations where risk and 
persona! vulnerability are involved. One can only know that his or her partner 
genuinely cares when a situation makes it possible for his or her partner not to care. 
Faith is the sense of emotional security that grows from past experiences showing 
how much one’s partner cares. It, however, enables a person to go beyond what the 
past can tell, and thus makes one feel secure that one’s partner will be responsive and 
caring in the face of an uncertain future.
Jones & George (1998) suggest that a person’s behavior and his or her 
interpretation of past experience are guided by a person’s value system. What a person 
values conditions his or her experience of trust and is upheld as a standard to be 
endeavored to follow. Butler (1991) identifies 10 conditions leading to trusts.
These conditions are as follows:
(1). Availability—  “being physically present when needed”.
(2). Competence— “knowledge and skills related to specific task”.
(3). Consistency— “reliability, acting and making decisions consistently, in such a way
as to prevent others’  anxiety caused by the unexpected”.
(4). Discreetness— “keeping confidence”.
(5). Fairness — “perceived equity”.
(6). Integrity — “honesty and moral character”.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
40
(7). Loyalty --“perceived benevolence; an implicit promise from subordinate not to
bring harm to the executive”.
(8). Openness — “leveling and expressing idea freely”.
(9). Promise Fiilfillment~“When we agree on something, I know he’ll stay to his
word” (Gabarro, 1978, p. 294).
(10). Receptivity — “the accepting of ideas” (Butler, 1991, p. 646-652).
Butler’s (1991) conditions of trust comprise mostly conditions of moral values, 
except for the condition of competence. (Hosmer, 1995) Hence, Hosmer (1995) 
suggests that both organizational theory and normative philosophy should be applied 
to define trust. According to Hosmer (1995), trust is “the reliance by one person, 
group, or firm upon a voluntarily accepted duty on the part of another person, group, 
or firm to recognize and protect the rights and interests of all others engaged in a joint 
endeavor or economic exchange” (p. 393). The reliance by one person, group, or firm 
upon a voluntarily accepted duty on the part of another person, group, or firm, rather 
than effective enforcement procedures, automatically makes the first party vulnerable 
to the uncontrollable behaviors of another person, group, or firm.
Hosmer (1995) proposes that normative philosophy should be looked at in 
honoring the voluntarily accepted duty of recognizing and protecting the rights and 
interests of others, since organizational theory does not explain how disinterested one 
needs to be to recognize and to protect the rights and interests of all others. 
“ Voluntary disinterestedness is a moral duty, owed by the ‘good’  man or woman to
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
41
others for the prevention of unwarranted harm, and ‘right’  and ‘ just’  and ‘fair’  are 
ethical terms, subject to definition by philosophical, not behavioral, 
standards”(Hosmer, 1995, p.394). Recognizing and protecting the rights and 
interests of all others involves a combination of self-interest and the interests of others. 
(Hosmer, 1995) This is in accordance with Argandona’s (1999) argument, which 
states that a virtuous person takes on or carries out commitments, not only in his or 
her own interest, but also in the interest of other parties.
Moreover, Hosmer (1995) points out that the purpose of reliance by one person, 
group, or firm on another person, group, or firm lies in improving cooperation and 
achieving benefits. Since cooperation takes place at different levels, i.e., cooperation 
between organizations, cooperation between individuals and cooperation between 
groups or departments, it is important to address the roles of trust at all levels of 
cooperative relationships. (Smith et al., 1995) Zaheer et al. (1998) notes that “not 
clearly specifying how trust translates from the individual to the organizational level 
leads to theoretical confusion about who is trusting whom because it is the individuals 
as members of organizations, rather than the organizations themselves, who trust” 
(p. 141). According to Smith et a!. (1995), cooperation at the individual micro- level 
is noteworthy, since cooperation, at any level, must ultimately be reduced to 
cooperation at the individual micro-level. For example, cooperation at the
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
42
organization macro-level could be reduced to cooperation between managers from 
different organizations, i.e., individual micro- level. Therefore, studies conducted at 
the micro-level provide great insight to macro researchers.
According to Hausman (2002), at the micro-level, trust would be more relevant 
to one’s ideals than one’s material interests. Trustworthy individuals enjoy benefits 
in the form of pride, intimacy, self-respect, and social recognition. Intimacy, which 
provides individuals with “feelings of being cared for, needed, loved and connected 
with others,” is a basic need and drive of individuals. (Boverie & Kroth, 2001, p. 87) 
Therefore, a trustworthy individual runs the risk of losing his or her own identity in 
the event of losing the trust of others. (Hausman, 2002)
In contrast with an individual’s trustworthiness, which is a matter of the 
individual’s conscience, a firm’s trustworthiness is a matter of the rules that govern 
the firm. Thus, trustworthiness guided by a code of moral conduct would be an 
explicit element in the culture of a trustworthy firm. (Hausman, 2002) Those rules 
must be well known and function as effective norms for organizational members. 
Fiol (2001) suggests that an organization's identity, a shared and collective sense of 
who we are (Albert & Whetten 1985, cited in Fiol, 2001), should be rooted in “a 
commitment to an unchanging set of values and outcomes (why we do what we do)” 
in a changing environment, (p.697) For example, a firm that values relationships
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
may be known for “putting its people and customer first,” “ensuring the stability and 
security of the workforce,” and “having a strong commitment to quality and integrity” 
(Marshall, 2000, p. 76). Individuals’  perceptions of the culture of the firm contribute 
to their perceptions of organizational identification. (Schrodt, 2002) Organizational 
identification occurs when individuals of the firm make decisions in a way that would 
promote the perceived interests of the firm. (Tompkins and Cheney, 1985, cited in 
Schrodt, 2002)
However, Hausman (2002) suggests that it has no intrinsic moral importance, 
no matter how well defined, to speak of the interest of a firm. It is the interest of those 
people who have a stake in the firm, e.g. shareholders, employees, suppliers and 
customers, that matters. The benefits of trustworthiness are more significant at the 
macro level. Since “the order, subordination, and regulation of a just city-state is 
more concrete than the psychic order in a just individual, and the disorder or 
distortion in an unjust city-state is more tangible than the disorder in an individual 
soul,” it is easier to identify the benefits accruing a trustworthy firm than the benefits 
accruing to a trustworthy individual. (Hausman, 2002, p. 1780). Trustworthiness 
contributes to the successful functioning of the firm. It not only enables the firm to 
cooperate better with outsiders, but also enables its members to cooperate better with 
one another (Hausman, 2002).
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
44
The need for intimacy also occurs at the macro-ievel. According to Cousins 
(2002), the new approach to supply management considers the supplier as “internal” 
to the firm, rather than “external” to the firm. The supplier should be seen as part of 
the internal stakeholder element since the supplier profoundly affects the construction 
and supply, and, hence, the perceived quality and reliability of the buying firm’s 
product. The internal stakeholder status gives the supplier authority to access certain 
proprietary information, such as building schedules, forward plans, and strategic 
market movements of the buying firm. The buying firm and the supplier interact in a 
symbiotic way to support each other. (Cousins, 2002)
Social recognition, in the form of reputation, is of value at the macro level. 
Others, basing their future prediction on the past behaviors of a firm, would be more 
willing to enter into a cooperative arrangement with the firm that has a trustworthy 
reputation. (Hausman, 2002) This claim is supported by a survey conducted by the 
Fair Trade Commission of Japan (1993), where only a single answer was allowed. 
Thirty four percent cited “trust based on past transactions and reliability” as the major 
and most critical reason Japanese automotive parts suppliers are selected as suppliers 
for automakers. (Kim & Michel!, 1999) Moreover, a trustworthy reputation reduces 
the firm’s cost of doing business by strengthening the effect of implicit contracts,
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
45
which reduces the cost required to write and monitor contracts and supervise 
employees or suppliers. (Hausman, 2002)
In cooperative interorgaizational relationships (IORs), Zaheer et al. (1998) 
distinguishes trust operating at the micro-level as interpersonal trust, and trust at the 
macro-level as interorganizational trust. According to Zaheer et al. (1998), 
interpersonal trust refers to the extent that trust is placed by the individual 
boundary-spanning agent in her individual counterpart in the partner firm; whereas, 
interorganizational trust refers to the extent that a collectively held trust orientation 
exists by the members of a focal firm toward the partner firm. Ring & Van de Ven 
(1994) argue that, although cooperative IORs are macro-level phenomena, their 
developments and evolutions over time rest upon a repetitive sequence of negotiation, 
commitment, and execution activities of individuals. Through the process of 
negotiation, joint expectations regarding motivations, possible investments, and 
perceived uncertainties are developed. Commitments to the terms and governance 
structure agreed upon in terms of codified formal relational contracts or informal 
psychological contracts are made when agreements are reached. Finally, actions 
associated with the execution of agreements are carried out. Over time, 
accumulations of efficient and equitable interactions between parties lead to trust. 
(Ring & Van de Ven, 1994)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
Boundary-spanning agents, acting on behalf of their firm, tend to interact more 
extensively with their counterparts in the partner firm, and are more involved in the 
interorganizational relationship than other organization members. (Friedman and 
Podoiny, 1992, cited in Zaheer et al., 1998) For example, according to Barbara et al. 
(2000), various departments and functions of the supplier firms need to be involved in 
the interaction with targeted customer firms to meet their needs and requirements. 
To achieve the relationship performance goal, individuals who are equipped with the 
required skills and competencies in both the customer firm and supplier firm need to 
be found to effectively perform the task. In addition, it is important to bring relevant 
resources together, e.g., financial, physical, and human resources of the partner firm 
or third parties who possess the relevant resources. (Barbara et al, 2000) Therefore, 
efficient boundary-spanning activities should be carried out by individuals who are 
well connected both inside and outside the firm. (Manev & Stevenson, 1995; 
Tushman & Scanlan, 1981, cited in Barbara et al, 2000)
Within an organization, Reina & Reina (1999) propose that “boundaries assist 
In defining the roles of individuals and the purpose of multitude of organizational 
structure, such as team and departments. As such, they play a strong role in 
developing contractual trust” (p. 71). In the instance of a collaborative team, the 
consensus of members on a set of operating agreements and a charter with clear roles
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
47
and responsibilities enable high levels of trust to be developed on the front end. 
(Marshall, 2000)
Agency theory uses the metaphor of a contract to describe the principal-agent 
relationship, such as the employer (the company)- employee relationship, (lensen & 
Meckling, 1976, cited in Eisenhardt, 1989) Reina & Reina (1999) suggest that 
expectations, either explicit or implicit, are set by both parties when a contract is 
entered into. Explicit expectations refer to “clearly stated and understood 
requirements”(p. 68), such as giving clear direction and request when starting a 
project, while implicit expectations refer to “unwritten, unspoken requirements, 
agreements, understandings between people” (Baker, 1994, cited in Reina & Reina, 
1999, p. 70), such as doing things in congruence with cultural norm. Contractual 
trust would be reinforced within an organization when people support each other’s 
intentions, honor agreements, and behave consistently. (Reina & Reina, 1999)
When an individual, group, or firm is believed to occupy a particular role, she is 
expected to perform the acts associated with that role in a competent manner (Jones,
2002 ), and fulfill the fiduciary responsibilities and obligations that go with the role 
she occupies. (Kramer, 1999) For example, at Ford Motor Company, a screening 
test which aims to examine suppliers’  credibility, technical knowledge, and skill
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
48
would usually be undertaken, and a performance standard of 85% and above would be 
expected. (Ratnasingam, 2001)
Hardin (1992) conceptualizes trust as a three-part relation, comprised of 
attributes of truster, attributes of trustee, and a specific context over which trust is 
conferred. (Kramer, 1999) In the context where truster and trustee do not have a 
history of prior interaction and there is a lack of personalized knowledge, an 
institutionalized role relationship would develop before an actual personal 
relationship started to develop. (Gabarro, 1987) Since institutionalized role 
behaviors have the effect of constraining the behaviors of individuals who serve as 
agents of the firm, the predictability of the qua persona behaviors of the individuals 
representing the firm would be enhanced by their mandated role behaviors. (Ring 
&Van de Ven, 1994) Therefore, it is important to know up front “the rales for 
engagement,” i.e., what the customer, the company, and the employee value, and what 
needs to be done to produce that value. (Reina & Reina, 1999) Mutual trust can 
reach a taken-for-granted quality when confidence in individuals’  “socialization into 
the structure of rales” (March & Olson, 1989, p. 27) and their continued adherence to 
the normative system is high. (.Kramer, 1999)
Ring &Van de Ven (1994) suggest that, as personal bonds between parties 
develop over time from the congruent sense making and congruent psychological
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
49
contracts, trust in the other party's goodwill also develops. Trust in the other party's 
goodwill, in turn, gives the parties greater flexibility to transcend the institutionalized 
roles they occupy to adapt to changing circumstances. As such, personal 
relationships increasingly supplement role relationships over time. Informal 
commitments made by parties serving as agents of the firms, however, need to be 
formally codified, since it is the firms, not individuals, who are the principal parties to 
the cooperative IOR. (Ring & Van de Ven, 1994) Moreover, based on the fact that 
agents who negotiate the cooperative IOR may leave the firms, and how they do 
things contributes to implicit expectations (Reina & Reina, 1999), formal 
documentation and standardization of informal commitments are needed to ensure 
that the cooperative IOR is legally recognizable beyond the time span of the agents. 
(Ring &Van de Ven, 1994)
According to Zaheer et al. (1998), institutionalizing processes connect trust at 
the micro level (interpersonal trust) and macro level (interorganizational trust). 
“Institutionalizing processes codify informal commitments made by individual 
boundary spanners, which over time become established and taken-for-granted 
organizational structures and routines” (Zucker, 1977, cited in Zaheer et al., 1998, p. 
144). Boundary spanners internalize and recreate norms derived from the 
interorganizational relationship in their trust orientations toward each other. For
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
50
example, there is interpersonal trust, in the process of exchange. The interpersonal 
trust of boundary spanners, in turn, becomes reinstitutionalized, and their trust 
orientation impacts other members’  trust orientation towards the partner firm, i.e., 
interorganizational trust. (Zaheer et al, 1998) Their study shows that interpersonal 
trust and interorganizational trust mutually reinforce each other. The more the 
boundary-spanning agent trusts her individual counterpart in the partner firm, the 
more the boundary-spanning agent’s firm trusts its partner firm. The relationship 
also works in the opposite direction. However, while interorganizational trust exerts 
strong influences on exchange performance, costs of negotiation, and conflict, 
interpersonal trust exerts little influence on these outcomes. This consequence may 
be attributable to the fact that interorganizational trust is more stable and enduring. 
(Ring &Van de Ven, 1994, cited in Zaheer et al., 1998) Therefore, to achieve 
efficiency and desirable cooperative outcome, firms should pay more attention to 
fostering trust at the macro level, i.e., interorganizational trust.
Chami & Fullenkamp (2002) suggest that mutual altruism of both parties, in a 
principal-agent relationship, leads to increased efficiency and higher productivity and 
profits. An altruistic agent (principal) would include in her utility function not only 
her own utility, but also the utility of the principal (agent). In this context, the agent 
would work harder since lack of effort would decrease the principal’s utility. On the
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
5!
other hand, the principal would offer a wage contract with more insurance (less risk 
sharing) since bearing the risk of production would decrease the utility of the agent. 
Efficiency would be achieved by reducing monitoring costs, and a higher level of 
productivity and profits would be derived by the agent’s exertion, of more efforts.
Butler’s (1995) study shows that helping opponents in the pursuit of their 
interests and information sharing enable individuals to gain the trust of their 
opponents. Through information sharing, the principal is able to verify the agent’s 
behaviors; therefore, the agent is more likely to behave in the interest of the principal 
(Eisenhardt, 1989). Ruppel & Harrington (2000) found that individual benevolence 
or non-self-interested climate enhances trust directly; whereas, an organizational 
principled climate enhances trust indirectly through its positive impact on 
communication. Individuals communicate better in situations where they are 
expected to follow rules and procedures that integrate and coordinate subcultures of 
the firm, rather than to further the interests of the firm, regardless of the consequences 
(Ruppel & Harrington, 2000). Communicating relevant information to one’s 
opponents, however, involves risk, since if increases one’s vulnerability. (Butler, 1995) 
Yet, the presence of risk and vulnerability, in turn, provides their opponents with an 
opportunity to demonstrate their dependability-an important element of trust. 
(Rempel & Holmes, 1986)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
52
In line with Rempel & Holmes’s (1986) argument, Molm et al. (2000) propose 
that since there is a greater opportunity for a person to demonstrate his or her 
trustworthiness in the context of weaker assurance and greater risk for exploitation, a 
higher level of trust and stronger feelings of affective attachment are more likely to 
develop in reciprocal exchange rather than negotiated exchange. The absence of 
assurance structure in reciprocal exchange makes it sounder for one to attribute a 
partner’s positive behaviors in reciprocal exchange to the partner’s personal traits and 
intentions.
There is a higher level of trust developed by inferences made by parties 
involved in trading partners’  inherent traits of trustworthiness and mutually serving 
intentions. (Molm et al., 2000) This reduces the need for establishing costly control 
mechanisms that are designed to monitor and influence organization members’  
behaviors (Das & Teng, 1998), thereby contributing to efficiency and profitability. 
(Charai & Fullenkamp, 2002)
Commitment and Innovation
Caratannis & Sagi (2001) argue that a new transformation that impacts 
competitiveness in the new economy has taken place. Although the same players, 
e.g., government, industry, and firms may be involved, the relation and method are
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
53
different. The editors of Wired  illustrate this transformation in their definition of the 
new economy. They defined the new economy as:
.. .a world in which people work with their brain instead of their hands. A 
world in which communication technology creates global competition.. .A 
world in which innovation is more important than mass production. A 
world in which investment buys new concepts or the means to create them, 
rather than new machines (cited in Healy, 2002, p. 87).
Competition on a global scale has prevented firms from passing cost increases 
onto their customers in the form of increased market prices. (Steudel and Desruelle, 
1992 cited in Cousins, 2002) In order to compete and survive in the global business 
environment, it is important for firms to reduce overall costs. (Cousins, 2002) In 
light of Japanese firms’  success at reducing costs by establishing closer working 
relationships with their suppliers, Western firms have decided that this should be the 
way forward. (Burt & Doyle, 1994 cited in Cousins, 2002)  According to Deming, 
closer working relationships with fewer suppliers enable buyers, suppliers and 
customers to derive the maximum amount of synergy from their relationship and, 
hence, achieve competitive advantage. (MacBeth and Ferguson, 1994 cited in 
Cousins, 2002) In congruence with Deming’s viewpoint, Porter (2001) suggests 
that a highly integrated value chain that enables the firm to deliver a unique value to 
customers is required to sustain the competitive advantage in the new economy. 
Therefore, innovation, i.e., any idea, practice, or object perceived to be new by an
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
54
organization (Zaltman et al. 1973; Rogers & Shoemaker, 1971), and the 
implementation of innovation increases “the yield of resources.” Consequently, it 
reduces overall costs and increases “the value and satisfaction obtained from 
resources by the customer” which are critical for achieving competitive advantage in 
the new economy. (Dracker, 1985, p. 33)
Tether (2002) argues that innovation has become increasingly distributed as the 
boundaries of the firms become increasingly blurred. His study, based on the 
response to the UK’s version of the second European community innovation survey 
(CIS-2) conducted in 1997, shows that nearly half (45%)of the firms identified as 
innovating, claim to have entered into some sort of cooperative arrangement for 
innovation. Of these, only 2% are entered into with other parts of their enterprise 
groups, and 42% are entered into with external partners. Customers and suppliers 
are identified as the most widely engaged co-operation partners. Other external 
partners include competitors, consultants, universities, and other organizations.
Tether (2002) points out that external partners are needed for innovation 
because firms do not possess internally all the relevant resources (including 
knowledge) and/or because firms would like to decrease the risks associated with 
innovation. Therefore, from a supplier’s perspective, collaborating with customers 
would have the advantage of obtaining complementary knowledge and an
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
55
understanding of user behavior, discovering the correct balance between performance 
and price, and increasing the likelihood that other firms within the same user 
community would accept and adopt the innovation. (Tether, 2002) From a 
customer’s perspective, collaborating with suppliers would have the advantage of 
complementing internal R&D efforts (Tether, 2002) and enhancing the quality and 
reliability of their products. (Cousins, 2002)
Wolpert (2002) suggests that, in addition to the above-mentioned external 
partners, “the relationships and curiosity of individual employees” also plays an 
important role in corporate innovation, (p. 80) Andriopoulos & Gotsi (2002) claim 
that individual employee’s ideas and insights can add value to innovation; it is 
important for a company to cherish diversity and encourage individuality. Since “the 
flow of different viewpoints, stimuli, and creative thoughts can comprise the basis 
upon which constructive judgment and discussions can take place before reaching, a 
final decision for a project,” it should be encouraged rather than suppressed. 
(Andriopoulos & Gotsi, 2002, p.62) For example, at New Flyer, a successful bus 
manufacturer in Canada and the USA, the “bottom-up” approach to market-push 
innovations prevails. Employees initiate innovations by convincing top management 
of the potentials of their ideas to reach product or process improvements.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
56
Employees who generate ideas are given the chance to develop and implement them. 
(Nijhof et al., 2002)
Calantone et al. (2002) takes a step further suggesting that intra-organizational 
knowledge sharing contributes to firm innovativeness. Because knowledge 
obsolescence occurs, in no time in a rapidly changing environment, new knowledge 
creation is required to keep a company competitive. (Koski, 2001) 
Intra-organizational knowledge sharing facilitates employee learning and knowledge 
creation by “keeping alive the knowledge and information gathered from various 
sources” that are able to “serve as a reference for future action” (Lukas et al., 1996, 
cited in Calantone et al., 2002, p. 517). For example, information about customer 
needs provided by the marketing department may be valuable to the R & D 
department in new product development. (Moorman & Miner, 1998, cited in 
Calantone et al., 2002)
Nijhof et al. (2002) argues that the commitment of the people who generate 
creative ideas for innovation is essential to turn the ideas into concrete improvements. 
“Many potential innovations are never realized due to disbelief and lack of 
commitment” (Imai, 1987; Beer, 1988 cited in Nijhof et al. 2002, p.675). According 
to Boverie & Kroth (2001, p. 197), commitment refers to “an intentional decision to 
stick with a situation or person”; the long-term aspect of which is “to maintain the
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
57
relationship” (Sternberg 1987). Hence, a committed employee would make the 
decision to remain with a company through “good times” and “bad times” (Boverie & 
Kroth, 2001). Andriopoulos & Gotsi (2002) argue that employees “seek to build 
relationships with their companies based on trust and mutual benefit” (p. 57). 
Analogous to external customers, they need to make “buying” decisions, i.e., they 
must buy into the vision and objectives of their companies. Similarly, Boverie & 
Kroth (2001) maintain that money alone is not a strong enough generator for 
commitment. In order to engender employee commitment, companies need to provide 
“the vision, the inspiration, and the means of achieving something meaningful” (p. 
198). For example, in the instance of “irresponsible outsourcing,” companies fail to 
provide employees with a sense of security, which in turn leads to alienation of 
employees from their jobs and employers. Employees’  commitment fades away 
under such circumstances. (Report of the Committee for the Future of the Finnish 
Parliament 1997, cited in Koski, 2001) Therefore, Boverie & Kroth (2001) suggest 
that companies’  commitment to employees is vital to trigger employees’  commitment 
to companies. As such, it is important to demonstrate companies’  commitment to 
their employees by providing investment in the development and effort of employees. 
For example, at Lunar design, a leading Silicon Valley product development 
consultancy, employees are given the opportunities to experiment on internal projects
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
58
that entail developing something new and noteworthy, and allowing them to further 
their design skills. (Andriopoulos & Gotsi, 2002)
Siders et al. (2001) proposes that employees’  commitment to external partners, 
e.g. customers, professions, and suppliers is related to their acceptance of the external 
partners’  goals and objectives. Their research shows that employees’  commitment to 
the customer results in employees’  increased efforts in satisfying customers’  
requirements, which in turn lead to enhanced market share by their ability to maintain 
existing customer accounts. According to Rowe and Barnes, a company’s ability to 
build long-term, committed, trusting relationships with its customers is “value 
creating” since it lead to a “socially complex phenomenon that would be very difficult 
to Imitate” (1998, p. 292, cited in Siguaw et al,  2002). Siguaw et al. (2002) 
suggests that suppliers signal their intentions to retain in relationships by engaging in 
idiosyncratic investment, channel relationships, specific investments (Anderson, & 
Weitz, 1992), high levels of communication that facilitates customer planning (Lush, 
& Brown, 1996), and/or customer-oriented efforts that provide the customer with 
value-added advantages.
Hosmer (1994) proposes that trust is required to generate commitment and 
innovative efforts on the part of all the stakeholders. Stakeholders cannot be forced 
into creative activities. (Reich, 1991, cited in Koski, 2001) They only can generate a
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
59
wealth of ideas or innovations in situations where they are satisfied with their 
contracts and working conditions. (Koski, 2001) According to Koski (2001), 
“ irrespective of the enterprise they work for, people expect a reward which is in a 
reasonable ratio to the added value they produce” (p. 492). Since expectation (either 
explicit or implied) management constitutes an essential part of trust building (Reina 
& Reina, 1999), stakeholders who have trust in the company will have confidence that 
their expectations will be met and commit themselves to the company’s future. 
Commitment to the company’s future will ensure the cooperative and innovative 
efforts of stakeholders. (Hosmer, 1994)
Koski (2001) suggests that the latitude given to people in determining, planning, 
and doing their own work largely determines the quality of their working conditions. 
Self-realization and self-expression are of vital importance to people’s working lives. 
Reina & Reina (1999) maintain that, when seeking input from others, it is important 
to show your trust in their competence. By providing people with the latitude to 
learn from their mistakes, people’s trust in their competence grows. (Reina & Reina, 
1999) Boverie & Kroth (2001) argue that self-trust enables people to take more risks. 
Since innovation is perceived as “a risky pursuit, with an uncertain and often distant 
payoff’  (Wolpert, 2002, p. 78), it is logical to infer that trust results in people’s 
commitment to innovative efforts. The study conducted by Ruppel & Harrington
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
60
(2000) shows that there Is a relationship between manager’s trust In employees and 
managers’  perceptions of commitment and innovation.
Moreover, Hosmer (1994) claims that in the context of innovation, It is not 
justifiable to invest In information systems or management structures to detect acts 
associated with joint moral hazards, i.e., lack of effort and self-serving acts on the part 
of the agents. (Demski and Feltham, 1978, quoted in Eisenhardt, 1989 and Hosmer, 
1994) Behaviors involving creativity and improvisation cannot be measured with 
accuracy and outcome-based measures often neglect the time frame and possible 
social and economic influences, which unreasonably shifts the risk to the agents. 
Therefore, the problem of moral hazards in this context only can be solved by 
developing trust, and commitment, and through the efforts of stakeholders who are 
agents of the company. (Hosmer, 1994)
Cousins (2002) argues that inter- and intra- organizational relationships exist to 
deliver value. In order to deliver value pertaining to innovation, inter-and intra- 
organizational information, and knowledge sharing is of vital importance. (Wolpert, 
2002) However, Nornian (2002) argues that, under such circumstances, a company 
runs the risk of exposing critical knowledge or capabilities to its partners, which in 
turn may result in Imitation or appropriation. Norman’s (2002) study shows that 
trust plays a pivotal role in information and knowledge sharing. Although
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
61
companies become more protective of their knowledge as they sense their partners’  
intentions to learn more, such protective attempts are reduced with trusted partners. 
Despite the fact that companies share more information with trusted partners, they 
experience less knowledge loss. Norman (2002) suggests that the act of information 
and knowledge sharing could be construed as signaling companies’  willingness to 
cooperate and commit to the relationship. Therefore, their partners may be less 
willing to act opportunistically to hurt the companies.
Zand (1972) examines the dynamics of trust within an organizational context. 
According to Zand (1972), a person who trusts his or her counterpart will disclose 
more relevant information that contributes to problem-solving; become more 
receptive to his or her counterpart’s influence, such as selection of goals and methods; 
accept interdependence; and impose less control on his or her counterpart. As a 
result, “problems are more likely to be identified and examined, and solutions more 
likely to be appropriate, creative, and long-range”(Zand, p. 231-232). Therefore, 
although confidence in partner cooperation can be generated by either building trust 
or effective control mechanisms (Das & Teng, 1998), it is worthwhile to pursue 
trust-building in situations where commitment to innovation is desired. (Ruppel & 
Harrington, 2000)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
62
Summary
In the new economy where the development of communication technology 
creates global competition (Healy, 2 0 0 2 ), it has become relatively difficult for 
companies to pass increased costs onto their customers in the form of increased, 
market prices. (Steudel and Desraelle, 1992 cited in Cousins, 2002) Therefore, in 
order to compete and survive in the new economy, companies must develop 
innovations that are able to increase “the yield of resources,” and hence reduce overall 
costs, or, increase “the value and satisfaction obtained from resources by the 
customer” (Drucker, 1985, p. 33).
Companies need to collaborate with external partners to carry out innovations 
because they may not have all the relevant resources, including knowledge, and /or 
they may want to decrease the risk associated with innovations. (Tether, 2002) In 
addition to external partners, innovations also could be generated from the ideas of 
individual employees (Andriopoulos & Gotsi, 2002) and further facilitated by 
intra-organizational knowledge sharing. (Calantone et. al., 2002)
External partners and employees, however, cannot be forced into creative 
activities. (Reich, 1991, cited in Koski, 2001). Trust is required to elicit 
commitment and innovative efforts from employees and external partners who are 
stakeholders of the companies. (Hosmer, 1994) Trust is defined as “the reliance by
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
63
one person, group, or firm upon a voluntarily accepted duty on the part of another 
person, group, or firm to recognize and protect the rights and interests of all others 
engaged in a joint endeavor or economic exchange”(Hosmer, 1995, p.393). The 
presence of trust implies that stakeholders are confident that their expectations, in 
respect to their contracts, and working conditions that are pivotal for idea generation 
and innovation will be met satisfactorily. (Koski, 2001) As such, stakeholders would 
be willing to commit themselves to the company’s future. Commitment, i.e., “to 
maintain the relationship” (Sternberg, 1987, cited in Boverie & Kroth, 2001) with the 
company, would ensure the cooperative and innovative efforts of stakeholders. 
(Hosmer, 1994)
Smith (1995) points out that since cooperation occurs at different levels, the 
role of trust needs to be addressed at all levels of cooperative relationships. Trust
operating at the micro-level, i.e., interpersonal trust, refers to the extent of trust placed 
by the individual boundary-spanning agent in her individual counterpart in the partner 
firm. On the other hand, trust operating at the macro-level, i.e., interorganizational 
trust, refers to the extent of a collectively held trust orientation by the members of a 
focal firm toward the partner firm. (Zaheer et al. 1998) According to Zaheer et al. 
(1998), trust operating at the macro-level has a more profound effect on exchange
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
64
performance, cost of negotiation, and conflict, because it is more enduring and stable. 
(Ring & Van de Yeti, 1994)
Since confidence in partner cooperation cart be derived from trust and control 
mechanisms, the presence of a higher level of trust would reduce the need for building 
costly control mechanisms that are designed to monitor and influence the behaviors of 
an organization’s members (Das & Teng, 1998), and which results in efficiency and 
profitability. (Chami & Fullenkamp, 2002) However, since the confidence 
engendered by trust is based on the “voluntarily accepted duty” of parties involved, 
Hosmer (1995) suggests that normative philosophy should be applied In honoring the 
voluntarily accepted duty of recognizing and protecting the rights and interests of all 
parties involved.
Hosmer (1994) proposes that an ethical approach to management needs to be 
adopted to create a “good society” where internal and external stakeholders are 
willingly to cooperate for the benefit of all. Since principles of ethical analysis are 
“objective statements that transcend countries, religions, and times” (p. 2 0), applying 
ethical principles in strategic decision-making would enable one to arrive at what is 
perceived by stakeholders to be “right,” “just,” and “fair” decisions in the allocation 
of benefit and harm, and hence protect stakeholders’  Interests.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
65
To operate effectively in a fast changing environment where individuals, 
institutions, and societies become highly differentiated and specialized, mangers and 
employees with relevant information must be authorized to make decisions. (Brickley 
et al., 2002) Corporate reward and performance evaluation systems, corporate 
culture, codes of ethics, and training programs play a pivotal role in aligning mangers’  
and employees’  behaviors with the ethical standards of the company.
Victor & Cullen (1988) argue that companies possess distinct types of ethical 
climates, i.e., “general and pervasive characteristics of organizations, affecting a 
broad range of decisions” (p. 101). Ethical climates are determined primarily by 
three fundamental criteria, i.e., egoism, benevolence, and principle. Ruppei & 
Harrington (2000) find that, within an organization, an individual benevolence or 
non-self-interested climate enhances trust directly, whereas, an organizational 
principled climate enhances trust indirectly through its positive effect on 
communication. A manager’s trust in employees, in turn, engenders perceptions of 
commitment and innovation.
Chapter II of this work presented the key literature dealing with the ethical 
approach to management, trust-based collaboration, and commitment and innovation. 
Chapter III will discuss the survey instruments, the reliability and validity of the 
survey instruments, as well as state the hypotheses to be tested.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
CHAPTER III 
METHODOLOGY
Introduction
The need for further research to address inter-organizational and 
intra-organizational business relationships from the perspective of suppliers and 
employees, respectively, was mentioned in chapter I. The theories and research on 
the need for ethics and trust to engender the commitment and innovative efforts of 
external  and internal  stakeholders were identified in chapter II. Chapter I and II 
serve as a basis for this research.
As depicted in chapter I, in a new economy defined by business globalization 
and an information and communication technology revolution (Pohjola, 2002), 
traditional companies need to deploy the Internet (Porter, 2001) to initiate innovative 
efforts across traditional organizational boundaries. Collaborating with stakeholders, 
such as customers, suppliers, and employees (Hosmer, 1994), inside and outside the 
companies, so as to develop a highly integrated value chain, leads to sustainable 
competitive advantage. (Porter, 2001)
An integrated value chain, i.e., the series of activities required in the production 
and delivery of goods and services (Porter, 2001), should have as its goal the 
enrichment of humanity. (Levy, 1999) “Broader ethics” that include internal and
66
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
67
external stakeholders of the value chain, and “stronger trust” that brings the 
stakeholders together, are of pivotal importance for success.
In this chapter, the methodology of the research, which aims at examining the 
importance of “broader ethics,” which encompass the interests of traditionally 
out-group  suppliers and in-group  employees, and “stronger trust,” which engenders 
commitment and innovative efforts on the part of suppliers and employees in an 
Internet-based world, is addressed. Moreover, the research questions and hypotheses, 
the survey instruments used in the research, the sample population, and the method of 
conducting the research are presented.
Research Questions and Hypotheses
The research questions focus on Hosmer’s (1994) proposition that “it is 
essential in any competitive sense to be moral” (p.25). An ethical approach to 
management is required to engender stakeholder trust, which, in turn, brings about 
stakeholders’  commitment to cooperative and innovative efforts that are critical to 
success in a global economy.
Hosmer’s (1994) proposition has been examined in IT departments across 
various companies by Ruppel & Harrington (2000), using a top-down view of 
management attitudes and philosophy. According to Ruppel & Harrington (2000),
“it is one of the few, if any, empirical results across multiple organizations testing
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
68
such a relationship” (p. 325). This research project, however, tries to continue prior 
research by using a bottom -up approach, i.e., from the perspective of employees 
rather than management, to test the ethics-trust-commitment and innovation linkage 
proposed by Hosmer (1994). It also extends prior research by examining Hosmer’s 
(1994) propositions from the supplier’s perspective, in addition to the employee’s 
perspective, and by examining trust at the organizational level instead of individual 
level.
Examining Hosmer’s (1994) proposition from the perspectives of both the 
employee and the supplier is especially important and meaningful. Traditionally, 
most buyer-supplier relationships could be characterized as adversarial. (Mudambi & 
Helper, 1998, cited in Bell et al. 2002) In a world where communication technology, 
such as the Internet, creates global competition (Healy, 2002), new buyer-supplier 
relationships that consider the supplier as “ Internal” rather than “ external” to the firm 
should be established to derive the maximum amount of synergy needed to achieve 
competitive advantage. (Cousins, 2002) As such, the following research questions 
are proposed:
1. Do suppliers’  perceptions of ethical climate influence their trust in the company?
2. Do suppliers’  trust in the company influence their perceptions of commitment 
and innovation?
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
69
3. Do employees’  perceptions of ethical climate influence their trust in the company?
4. Do employees’  trust in the company influence their perceptions of commitment 
and innovation?
5. Does ethical climate influence suppliers’  level of trust the same way as it does to 
employees?
6. Does level of trust influence suppliers the same way as it does to employees in 
their perceptions of commitment and innovation?
7. Is the commitment and innovativeness of employees, acting as boundary-spanning 
agents of the manufacturing firms and playing the role of both suppliers and 
employees, affected by the ethical climate, and hence the level of trust of the 
customer and manufacturing firms?
According to Victor & Cullen (1987), an organization’s ethical climate is a 
dimension of the work climate, which guides individuals of the organization in their 
determination of right and wrong behaviors at work. The ethical climate of an 
organization reflects and helps define corporate ethics since it represents “the shared 
perceptions of what is ethically correct behavior and how ethical issues should be 
handled” (Victor & Cullen, 1987, p.52). Victor & Cullen’s (1988) study indicates 
that types of ethical climate prevailing in organizations, or groups within
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
70
organizations, are defined primarily in terms of three ethical criteria, i.e., benevolence, 
egoism, and principle used for organizational decision making.
Hosmer (1995) defines trust as “ the reliance by one person, group, or firm 
upon a voluntarily accepted duty on the part of'another person, group, or firm to 
recognize and protect the rights and interests of all others engaged in a joint endeavor 
or economic exchange” (p. 393). In an organization characterized by a benevolent 
ethical climate, the rights and interests of all others engaged in a joint endeavor or 
economic exchange would be better recognized and protected, since in such an 
organization, ethical reasoning centered on consideration of the well-being of others 
would be applied in organizational members’  decision-making (Victor & Cullen, 
1988), thereby enhancing the trust of the parties involved. Given this line of 
reasoning, the following hypotheses are posited:
HOi: There is a negative or no relationship between suppliers’  perceptions of the 
level of benevolence corporate work climate and their level of trust in customer 
firms.
Hap There is a positive relationship between suppliers’  perceptions of the level of 
benevolence corporate work climate and their level of trust in customer firms
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
71
HCb: There is a negative or no relationship between employees' perceptions of the
level of benevolence corporate work climate and the level of trust in their 
employing firms.
H &2- There is a positive relationship between employees’  perceptions of the level of 
benevolence corporate work climate and the level of trust in their employing 
firms.
Contrarily, in an organization characterized by a egoistic ethical climate, the 
rights and interests of all others engaged in a joint endeavor or economic exchange 
would be less likely to be recognized and protected, since in such an organization, 
ethical reasoning dominated by consideration of self-interest would prevail in 
organizational members’  decision-making (Victor & Cullen, 1988), thereby degrading 
the trust of the parties involved. Therefore, the following hypotheses follow:
HO 3: There is a positive or no relationship between suppliers’  perceptions of the 
level of egoism corporate work climate and their level of trust in customer firms. 
Has: There is a negative relationship between suppliers’  perceptions of the level of 
egoism corporate work climate and their level of trust in customer firms.
HO 4: There is a positive or no relationship between employees' perceptions of the 
level of egoism corporate work climate and the level of trust in their employing 
firms.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
72
Ha*: There is a negative relationship between employees' perceptions of the level of 
egoism corporate work climate and the level of trust in their employing firms.
In an organization characterized by a principled ethical climate, ethical 
reasoning centered on the application and interpretation of rules or law would be used 
in organizational members5  decision-making. (Victor & Cullen, 1988) Therefore, the 
rights and interests of all others engaged in a joint endeavor or economic exchange 
would be recognized and protected by prevailing rules or law, thereby strengthening 
the trust of the parties involved. As such, the following hypotheses are presented: 
HO5: There is a negative or no relationship between suppliers’  perceptions of the 
level of principle corporate work climate and their level of trust in customer 
firms.
Has: There is a positive relationship between suppliers’  perceptions of the level of
principle corporate work climate and their level of trust in customer firms 
HIV: There is a negative or no relationship between employees' perceptions of the 
level of principle corporate work climate and the level of trust in their employing 
firms.
Hae: There is a positive relationship between employees’  perceptions of the level of 
principle corporate work climate and the level of trust in their employing firms.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
73
Hosmer (1994) proposes that, in a global economy, cooperative and innovative 
efforts on the part of all of the stakeholder groups - both within and outside an 
organization - will result in competitive and economic success. To ensure such 
efforts, stakeholders’  commitment to the company’s future needs to be present. 
According to Hosmer (1994), stakeholders’  trust in the direction of a firm is pivotal to 
the derivation of commitment and innovative efforts of stakeholders. Koski (200!) 
claims that a wealth of ideas and innovations can only be generated in situations 
where stakeholders are satisfied with their working conditions and contracts. Since 
stakeholders “expect a reward which is in a reasonable ratio to the added value they 
produce” (Koski, 2001, p. 492), and that expectation (either explicit or implied) 
management constitutes an essential part of trust building. (Reina & Reina, 1999) 
Stakeholders who trust the company will be confident that their expectations will be 
fulfilled and committed to the company’s future, and hence will make innovative 
efforts. Therefore, the following hypotheses are formulated:
HO7:  Level of trust in customer firms is not a significant predictor of the existence of 
commitment and innovation in suppliers 
Ha?: Level of trust in customer firms is a significant predictor of the existence of 
commitment and innovation in suppliers
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
74
H O g: Level of trust in employing linns is a not a significant predictor of the existence 
of commitment and innovation in employees.
Hag: Level of trust in employing firms is a significant predictor of the existence of 
commitment and innovation in employees.
Figure 1  illustrates the conceptual relationships of the variables under study.
Figure 1: A Conceptual Model of Ethical Climate, Trust, Commitment, and 
Innovation
HI
H3 H .7
H5,
H8
H6,Trust
TrustCommitment
Innovationand
Commitment
InnovationandEthical Climate
Principled ClimateBenevolent Climate
Egoistic Climateived by EmployeesEthical Climate
Principled ClimateBenevolent Climate
Egoistic Climate
Survey Instruments
In this study, a questionnaire with 39 items was developed to conduct the survey 
research. The questionnaire is comprised of four sections. In each of the first three
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
75
sections, a pre-existing instrument is included to measure the variable constructs
under study, while the fourth section collects demographic data. The reliability and
validity' of each survey instrument and their characteristics are described below. 
Reliability and Validity
It is important for business ethics researchers to develop reliable and valid
instruments. Although instrument reliability can easily be assessed in terms of
inter-rater reliability, internal consistency, or test-retest reliability, instrument validity,
in business ethics research, is typically more difficult to ascertain. (Randall & Gibson,
1990) Dalton et al. (1996) concur with Randall & Gibson’s (1990) viewpoint and
state:
In business ethics research—however widely defined— ‘validity’ is a recurring 
concern. While validity is seen in many different contexts (e.g. internal, external, 
statistical conclusion, construct), the Issue is largely the same: something about 
the manner by which the data are collected, analyzed, or applied threatens their 
accuracy or their responsible interpretation. This potential inaccuracy of data is 
especially apparent when the data of interest are sensitive (Dalton & Metzger, 
1992a; Fox & Tracy, 1986; Lee & Renzetti, 1990 cited in Dalton ,1996, p.87).
As such, pre-existing instruments with established records of reliability and 
validity are adopted in this study to measure the variable constructs under study, i.e.,
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
76
ethical climate, trust, commitment and innovation. Prior research conducted using 
the above-mentioned instruments, which are included in the different sections of the 
questionnaire, are discussed in chapter II. The reliability and validity of each 
instrument are addressed in the remaining parts of the section.
Ethical Climate
The ethical climate questionnaire (ECQ) was introduced by Victor & Cullen
(1987) to measure organizational members’  perceptions of ethical climate. A basic 
assumption that ethical criteria, i.e., egoism, benevolence, and principle are “prevalent 
and significant in corporate decision making,” guides the design of the ECQ (Victor & 
Cullen, 1987, p. 52).
Three loci of analysis, i.e., individual, local, and cosmopolitan are 
conceptualized to distinguish possible ethical climate types within each of the 
above-mentioned ethical criteria. (Victor & Cullen, 1988) Nine theoretically 
possible ethical climates are derived, as depicted in table 1  (see chapter II). The 
ECQ, which is comprised of 36 moral climate description items, was developed to tap 
the nine theoretically possible ethical climates. (Victor & Cullen, 1987)
Victor, Cullen, and colleagues have conducted three studies using the ECQ 
(Cullen et al, 1993). Since ECQ was newly introduced in 1987, Victor & Cullen 
(1987, 1988) conducted several procedures to help establish the validity and reliability
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
77
of the instrument. First, ethical climate scales (six in 1987, five in 1988) were 
constructed from items (25 items in 1987, 26 items in 1988) identified by the factor 
analysis as representing the emergent ethical climate types (six in 1987, five in 1988). 
Although there appears to be a moderate degree of independence between the scales 
in both studies (the intercorrelations ranged from 0.00 to 0.42 in 1987, from 0.05 to 
0.55 in 1988), Victor & Cullen (1987) claim that “while greater scale independence 
may be desirable to tap better the uniqueness of each type of ethical climate, the 
theoretical relationship among the constructs does not demand strict independence. 
It is possible that two or more types of ethical climate can coexist” (p. 62). In 
addition, the coefficient alphas for each scale found in both studies (ranged from 0.65 
to 0.82 with an average of 0.76 in 1987, ranged from 0.60 to 0.80 with an average of
0.74 in 1988) indicate that the measures have satisfactory reliability. (Nunnally, 1978, 
cited in Victor & Cullen, 1988)
Second, the discriminant analysis and ANOVA testing conducted across 
companies under study in 1987, and the multivariate analyses of variance conducted 
across companies under study in 1988, indicate that the ethical climates examined in 
both studies are significantly strong and identifiably different to produce significant 
discrimination among companies or groups. (Victor & Cullen, 1987, 1988)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
78
Third, to be reliable and valid, the ECQ emphasizes the respondents’  
description of the ethical climate rather than their feelings about it. The instruction 
to the respondents reads:
We would like to ask you some questions about the general climate in your 
company. Please answer the following in terms of how it really is in your 
company, not how you would prefer it to be. Please be as candid as possible, 
remember, all your responses will remain strictly  anonymous.
In the 1988 study, nonexistent to moderate relationships (correlation ranged 
between 0.00 and 0.47) were found between respondents’  affective responses to the 
ethical dimensions of decision-making in their companies and the observations of the 
ethical climate dimension. The finding suggests that respondents can make a 
distinction between affective responses to ethical climates and perceptions of ethical 
climates. (Victor &Cuilen, 1988)
Finally, Cullen et al. (1993) argue that the validity of the construct and high 
reliability for these scales are supported by the observation of the three principled 
climates and the egotistic self-interest climate in all three studies with widely different 
samples. The 26-item climate scale constructed in the 1988 study is used for this 
research project because it is the largest study conducted by Victor & Cullen in terms 
of sample size and breath of industries.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
79
Trust
Zaheer et al. (1998) developed measures of trust at both the individual level and 
organizational level of analysis. According to Zaheer et al. (1998), the origin of trust 
lies In individuals since “it Is individuals  as members of organizations, rather than the 
organizations themselves, who trust” (p. 141). However, the referent of trust varies. 
Trust can be viewed as “being placed in another individual or in a group of 
Individuals such as the partner organization” (p. 143). The organizational-level trust 
measure Is used for this research project because it has been found that trust created at 
the organizational level has a more profound impact on performance. (Zaheer et al, 
1998)
Zaheer et al. (1998) relied primarily on a measurement scale created and 
validated by Rempel et al. (1985), as modified by Rempel and Holmes (1986), to 
develop the organizational-level trust measure. Rempel and Holmes’  (1986) scale 
was relied upon because of its ability to “tap trust in close, personal relationships 
rather than a more general trusting orientation” (Zaheer et al, 1998, p. 147).
Zaheer et al. (1998) conceptualized trust as having the three components of 
predictability, reliability and fairness in an exchange context. As such, items 
measuring a “faith” element in Rempel and Holmes (1986) scale were replaced with 
items designed to measure the “fairness” component. Items designed to measure the
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
80
predictability component were discarded after assessing the construct for 
unidimensionaiity.
The organizational-level trust measure developed by Zaheer et al. (1998) 
contains five items. Of these five items, two items are designed to measure the 
fairness component, two items relate to the reliability component, and one item 
directly assesses trust at the organizational level. The Cronbach alpha reliability 
value for the measure is 0.7664, which exceeds the recommended value of 0.70. 
(Nunnally, 1978, cited in Zaheer et al ., 1998) The measure is validated by 
establishing convergent and discriminant validity. The positive and highly 
significant correlation (0.706, t = 4.27, p<0.01) found between trust assessed by two 
respondents provides strong support for convergent validity. The discriminat 
validity for individual-level and organizational-level trust is supported by the 
difference in chi-square (1 df) of 9.65, which is statistically significant at p<0.01.
Commitment and Innovation
Two statements, in the format of agreement or disagreement from Yeung, 
Brockbank, and Ulrich’s (1991) competing values instrument, were used in Ruppel 
and Harrington’s (2000) study to measure the perception of commitment and 
innovation. The Cronbach reliability for the two items is 0.76, indicating an 
acceptable level of internal consistency.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
8 1
Content validity of the measure is supported by the findings that there is a 
significant negative relationship between productivity IT (described below) and the 
commitment and innovation construct (r=-0.25; p<0.05), while there is a significantly 
positive relationship between human, relation IT (described below) and the 
commitment and innovation construct (r=0.25; p<0.05).
Productivity IT and Human relation IT were described as follows:
Productivity IT:  The organization affects or reacts to its environment as a 
cohesive unit in an intentional optimizing manner. Key upper management 
activities in pursuit of profit maximization include planning, directing, and goal 
setting. Our systems support this management focus.
Human relation IT: Maintenance of the organization and its human resources is 
key, emphasizing cohesive relationships and individual commitment and 
contribution. In pursuit of these goals, upper management promotes employee 
dialogue, participation, and training. Our systems support this management 
focus. (Ruppel and Harrington, 2000, p.322)
Demographic Information
The following five demographic questions are included in the final section of 
the questionnaire.
1. Gender (check one): male or female
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
82
2. Organizational forms of current/previous employment (check one): head 
office of manufacturing firm, branch of manufacturing firm, or other.
3. The application of the Internet in job performance (check one): yes or no.
4. Roles of employment (check one): boundary spanner (interact with
customer firms) or non-boundary spanner (do not interact with customer 
firms).
5. Length of employer-employee / buyer- supplier relationship (check one):
less than I year, between 1-3 years, between 4-6 years, between 7-10
years, over 10 years.
6. lob level (check one): officer, supervisor, manager, and above
Gender, organizational forms of current/previous employment (question 2), the 
application of the Internet (question 3) are included in the questionnaire to validate 
characteristics of the manufacturing firm under study. Roles of employment 
(question 4) are included to address research question 7, since boundary spanners play 
the role of both the supplier (from the customer firm’s perspective) and the role of the 
employee (from the manufacturing firm’s perspective). Length of 
employer-employee / buyer- supplier relationship (question 5), and job level (question 
6) are included, based on Victor& Cullen’s (1988) research finding that ethical 
climates vary with regard to the variables of tenure and job level.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
8 3
Sample and Setting
This study focuses on traditional organizations, as opposed to the dot-coms, in 
the manufacturing sector that use the Internet to conduct businesses. Internet 
technologies have the ability to provide suppliers and customers with informational, 
transactional, and interactive capabilities across time and space. (Zhu & Kraemer, 
2002) However, the online initiatives of traditional organizations can only be 
effective if their Web sites are able to attract the traffic of potential business partners. 
To achieve this aim, it is important that the Web sites of traditional organizations are 
easy for visitors to find and use. (Lewis, 2003) As such, the sample data of this 
study will be collected from boundary-spanning employees of the U.S. manufacturing 
companies that appear in the search-engine listings for online searches.
Boundary-spanning employees, who use the Internet in their job performances, 
are the focus of this study because e-collaboration of internal and external 
stakeholders is essential to innovations that are critical for success in an Internet based 
world. (Ozer, 2003) Boundary-spanning employees play both the roles of suppliers 
and employees. Acting on behalf of manufacturing companies as “suppliers,” 
boundary-spanning employees interact directly with customers to address their 
distinctive needs. They play a central role in the development and maintenance of
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
84
inter-organizational relationships. Differences in customer needs and organizational 
goals may sometimes cause role conflicts to occur. (Stamper & Johlke, 2003)
In searching MSN, Yahoo and Google for “manufacturing company,” 
“manufacturing inc,” “personnel directory,” and “contact list,” 240 manufacturing 
companies were found that provide company and employee information such as 
business address, name and position of contact personnel. A total of 650 survey 
questionnaires were distributed to the employees of these 240 manufacturing 
companies. Half of the employees were asked to complete the questionnaire in their 
positions as suppliers (from the perspective of the customer firms), while the other 
half were asked to complete the questionnaire in their positions as employees. To 
correctly identify boundary-spanning employees that use the Internet in their job 
performance, only those replies indicating that survey respondents use the Internet in 
their job performance (see demographic information, question 3 above), and that there 
are direct interactions between survey respondents and their counterparts in the 
customer firms (see demographic information, question 4 above) will be included in 
the survey.
While the written self-report technique is used often to ensure the anonymity of 
respondents (Dalton et al., 1997), when sensitive questions are presented in a survey, 
as in this study, respondents may not answer truthfully, leave out the sensitive
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
85
questions, or refuse to participate in the study, thereby introducing a response or a 
non-response bias. (Larkin et al, 1997) To prevent misleading results, certain 
measures were taken to provide enhanced assurance of the anonymity of the 
respondents and participating companies, thereby increasing the cooperation and 
candidness of the respondents and manufacturing companies involved.
In the supplier questionnaire, the respondents were asked to evaluate a 
current/previous customer firm with whom they have/had either a relatively long-term 
buyer-supplier relationship or a relatively short-term buyer-supplier relationship 
stipulated in the questionnaire. In the employee questionnaire, the respondents were 
asked to evaluate a current/previous employer firm with whom they have/had either a 
relatively long-term employer-employee relationship or a relatively short-term 
employer-employee relationship stipulated in the questionnaire. By doing so, the 
identity of the firms, either the customer firms or the employer firms, under 
evaluation would be unknown to the researcher. However, for the purpose of this 
study, the targeted employer firms should be manufacturing firms using the Internet to 
conduct business. Such characteristics were validated in the demographic 
information (questions 2 and question 3) section of the questionnaire. Moreover, 
based on Victor & Cullen’s (1988) research finding that ethical climates vary with 
regard to the variable of tenure, using data originated from employees/suppliers with
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
86
various lengths of employer-employee/buyer-supplier relationships, enhances the 
questionnaire’s ability to tap different types of ethical climates.
Data Collection
A total of 650 survey packets containing a cover letter (see Appendix B) 
describing the nature and purpose of the study, an integrated survey instrument (see 
Appendix C), and a pre-addressed, stamped envelop, was mailed to the employees of 
the 240 Internet-enhanced manufacturing companies. Given that some companies 
only post the name of one contact person on their Web sites, one to three employees 
of each of the 240 Internet-enhanced manufacturing companies were invited to 
participate in the study. Employees in the lower hierarchy were asked to participate 
first, since the study used a bottom-up approach to conduct the research.
Respondents returned the survey instrument directly to the researcher using the 
pre-addressed, stamped envelop enclosed in each packet.
Pretest
In order to apply the integrated survey instrument to different groups of 
participants (the customer firms vs. the employee firms), some of the wording of the 
original survey instrument has been adjusted accordingly. The adjusted survey 
instrument was pretested with a sample of 43 employed MBA students to evaluate the 
clarity of the instructions and items presented in the survey and the time required to
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
87
complete the survey. A packet containing a cover letter and an integrated survey 
Instrument was distributed to each participant during the lecture; the survey 
instrument was collected upon completion.
Data Analysis
A varimax factor analysis was performed on the ethical climate questionnaire to 
determine its factor structure. According to Victor and Cullen’s (1988) study, ethical 
climate for organizations are defined primarily in terms of three ethical criteria, i.e., 
egoism, benevolence, and principle. Therefore, it was expected that factors in line 
with these ethical dimensions would be produced.
Stepwise multiple regression was used to examine the relationships between 
various climate types and level of trust. Logistic regression was used to examine the 
relationships between the level of trust and perceptions for commitment and 
Innovation. The data collected were analyzed using SPSS software.
Summary
This chapter depicts the methodology used to examine the need for companies 
operating in an Internet based world to adopt an ethical approach to management to 
engender trust on the part of both traditionally out-group  suppliers and in-group  
employees, thereby eliciting their commitment and innovative efforts.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
88
Seven research questions are proposed and eight hypotheses are formulated. 
The characteristics, reliability, and validity of the instrument used to measure the 
variable constructs of ethical climate, trust, commitment, and innovation are described. 
A total of 650 employees of 240 Internet-enhanced manufacturing firms, were asked 
to complete the questionnaire, either in their positions as suppliers (acting as 
boundary spanning agents of the firm) or in their positions as employees. The data 
collected from the respondents were analyzed using SPSS software. Stepwise 
multiple regression was used to examine the relationships between various climate 
types and level of trust. Logistic regression was used to examine the relationships 
between the level of trust and perceptions for commitment and innovation.
The findings of the study will be discussed in Chapter Four, and the conclusions 
and recommendations for future research will be presented in Chapter Five.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
CHAPTER IV 
ANALYSIS AND PRESENTATION OF FINDINGS
Introduction
This chapter purports to analyze and present the findings of the research. The 
basis of the research was developed in chapters I and II. Chapter I elaborated on the 
need for further research on inter-organizational and intra-organizational business 
relationships from the perspectives of suppliers and employees respectively. Chapter 
II illuminated the theories and research on the need for ethics and trust to address the 
above mentioned business relationships, and hence to obtain the commitment and 
innovative efforts of stakeholders inside and outside business organizations.
The methodology specific to this research was described in Chapter III. 
Boundary-spanning employees of U.S. manufacturing companies, who use the 
Internet in their job performance, were the focus of this research. These employees 
were targeted based on the fact that they play both the role of supplier and of 
employee, and that the Internet provides a common platform for collective 
intelligence, In real time and across boundaries, which is conductive to innovation.
In this chapter, the results of the pretest, survey data collection, descriptive 
statistics of the samples, factor analysis and Cronbach’s alpha coefficient of reliability 
analysis are discussed before analyzing and presenting the results of the hypotheses
89
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
90
testing. The analyses investigate the relationships among ethical climates, trust, 
commitment and innovation in an Internet-based world from the perspectives of 
suppliers and employees.
Pretest Findings
Pretests were administered to three classes of employed MBA students during 
the lectures to evaluate the understandability of the questionnaire, and to ascertain the 
time required to complete it.
A total of 43 employed MBA students participated in the pretests. The 
respondents were Informed of the nature of the survey, and were asked to give their 
opinions on the clarity and appropriateness of the questionnaires upon completion. 
Most respondents completed the questionnaire within 15 minutes, without having a 
problem. A few respondents commented on the wording of certain items. Minor 
changes were made accordingly.
Of the 43 employed MBA students, 10 of them worked for Internet-enhanced 
manufacturing companies in Florida. Permission for data collection from these 
companies was requested. However, due to the sensitive nature of this research, the 
companies declined the invitation to participate in this research study.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
91
Survey Data Collection Results
A sample of 240 manufacturing companies were selected for the purpose of this 
study. Companies that provide their company and employee information, such as 
business address, name, and position of contact personnel to online visitors were 
selected, since Internet-enhanced manufacturing companies are represented by their 
Websites in the virtual world.
A total of 650 survey packets were mailed individually to employees of the 240 
Internet-enhanced manufacturing companies mentioned above. Half of the survey 
respondents were asked to fill out the questionnaire in their position as employees, 
while the other half were asked to fill out the questionnaire in their position as 
suppliers.
In the employee questionnaire, the respondents were asked to evaluate a 
current/previous employer firm with whom they have or had either a relatively 
long-term, employer-employee relationship (questionnaire format A) or a relatively 
short-term, employer-employee relationship (questionnaire format B). In the 
supplier questionnaire, the respondents were asked to evaluate a current/previous 
customer firm with whom they have or had either a relatively long-term, 
buyer-supplier relationship (questionnaire format C) or a relatively short-term, 
buyer-supplier relationship (questionnaire format D).
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
92
After approximately a two-month period of data collection, a total of 149 
survey questionnaires were received. Based upon a review of the demographic data, 
3 7 survey questionnaires were found to be not in accordance with the required sample 
criteria, and were eliminated as a result. In addition, four survey questionnaires were 
eliminated because the respondents had left out certain sections of the questionnaire.
As such, a total of 108 valid survey questionnaires were received, of which 54 
were from respondents answering the questionnaires in their positions as employees 
and 54 were from respondents answering the questionnaires in their positions as 
suppliers. Equal numbers of valid responses were received from the employee 
respondents and the supplier respondents. The effective response rate was 
approximately 17%. The results of survey data collection are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2
Survey Data Collection Results
Questionnaire
FormatQuestionnaire
DistributedQuestionnaire
RepliedValid Invalid Reasons
for elimination 
W  X Y  Z
A 163 40 28 12 8 2 2
B 162 31 26 5 3 2
C 163 37 28 9 5 3 1
D 162 41 26 15 1 1 2  2
Total 650 149 108 41 27 9 1 4
W~ No application of the Internet in job performance
X -No involvement or no indication of involvement in customer firm interaction 
7 =  No application of the Internet in job performance and no involvement in customer
firm interaction
Z = Incomplete response (left out certain sections of the questionnaire)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
93
Descriptive Statistics of the Samples
Of the 108 valid survey questionnaires received, 54 were from respondents 
answering the questionnaires in their positions as employees, and 54 were from 
respondents answering the questionnaires in their positions as suppliers. The 
descriptive statistics of the employee and supplier respondents, and the respondents in 
total are presented and discussed next, in the order in which the demographic 
questions were presented in the questionnaires (see Appendix A, Part IV).
Gender
Most of the survey respondents were male. Of the employee respondents, 
86.8% were male and 13.2% were female. Of the supplier respondents, 81.5% were 
male and 18.5% were female. All in all, a total of 84.1 % of survey respondents were 
male. Females accounted for only 15.9% of total survey respondents. The SPSS 
cross tabulation of gender and roles (I.e. employee respondents and supplier 
respondents) is shown in table 3 below.
Organizational Setting
The most prevalent organizational setting In this study was the head office of a 
manufacturing firm. Respondents indicating they work or have worked in the head 
office of the manufacturing firm included 74.1% of the employees, 68.5% of the 
suppliers, and 71.3% of the total respondents. Some survey respondents - 16.7% of
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
employee respondents, 22.2% of supplier respondents, and 19.4% of total survey 
respondents - indicated that they work or have worked at the branch of the 
manufacturing firm. Others - 9.3% of employees, suppliers and total survey 
respondents - indicated that they work or have worked at different locations of the 
manufacturing firm. The SPSS cross tabulation of the organizational settings and 
roles (i.e. employee respondents and supplier respondents) is shown in table 4 below.
Table 3
Gender  * Role Cross Tabulation
EmployeeRole
SupplierTotal
Gender Male count 46 44 90
% within Role 86.8% 81.5% 84.1%
% of Total 43.0% 41.1% 84.1%
Female count 7 10 17
% within Role 13.2% 18.5% 15.9%
% of Total 6.5% 9.3% 15.9%
Total count 53 54 107
% within Role 100% 100% 100%
% of Total 49.5% 50.5% 100%
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
95
Tabls 4
Organizational Form  * Role Cross Tabulation
Role Total
Employee Supplier
Organizational Form count 40 37 77
Head Office o f a % within Role 74.1% 68.5% 71.3%
Manufacturing Firm % of Total 37.0% 34.3% 71.3%
Branch o f a count 9 12 21
Manufacturing Firm % within Role 16.7% 22.2% 19.4%
% of Total 8.3% 11.1% 19.4%
Other count 5 5 10
% within Role 9.3% 9.3% 9.3%
% of Total 4.6% 4.6% 9.3%
Total count 54 54 108
% within Role 100% 100% 100%
% of Total 50% 50% 100%
The Application of the Internet in Job Performance.
Since this study proposed to select boundary-spanning employees who use the
Internet in their job performance as subjects, only those respondents answering “yes” 
to the question were selected as subjects. Therefore, as shown in Table 5, 100.0% of 
survey respondents selected use the Internet in their job performance. Even though 
the survey questionnaires were mailed to employees whose names appear on their 
companies’  Websites, 27 of the survey respondents indicated that they do not use 
the Internet in their jobs. These respondents, therefore, were eliminated from the 
study, (see Table 2 above)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
96
Table 5
Internet Application in Job Performance  * Role Cross Tabulation
Role Total 
Employee Supplier
The Application of
the Internet in 
Job Performanceyes count
% within Role 
% of Total54
1 0 0.0%
50.0%54
1 0 0.0%
50.0%108
1 0 0.0%
1 0 0.0%
Total count 
% within Role 
% of Total54
1 0 0.0%
50.0%54
1 0 0.0%
50.0%108
1 0 0.0%
1 0 0.0%
Customer Relationship
As mentioned earlier, this study focused on boundary-spanning employees who
use the Internet in their job performance. Only those respondents indicating that
they have been involved in the interaction with customer firms were selected as
subjects for the study. Consequently, as shown in Table 6, 100.0% of survey
respondents selected, have interacted with their customer firms. Those who
indicated otherwise, or did not respond to this item, were eliminated as a result. Ten
out of 149 total responses received, were eliminated, as indicated in Table 2.
Length of employee-employer/ buyer-supplier relationships
In order to provide enhanced assurance of the anonymity of the respondents and
participating companies, and to tap different ethical climates, survey respondents were
asked to base their evaluation on companies with whom they either have or had a
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
97
relativeiy long-term relationship, or have or had a relatively short-term relationship 
(as specified in questionnaire formatted A, B, C and D).
As shown in Table 7, the majority of survey respondents, especially the 
employee respondents, base their evaluations on companies with whom they have or 
had a relatively long-term relationship. Of the employee respondents 57.4% said 
they have or had a business relationship lasting more than 1 0 years with the 
companies they were evaluating. Of the supplier respondents 43.4% said they have 
or had a business relationship lasting more than 1 0 years with the companies they 
were evaluating. All in all, a total of 50.5% of survey respondents indicated they 
have or had a business relationship lasting more than 10 years with the companies 
they were evaluating. Only 1 .9% of the employees and suppliers indicated that they 
have or had a business relationship of less than one year with the companies they 
were evaluating. This could be attributed to the likelihood that Internet-enhanced 
manufacturing companies tend to post employees of longer tenure as contact persons 
on their Websites.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
98
Table 6
Customer Firms Interaction * Role Cross Tabulation
Role
Employee SupplierTotal
Involvement in the yes count 54 54 108
Interaction with % within Role 1 0 0.0% 1 0 0.0% 100.0%
Customer Firm % of Total 50.0% 50.0% 1 0 0.0%
Total count 54 54 108
% within Role 1 0 0.0% 100.0% 1 0 0.0%
% of Total 50.0% 50.0% 1 0 0.0%
Job Level
As shown in Table 8 below, the majority of the survey respondents hold or have 
held a job position of manager and above. Of the employee respondents, 6 8.6% hold 
or have held a job position of manager and above. Of the supplier respondents, 
70.6% hold or have held a job position of manager and above. All in all, a total of 
69.6% of survey respondents indicated that they hold or have held a job position of 
manager and above. More supplier than employee respondents (19.6% as opposed 
to 9.8%) indicated that they had held a supervisory position. More employee 
respondents (21. 6%) than supplier respondents (9.8%) indicated that they had held an 
officer position. In total, job positions were distributed evenly between officers 
(15.7%) and supervisors (14.7%).
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
99
Table 7
Length o f Relationship * Role Cross Tabulation
Role
Employee SupplierTotal
Length less than 1  year count
% within Role 
% of Total1
1.9%
.9%1
1.9%
.9%2
1.9%
1.9%
between 1-3 years count 5 11 16
% within Role 9.3% 20.8% 15.0%
% of Total 4.7% 10.3% 15.0%
between 4-6 years count 1 0 1 0 20
% within Role 18.5% 18.9% 18.7%
% of Total 9.3% 9.3% 18.7%
between 7-9 years count 7 8 15
% within Role 13.0% 15.1% 14.0%
% of Total 6.5% 7.5% 14.0%
more than 10 years count 31 23 54
% within Role 57.4% 43.4% 50.5%
% of Total 29.0% 21.5% 50.5%
Total count 54 53 107
% within Role 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
% of Total 50.5% 49.5% 100.0%
The fact that the majority of the survey respondents held a job position of 
manager and above could be attributed to the likelihood that Internet-enhanced 
manufacturing companies tend to post the name of employees with higher job 
positions on the contact lists of their Websites.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
100
Table 8
Job Level  * Role Cross Tabulation
Role Total
Employee Supplier
Job Level Officer count 11 5 16
% within Role 2 1.6% 9.8% 15.7%
% of Total 1 0.8% 4.9% 15.7%
Supervisor count 5 1 0 15
% within Role 9.8% 19.6% 14.7%
% of Total 4.9% 9.8% 14.7%
Manager count 35 36 71
And above %  within Role 68.6% 70.6% 69.6%
% of Total 34.3% 35.3% 69.6%
Total count 51 51 102
% within Role 100.0% 1 0 0.0% 100.0%
% of Total 50.0% 50.0% 100.0%
Factor Analysis
Factor analysis was performed on Part I of the questionnaire-the 26 corporate 
work climate description items coded CWC01-CWC26-to determine whether factors 
similar to prior studies (Victor & Cullen, 1987, 1988) would emerge in this study, and 
to examine the internal consistency of the items comprising each factor. Using a 
principal component factor solution and a Varimax rotation, the analysis yielded a 
total of six factors (see Rotated Component Matrix in appendix D).
Variable items appearing under each of the six factors in the rotated component 
matrix mentioned above were further screened using the three criterions suggested by 
Wu & Lin (2001). The first criterion is that the absolute values of factor loadings for
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
1 0 1
selected items should be greater than 0.6. The second criterion is that the absolute 
values of factor loading differences between two factors for any selected items should 
be greater than 0.3. The third criterion is that the item-to-totai correlations for 
selected items should be greater than 0.5. Based on these criterions, this study 
replicated four ethical climates (rules, caring, instrumental and independence climates; 
see table 9 below) identified by Victor and Cullen in their 1987 and 1988 studies. 
Factors 5 and 6 were eliminated in arriving at the conclusion, since after taking the 
above-mentioned criteria into consideration, none or only one item remained in each 
factor respectively.
A relaxation of the second criterion, however, may result in the inclusion of 
factor 5, which represents the law and code climate of an organization. Such 
relaxation seemed to be justified because the two items had high item-to-total
correlations (0.7656 and 0.7656; see table 9 below) and the Cronbach’s alpha for the 
factor was high (0.8672) as shown in table 9. The law and code climate of an 
organization also was present in Victor and Cullen’s 1988 study. As such, the 
inclusion of the law and code climate (factor 5) enabled this study to tap all five 
ethical climates identified in Victor and Cullen’s 1988 study.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
102
Iii accordance with Victor and Cullen’s 1988 study, this study also showed that 
corporate work climates are defined primarily In terms of ethical criteria. The loci of 
analysis help to define different corporate climates within the principle ethical 
criterion only (see table 9 below). To address the hypotheses made in this study, the 
five corporate work climates of caring, instrumental, law and code, rules, and 
independence were rephrased in terms of their respective ethical criteria and loci of 
analysis as benevolence climate, egoism climate, principle-cosmopolitan climate, 
principle-local climate, and principle-individual climate.
Reliability Test
The 26-item ethical climate questionnaire developed by Victor and Cullen
(1988) measuring different types of ethical climates within organizations was 
included in part I of the survey instrument. Only the 18 variable items selected by 
means of factor analysis representing the five different corporate ethical climates (see 
table 9) were used in this study. Cronbach’s coefficient alpha was calculated to 
measure the internal consistency of the items selected in each of the five scales. As 
shown in table 9 below, Cronbach’s alpha for each scale ranged from 0.8835 to 
0.7883, well exceeding the recommended value of 0.70 (Nunnally, 1978), hence the 
ranges are sufficient for establishing internal consistency.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
103
Part II of the survey instrument contained the 5-item trust questionnaire 
developed by Rempel & Holmes (1986) and modified by Zaheer et al. to measure 
trust at the organizational level. The trust scale had a Cronbach’s alpha of 0.8515 
(see appendix E), which also exceed the recommended value of 0.7 (Nunnally, 1978) 
for internal consistency.
Two statements from Yeung, Brockbank, and Ulrich’s (1991) competing value 
instrument were included in part HI of the survey instrument to assess subjects’  
perception of commitment and innovation. The Cronbach’s alpha for the scale was 
0.6585 (see appendix E), which was lower than the desirable value of 0.7 (Nunnally, 
1978), however, this value was considered acceptable and sufficient for basic research 
(Nunnally, 1967).
Instrument Item Descriptive Results
Table 10 presents the descriptive results of variable items included in the study 
for further analysis. The mean and standard deviation were used as the measure of 
central tendency and the measure of dispersion respectively for each item.
As shown in table 10, corporate work climate items, which represent law and 
code (principle-cosmopolitan) and rules (principle-local), tended to have higher mean 
scores and tower standard deviation scores than items representing other types of 
corporate climates for employee and supplier respondents, as well as in total. Items
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
104
representing instrumental (egoism) climate had relatively lower mean scores than 
items representing other types of corporate climate for employees, suppliers, and in 
total. The descriptive results confirm Victor and Cullen’s (1988) findings that 
manufacturing plants put greater emphasis on law, code and rules.
Table 10 also shows that, although the employee respondents seemed to have 
higher levels of trust than supplier respondents in the companies under evaluation (as 
indicated by all items included in the trust scale), the standard deviations for ail items 
measuring trust were higher for employee respondents than for supplier respondents. 
The item (T31) directly assessing organizational trust had higher mean scores than 
other items measuring different aspects of trust for employee respondents, supplier 
respondents, and in total. All items under the trust scale had mean scores greater 
than four (neutral opinion) for employee respondents, showing a tendency towards 
positive perceptions of trust among employee respondents. One item (T28) 
measuring the fairness aspect of trust, and one item (T30) measuring the reliability 
aspect of trust, had mean scores of less than four (neutral opinion) for supplier 
respondents, indicating a tendency towards negative perceptions of trust in these 
aspects, among supplier respondents. In total, one item (T30) measuring the 
reliability aspect of trust had mean scores of less than four (neutral opinion), showing
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
105
a tendency towards negative perceptions of the reliability aspect of trust among all
survey respondents.
Table 9
Cronbach’ s Alphas and Item-to-Total Correlations for Corporate Work Climates  
Identified in this Study
Ethical climates identified Cronbach’s 
in terms of factor analysis alpha*item code *  theoretical ethical 
climate dimensions 
(criterion vs locus)Item-to-total
correlations
Rules/ Principle-Local 0.8835 CWC 13 PL 0.7485
CWC 12 PL 0.7687
CWC 14 PL 0.7536
CWC 15 PL 0.7086
Caring/Benevolence 0.8741 CWC02 BL 0.7876
CWC03 BI 0.7479
CWC01 BL 0.7194
CWC04 BI 0.6686
Law and Code/ 0.8672 CWC08 PC 0.7656
Principle Cosmopolitan CWC 10 PC 0.7656
Instrumental/ Egoism 0.7999 CWC20 EL 0.5668
CWC 19 EL 0.6660
CWC 18 El 0.6010
CWC21 EL 0.6213
Independence/ 0.7883 CWC24 PI 0.6285
Principle-Individual CWC26 PI 0.6566
CWC25 PI 0.5786
CWC23 PI 0.5249
*items of corporate work climate (CWC) were coded in the order the items were presented in 
the questionnaire (see appendix A for the wording of each item).
*  *B=benevolence, P=principle, E=egoism, ^individual, L=local, C=cosmopolitan
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
106
Table 10 Descriptive Results for Variable Items
‘ Variable Items M e a n s Standard Devi ation
E m p lo y e e Supplier T o ta l E m p lo y e e Supplier T o ta l
Caring/ Benevolence 2.81 2.76 2.79 l . l l 0.92 1.02
CWC01 3.02 3,24 3.13 1.21 1.13 1.17
CWC02 3.07 2.83 2.95 1.37 1.16 1.27
CWC03 2 28 2.27 2.28 1.23 1.07 1.15
CWC04 2.91 2.76 2.83 1.26 1.11 1.19
Law and Code/Principle -Cosmopolitan 4.24 4.08 4.16 0.99 0.90 0.90
CW C08 4.17 4.15 4.16 0.99 0.86 0.92
CW C 10 4.30 4.02 4.16 0.91 1.05 0.99
Rules/ Principle-Local 3.63 3.63 3.63 0.87 0.82 0.84
CWC 12 4.07 4.06 4.06 0.95 0.76 0.86
CWC 13 4.15 4.04 4.09 0.88 0.97 0.92
CWC14 3.11 3.15 3.13 1.09 1.17 1.13
CWC 15 3.19 3.26 3 22 1.07 0.96 1.01
Instrum ental/ Egoism 1.70 2.07 1.89 1.08 0.99 1.05
CWC 18 1.78 2.09 1.93 1.41 1.40 1.41
CWC19 1.34 1.89 1.62 1.31 1.40 1.38
CWC20 1.94 1.85 1.90 1.20 1.02 1.11
CWC21 1.79 2.37 2.08 1.38 1.31 1.37
Independence/ Principle-Individual 2.54 2.44 2.49 0.96 0.91 0.93
CWC23 2.85 2.61 2.73 1.11 1.25 1.18
CWC24 2.37 2.37 2.37 1.31 1.26 1.28
CWC25 2 .1 1 2.07 2.09 1.21 1.06 1.13
CWC26 2.83 2.72 2.78 1.22 1.12 1.17
Trust 4.90 4.13 4.52 1.57 1.30 1.48
T27 4.94 4.57 4.76 1.76 1.74 1.76
T28** 4.67 3.43 4.05 2.08 1.85 2.06
T29** 4.59 4.15 4.37 2.20 1.91 2.06
T30** 4.41 3.20 3.81 1.94 1.83 1.97
T31 5.77 5.31 5.54 1.55 1.53 1.55
Commitment and Innovation 0.67 0.75 0.70 0.40 0.37 0.39
C132 0.57 0.69 0.63 0.50 0.47 0.49
0 3 3 0.76 0.81 0.79 0.43 0.39 0.4!
* Items of corporate work ciimate (CWC) scale trust (I) scaie and commitment and innovation (Cl) scale were coded in the order 
the items were presented in the questionnaire (see appendix A for the wording of each item).
** Reverse coded; the scoring on these items was reversed
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
107
items in the commitment and innovation scales had higher mean scores and 
lower standard deviation scores for supplier respondents than for employee 
respondents, showing a tendency towards perceptions of more commitment and 
innovative efforts for supplier respondents in inter-organizational relationships. 
Both employee respondents and supplier respondents indicated a tendency towards 
positive perceptions of commitment and innovation in their respective business 
relationships with companies under evaluation.
Pearson Correlation Coefficient
Table 1 1  shows the Pearson correlation coefficients calculated for the seven 
variables examined in the study, covering the five types of corporate work climate, 
trust, commitment and innovation variables.
Inter-climate scale correlations ranging from -0.465 to 0.634 were found in this 
study. This finding is theoretically acceptable and comparable to the findings of 
prior studies (Victor & Cullen, 1987,1988; Wimbush 1991; Harvey, 2001). Since 
two or more types of corporate work climates may coexist, corporate work climate 
variables were not expected to have strict independence (Victor & Cullen, 1987). 
Moreover, since these correlations were less than 0.7, which is the suggested criterion 
for initial  evidence of multicollinearity (Gunst & Mason , 1980, cited in Wimbush, 
1991), there was no evidence of a high degree of multicollinearity in the study.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
108
Table 1 1
Pearson Correlation Coefficient
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
i. Caring/ Benevolence 1.00
2. Law and Code/Principle -Cosmopolitan 0.440** 1.00
3. R iles/ Principle-Local 0.490** 0.634** 1.00
4. Instrum ental/ Egoism -0.465** -0.309** -0.278** 1.00
S. Independence/ Principle-Individual 0.329** 0.071 0.058 -0.249* 1.00
6. Trust 0.666** 0.439** 0.369** -0.538** 0.332** 1.00
7. Commitment and Innovation 0.291** 0.119 0.190* -0.073 0.133 0.208* 1.00
** correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed) 
* correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed)
According to Table 11, the trust variable was positively correlated with 
benevolence, principle-cosmopolitan, principle-local and principle-individual climate 
variables, and negatively correlated with the egoism climate variable at the 
significance level of 0.01. Commitment and innovation was positively correlated
with the benevolence climate variable at the significance level of 0.01, and positively 
correlated with principle-local climate variable and trust variable at the significance 
level of 0.05. The relationships between the five different corporate work climates 
and trust, and between trust and commitment and innovation, were the focus of the 
hypotheses tests.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
109
Hypothesis Testing
Hosmer’s (1994) proposition that “it is essential in any competitive sense to be 
moral” served as the basis for the hypothesis testing conducted in this study (p.25). 
According to Hosmer (1994), an ethical approach to management would engender the 
trust required to bring about commitment and innovative efforts of stakeholders both 
outside and inside an organization, which are critical to success in a global economy. 
As such, the ethics-trast-commitment-and-innovation linkage was examined from the 
perspectives of both the suppliers (the “external” stakeholders) and the employees 
(the “internal” stakeholders).
To examine the relationships between the five different ethical work climates 
and trust (hypotheses 1  to 6), the climate types of benevolence, egoism, 
principle-cosmopolitan, principle-local, and principle-individual were entered into the 
stepwise multiple regression as independent variables, and trust was entered as the 
dependent variable. The criteria for entry into the regression was a p  < 0.05 level. 
The hypotheses were tested at the significance level of 0.05. The results of stepwise 
multiple regressions are presented in table 12 (for the perspective of suppliers) and 
table 13 (for the perspective of employees).
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
110
Table 12
Results o f Stepwise Multiple Regression (Suppliers’  Perspective)
Model Summary
Adjusted R Std. Error of
Model R R Square Square the Estimate
1  .523a .
2 .637b.274
.405.259
.3811.10614
1.01136
R Square 
Model Change F ChangeModel Summary 
Change Statistics
dfl df2 Sig. F Change
1  .274
2 .13118.482
10.6141
149
48.000
.002
a. Predictors: (Constant), Principle-Cosmopolitan
b. Predictors: (Constant), Principle-Cosmopolitan, Egoism
c. Dependent Variable: Trust
ModelSum of 
SquareANOVA
df Mean Square F Sig.
1  Regression 
Residual 
Total22.613
59.953
82.5661
49
5022.613
1.22418.482 ,000a
2 Regression 
Residual 
Total33.469
49.097
82.5662
48
5016.735
1.02316.361 •000b
a. Predictors: (Constant), Principle-Cosmopolitan
b. Predictors: (Constant), Principle-Cosmopolitan, Egoism
c. Dependent Variable: Trust
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
I l l
Coefficients 
Unstandardized Standardized
Coefficients Coefficients
Model _______________________ B Std.Error Beta ______ t_______ Sig
1  (constant)
Principle-Cosmopolitan1.119
.742.715
.172 .5231.565
4.299.124
.000
2 (constant) 2.878 .848 3.394 .001
Principle-Cosmopolitan .563 .397 .397 3.372 .001
Egoism -.494 .152 -.384 -3.258 .002
ModelExcluded Variables 
Retain t SimPartial
CorrelatiorCollinearity
Statistics
i  Tolerance
1  Principle-Local .009a .057 .955 .008 .582
Benevolence ,339a 2.523 .015 .342 .738
Egoism -.384a -3.258 .002 -.426 .892
Principle-Individual •257a 2.179 .034 .300 .991
2 Principle-Local ,018b .121 .905 .018 .582
Benevolence ,221b 1.635 .109 .232 .652
Principle-Individual ,181b 1.596 .117 .227 .936
a. Predictors: (Constant), Principle-Cosmopolitan
b. Predictors: (Constant), Principle-Cosmopolitan, Egoism
c. Dependent Variable: Trust
Table 13
Results o f Stepwise Multiple Regression (Employees ’Perspective)
Model Summary
Adjusted R Std. Error of
Model _______ R R Square ______ Square ___________ the Estimate
1  .827 .  .684 .677 .91266
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
112
Model Summary 
Change Statistics
R Square
Model Change F Change dfl d£2 Sig. F Change
1  .684 103.741 1  48 .000
a. Predictors: (Constant), Benevolence
b. Dependent Variable: Trust
ModelANOVA
Sum of
Square df Mean Square F Sig.
1  Regression 
Residual
Total86.410 1  86.410 
39.981 48 .833 
126.391 49103.741 .000a
a. Predictors: (Constant), Benevolence
b. Dependent Variable: Trust
ModelCoefficients 
Unstandardized Standardized 
Coefficients Coefficients 
B Std.Error Beta t Sig.
1  (constant) 
Benevolence1.558 .350
1.170 .115 .8274.446 .000 
10.185 .000
ModelExcluded Variables 
Beta In t Sig.Collinearity 
Partial Statistics 
Correlation Tolerance
i Principle-Local ,012a .129 .898 
Principle-Cosmopolitan .043a .485 .630 
Egoism -,146a -1.604 .116 
Principle-Individual .160a 1.918 .061.019
.071
-.228
.269.761
.838
.771
.898
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
H1n_ :  There is a negative or no relationship between suppliers’  perceptions of the
level of benevolence corporate work climate and their level of trust in customer 
firms.
H I a c There is a positive relationship between suppliers’  perceptions of the level of 
benevolence corporate work climate and their level of trust in customer firms.
As shown in table 12, from the suppliers’  perspective, the benevolence 
corporate work climate did not meet the criteria for entry into the regression at a p 
<0.05 level. The Beta In value for the benevolence corporate work climate variable 
in model 2 was 0.221 (see table 12, excluded variables). The significance value of 
0.109 (greater than 0.05) indicated that the coefficient was not considered significant. 
As such, the study failed to reject the null hypothesis.
H2jy: There is a negative or no relationship between employees' perceptions of the 
level of benevolence corporate work climate and the level of trust in their
employing firms.
H2a: There is a positive relationship between employees' perceptions of the level of 
benevolence corporate work climate and the level of trust in their employing
firms.
As shown in table 13, from the employees’  perspective, only the benevolence 
corporate work climate met the criteria for entry Into the regression at a p< 0.05 level.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
114
A significant linear regression was found (the significance of F value of 0.000 was 
less than 0.05), with an R2  of 0.684. The result indicated that 68.4 % of the variance 
in the trust dependent variable was accounted for by the benevolence corporate work 
climate predictor variable. The Beta value of 0.827 and the significance of t value of 
0.000 reported for the benevolence corporate work climate predictor variable, 
indicated that there was a strong, positive relationship between the benevolence 
corporate work climate and trust from the perspective of employees. This 
relationship was statistically significant. Therefore, the null hypothesis was rejected. 
H 3n: There is a positive or no relationship between suppliers’  perceptions of the 
level of egoism corporate work climate and their level of trust in customer firms. 
H3w There is a negative relationship between suppliers’  perceptions of the level of 
egoism corporate work climate and their level of trust in customer firms.
As shown in Table 12, model 2, from the suppliers’  perspective, two types of 
ethical climates types, i.e. the principle-cosmopolitan corporate work climate and the 
egoism corporate work climate, met the criteria for entry into the regression at a p  < 
0.05 level. A significant linear regression was found (the significance of F value of 
0.000 was less than 0.05). The R2  change value of 0.131 indicated that 13.1 % of 
the variance in trust was explained by the inclusion of the egoism corporate work 
climate in model 2. The significance of F change value of 0.002 (less than 0.05)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
115
indicated that the variance in trust explained by the egoism corporate work climate 
was significantly above and beyond that already explained by the 
principle-cosmopolitan corporate work climate entered previously. The Beta value 
of -0.384 and the significance of t value of 0.002 (less than 0.05) indicated that there 
was a statistically significant, moderate negative relationship between the egoism 
corporate work climate and trust from the perspective of suppliers. Therefore, the 
null hypothesis was rejected.
H 4n: There is a positive or no relationship between employees' perceptions of the
level of egoism corporate work climate and the level of trust in their employing 
firms.
H 4 a: There is a negative relationship between employees' perceptions of the level
of egoism corporate work climate and the level of trust in their employing firms. 
As shown in table 13, from the employees’  perspective, the egoism corporate 
work climate did not meet the criteria for entry into the regression at a p <0.05 level. 
The Beta In value for the egoism corporate work climate variable in model 1  was 
-1.46 (see table 13, excluded variables). The significance value of 0.116 (greater 
than 0.05) indicated that the coefficient was not considered significant. As such, the 
study failed to reject the null hypothesis.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
116
According to the factor analysis performed in this study, and prior studies, such 
as the Victor & Cullen, 1988 study, the loci of analysis, i.e. cosmopolitan, local and 
individual, defined different climate types within the principle criterion, therefore, 
hypotheses 5 and 6 were modified to address the three loci of analysis within the 
principle criterion below.
H5aN: There is a negative or no relationship between suppliers’  perceptions of the
level of principle-cosmopolitan corporate work climate and their level of trust in 
customer firms.
HSaA: There is a positive relationship between suppliers’  perceptions of the level of 
principle-cosmopolitan corporate work climate and their level of trust in 
customer firms
As shown in table 12, from the suppliers’  perspective, both the 
principle-cosmopolitan corporate work climate and the egoism corporate work 
climate met the criteria for entry into the regression at a p < 0.05 level. A significant 
linear regression was found (the significance of F value of 0.000 was less than 0.05). 
The R2  value of 0.274 indicated that the principle-cosmopolitan corporate work 
climate explained 27.4% of the variance in trust. The Beta value of 0.397 and the 
significance of t value of 0.001 further suggested that there was a statistically 
significant, moderate positive relationship between the principle-cosmopolitan
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
corporate work climate and trust from the perspective of suppliers. Therefore, the null 
hypothesis was rejected.
H SbN : There is a negative or no relationship between suppliers’  perceptions of the
level of principle-local corporate work climate and their level of trust in 
customer firms.
H5bA; There is a positive relationship between suppliers’  perceptions of the level of 
principle-local corporate work climate and their level of trust in customer firms 
As shown in table 12, from the suppliers’  perspective, the principle-local 
corporate work climate did not meet the criteria for entry into the regression at a p 
<0.05 level. The Beta In value for the principle-local corporate work climate variable 
in model 2 was 0.018 (see table 12, excluded variables). The significance value was 
0.905 (greater than 0.05), which indicated that the coefficient was not considered 
significant. As such, the study failed to reject the null hypothesis.
H5cn: There is a negative or no relationship between suppliers’  perceptions of the
level of principle-individual corporate work climate and their level of trust in 
customer firms.
HSca- There is a positive relationship between suppliers’  perceptions of the level of 
principle-individual corporate work climate and their level of trust in customer 
firms.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
118
As shown in table 12, from the suppliers’  perspective, the principle-individual 
corporate work climate did not meet the criteria for entry into the regression at a p 
<0.05 level. The Beta In value for the principle-individual corporate work climate 
variable in model 2 was 0.181 (see table 12, excluded variables). The significance 
value was 0.117 (greater than 0.05), which indicated that the coefficient was not 
considered significant. As such, the study failed to reject the null hypothesis.
H6aN: There is a negative or no relationship between employees' perceptions of the 
level of principle-cosmopolitan corporate work climate and the level of trust in 
their employing firms.
H6aA: There is a positive relationship between employees' perceptions of the level
of principle-cosmopolitan corporate work climate and the level of trust in their 
employing firms.
As shown in table 13, from the employees’  perspective, the
principle-cosmopolitan corporate work climate did not meet the criteria for entry into 
the regression at a p <0.05 level. The Beta In value for the principle-cosmopolitan 
corporate work climate variable in model 1  was 0.043 (see table 13, excluded 
variables). The significance value was 0.630 (greater than 0.05), which indicated 
that the coefficient was not considered significant. As such, the study failed to reject 
the null hypothesis.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
H61> n: There is a negative or no relationship between employees' perceptions of the
level of principle-local corporate work climate and the level of trust in their 
employing firms.
H6bA- There is a positive relationship between employees' perceptions of the level 
of principle-local corporate work climate and the level of trust in their 
employing firms.
As shown in table 13, from the employees’  perspective, the principle-local 
corporate work climate did not meet the criteria for entry into the regression at a p 
<0.05 level. The Beta In value for the principle-local corporate work climate variable 
in model 1  was 0.012 (see table 13, excluded variables). The significance value was 
0.898 (greater than 0.05), which indicated that the coefficient was not considered 
significant. As such, the study failed to reject the null hypothesis.
H 6cn : There is a negative or no relationship between employees' perceptions of the 
level of principle-individual corporate work climate and the level of trust in their 
employing firms.
H 6 ca : There Is a positive relationship between employees' perceptions of the level 
of principle-individual corporate work climate and the level of trust in their 
employing firms.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
120
As shown in table 13, from the employees’  perspective, the principle-individual 
corporate work climate did not meet the criteria for entry into the regression at a p 
<0.05 level. The Beta In value for the principle-individual corporate work climate 
variable in mode! 1  was 0.160 (see table 13, excluded variables). The significance 
value was 0.061 (greater than 0.05), which indicated that the coefficient was not 
considered significant. As such, the study failed to reject the null hypothesis.
To examine the relationships between the trust predictor variable and the 
commitment and innovation dependent variable, subjects were grouped into two 
categories. Subjects who agreed with both items on the commitment and innovation 
measure were grouped together and categorized as subjects with commitment and 
innovation. Subjects who disagreed with both items on the commitment and 
innovation measure were grouped together and categorized as subjects with no 
commitment and innovation. Subjects with contradictory responses, i.e., agree with 
one item and disagree with the other, were eliminated from the analysis. For 
hypotheses testing 7 and 8, the trust variable was entered into the logistic regression 
as the predictor variable, and the commitment and innovation variable was entered 
into the logistic regression, as the dependent variable. The results of logistic 
regression were presented in table 14 (for the perspective of suppliers) and table 15 
(for the perspective of employees) below.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
121
Table 14
Results o f Logistic Regression (Suppliers ’Perspective)
Omnibus Tests of Model Coefficients
Chi-Square df SIg
Step 1  Step .807 1 .369
Block .807 1 .369
Model .807 1 .369
StepModel Summary 
-2Log Cox & Snell 
Likelihood R SquareNagelkerke
R Square
1 40.511 0.019 0.030
ObservedClassification Tablea
Commitment and Percentage 
Innovation Correct 
0.00 1.00
Step 1  Commitment 0.00 0 8 .0
and Innovation 1.00 0 35 100.0
Overall Percentage 81.4
a.The cut value is 0.500
Variables in the Equation
B S.E. Wald df Sig Exp(B)
Step Trust .271 .310 .766 1 .382 3.311
l a Constant .377 1.273 .088 1 .767 .458
a.Variable(s) entered on step 1: Trust
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
122
Table 15
Results o f Logistic Regression (Employees’  Perspective)
Omnibus Tests of Model Coefficients 
Chi-Square df Sig
Step 1  Step 
Block 
Model4.796 1
4.796 1
4.796 1.029
.029
.029
StepModel Summary 
-2Log Cox & Snell 
Likelihood R SquareNagelkerke 
R Square
1 41.604 0.116 0.166
Classification Table a
ObservedCommitment and 
Innovation 
0.00 1.00Percentage
Correct
Step 1  Commitment
and Innovation 
Overall Percentage0.00 4 7 
1.00 2 2636.4
92.9
76.9
a. The cut value is 0.500
Variables in the Equation
Step Trust 
la  ConstantB S.E. Wald df 
.532 .257 4.289 1  
■1.634 1.251 1.707 1Sig Exp(B) 
.038 1.702 
.191 .195
a.Variable(s) entered on step 1: Trust
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
123
H7n:  Level of trust in customer firms is not a significant predictor of the existence of 
commitment and innovation in suppliers 
H 7 a‘ -  Level of trust in customer firms is a significant predictor of the existence of 
commitment and innovation in suppliers 
As shown in table 14, from the suppliers’  perspective, the model did not fit well. 
Model x 2  =0.807 is not statistically significant (significance=j p=.369). Moreover, 
the significance of the B based on the Wald statistic was 0.382, suggesting that the 
effect of trust on the commitment and innovation of suppliers was not statistically 
significant. Nagelkerke R Square of 0.030, further suggested that only 3% of the 
commitment and innovation dependent variable was accounted for by the trust 
predictor variable. As such, the study failed to reject the null hypothesis that the 
level of trust in customer firms is not a significant predictor of the existence of 
commitment and innovation in suppliers
H 8n: Level of trust in employing firms is a not a significant predictor of the 
existence of commitment and innovation in employees.
H8/v: Level of trust in employing firms is a significant predictor of the existence of 
commitment and innovation in employees.
As shown in table 15, from the employees’  perspective, the model fitted well. 
Model x 2  =4.796 is statistically significant (significance= p=.Q29).  Moreover, the
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
124
significance of the B based on the Wald statistic was .038, indicating that the trust 
independent variable significantly predicts the commitment and innovation dependent 
variable from the perspective of the employees. A positive, significant B of 0.532 
indicated that there was a positive relationship between the level of trust in the 
employing firms and the existence of commitment and innovation in employees.
The classification table further suggested that the model predicted which value of 
commitment and innovation was observed in the data 76.9% of the time. In addition, 
the Nagelkerke R square value of 0.166 suggested that 16.6% of the commitment and 
innovation dependent variable was accounted for by the trust predictor variable. 
Therefore, the null hypothesis was rejected.
Summary
This chapter analyzed the data collected from the boundary-spanning 
employees of the U.S. manufacturing companies and presented the results of the study. 
A total of 108 valid responses were received, of which 54 were from respondents 
answering the questionnaires in their roles as suppliers, and 54 were from respondents 
answering the questionnaires in their roles as employees.
The demographic profile of supplier respondents and employee respondents 
was summarized in tables 3 through 8. The majority of survey respondents were
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
125
male (84.1%), and held positions of manager and above (69.6%) in the head office of 
manufacturing companies (71.3%) for more than 10 years (50.5%).
Five climate types, in accordance with Victor & Cullen’s 1988 study, emerged 
from the factor analysis performed on the 26-item corporate work climate 
questionnaire. The climate types of caring, instrumental, law and code, rules, and 
independence were rephrased in terms of their respective ethical criteria and loci of 
analysis as benevolence, egoism, principle-cosmopolitan, principle-local, and 
principle-individual to address the hypotheses made in this study.
Table 10 presents the descriptive results of variable items included in the study 
after factor analysis. The cronbach’s coefficient alphas calculated for the five 
corporate work climate scales (a  =  0.8835 ~ 0.7883), the trust scale( a =0.8515), and 
the commitment and innovation scale ( a =0.6585) all met the criterion suggested by 
Nunnally (1967) for establishing internal consistency.
The results of hypotheses testing showed that suppliers have greater trust in 
customer firms with a higher level of perceived principle-cosmopolitan corporate 
work climate (H5a), and have less trust in customer firms with a higher level of 
perceived egoism corporate work climate (H3). However, no statistically significant 
relationship was found between the level of trust in customer firms and the existence 
of commitment and innovation in suppliers (H7).
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
126
In contrast, employees have greater trust in employer firms with a higher level 
of perceived benevolence corporate work climate (H2). Moreover, there was a 
statistically significant positive relationship between the level of trust in employing 
firms and the existence of commitment and innovation in employees (H8).
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
CHAPTER V 
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
Introduction
This chapter summarizes and concludes the findings of the research. As 
described in chapters I and II, traditionally, suppliers were seen as “external” 
stakeholders, while employees were seen as “Internal” stakeholders of the companies. 
However, in an Internet based global economy, companies’  success hinges on 
stakeholders’  (both internal and external) ability to open-raindedly form “intelligent 
communities” (Levy, 1999) so as to deliver values that are unique to customers in the 
form of innovation, via a highly integrated value chain (Porter, 2001).
Based on Hosmer’s (1994) proposition that an ethical approach to management 
would build trust on the part of all of the stakeholders inside and outside the 
companies, and that trust would engender stakeholders’  commitment to cooperative 
and innovative efforts that are critical to success in a global economy, the research 
investigated the relationships among ethical climates, trust, commitment and 
innovation from the perspectives of suppliers and employees, respectively.
An overview of significant findings and conclusions based on the results of data 
analysis presented in chapter IV, using the methodology for research described in 
chapter III, are presented in this chapter. In addition, implications of the research,
127
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
128
limitations of the research and recommendations for future research are discussed in 
the chapter.
Overview of Significant Findings
Factor analysis performed on Part I of the questionnaire, the 26 corporate work 
climate description items, yielded a total of six factors. The 6th factor was 
eliminated from further analysis because there was only one item with factor loading 
greater than 0.6. Variable items appearing under each of the 5 retained factors, 
described the ethical climate types of benevolence (caring), egoism (instrumental), 
principle-cosmopolitan (law and code), principle-local (rales), and principle- 
individual (independence), respectively. The five ethical climates identified in the 
study replicated that of Victor and Cullen’s 1988 study.
In addition, the factor structure found in the study, and hence climate types 
identified, supported Victor and Cullen’s 1988 finding that types of ethical work 
climate were defined primarily in terms of ethical criteria. The loci of analysis 
defined different types of ethical work climate only within the principle ethical 
criterion.
The results of descriptive statistics on the instrument items indicated that, from 
the perspective of boundary-spanning employees, both the manufacturing firms and 
the customer firms emphasized law and code and rules. The law and code
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
129
(principle-cosmopolitan) climate and the rules (principle-local) climate had higher 
mean scores and lower standard deviation scores in comparison with other climate 
types evaluated by boundary spanning employees both in their role as employees and 
suppliers (see table 10).
Although the questionnaires were answered by different boundary spanning 
employees in their role as either the employees of manufacturing firms or the 
suppliers of customer firms under evaluation, it is interesting to find that the mean 
value of the rules (principle-local) climates are identical for the employee respondents 
(mean value=3.63) and the supplier respondents (mean value=3.63), with relatively 
low and similar values of standard deviation (Std. Deviation=0.87 for the employee 
respondents; Std. Deviation=0.82 for the supplier respondents). According to Van de 
ven (1976), “the extent to which rules, policies, and procedures are established to 
transact activities between parties, and the extent of procedures followed by a 
committee or group that governs the inter-organizational relationship (IR),” indicated 
the formalization of inter-agency contacts (p. 26). The fact that employee 
respondents and supplier respondents perceived the same level of rules climates, 
suggested the possible occurrence of formalization of inter-agency contacts in both 
intra-organizational and inter-organizational structures.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
130
Both the sampled manufacturing companies and customer firms had the lowest 
emphasis on egoism. However, the supplier respondents’  perception of egoism 
climates in customer firms (mean value= 2.07) was stronger than employee 
respondents’  perception of egoism climate in manufacturing firms (mean value= 
1.70).
Similar results were found in prior research. In Victor and Cullen’s 1988 study, 
the manufacturing plant also had the greatest emphasis on law and code and rales, and 
lowest emphasis on egoism. However, the mean values for both the law and code 
climate and the rules climate were higher in the current study (mean value= 4.24 for 
law and code; 3.63 for rales climate) than prior research studies (mean value=3.60 for 
law and code; 3.20 for rules climate). Furthermore the mean value for the egoism 
climate was lower for the current research (mean value=1.70) than prior research 
studies (mean va!ue=2.30). These results suggest the possible tendency of 
manufacturing firms today to place even more emphasis on law and code and rales, 
and less emphasis on egoism.
The descriptive statistics also indicated that, on average, the employee 
respondents’  levels of trust in manufacturing firms were higher than supplier 
respondents’  levels of trust in customer firms. Contrarily, supplier respondents 
perceived higher levels of commitment and innovation than employee respondents in
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
131
their respective relationships with the customer firms and manufacturing firms under 
evaluation.
The relationships among ethical work climates, trust, commitment and 
innovation were examined from the perspectives of both the suppliers (the 
traditionally “external” stakeholders) and the employees (the traditionally “internal” 
stakeholders) in hypotheses tests numbered I to 8 in the study.
The results of the hypotheses testing indicated that suppliers had higher levels 
of trust in customer firms with higher levels of perceived principle-cosmopolitan (law 
and code) corporate work climate (H5a); they also had lower levels of trust in 
customer firms with higher levels of perceived egoism (instrumental) corporate work 
climate. However, no statistically significant relationship was found to exist between 
levels of trust in customer firms and the existence of commitment and innovation in 
suppliers (H7).
This finding could be further illuminated by one supplier respondent’s comment 
on items under the trust measure. “Questions like #30 part 2 assume we are not too 
bright. If one is not clear on what the customer wants, and does not ‘hesitate’  then 
one does not stay in business very long.” This comment is in accord with the study’s 
finding that only the principle-cosmopolitan (law and code) corporate work climate 
had a positive effect on the levels of trust of suppliers. Suppliers’  level of trust
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
132
seemed to be based on the fulfillment of explicit contracts. As such, a customer firm 
characterized by a principled-cosmopolitan corporate work climate and based their 
ethical reasoning on law or professional standards, seemed to provide better assurance 
of meeting the explicit expectations or the fulfillment of explicit contracts of 
suppliers.
In contrast, employees had higher levels of trust in manufacturing firms with 
higher levels of perceived benevolence (caring) corporate work climate (H2). In 
addition, levels of trust In manufacturing firms were a statistically significant 
predictor of the existence of the commitment and innovation in employees of the 
manufacturing firms (H8).
Implication of this Study
Ruppel & Harrington (2000) used a top-down view of management attitudes 
and philosophy to examine the ethics- trust- commitment and innovation linkage 
proposed by Hosmer (1994). This study used a bottom -up approach, i.e., the 
perspective of employees rather than management, to test Hosmer’s (1994) 
propositions. This study also extended prior research by examining Hosmer’s 
(1994) propositions based on both the supplier’s perspective and the employee’s 
perspective, and by examining trust at the organizational level rather than at the 
individual level. Examining trust at the organizational level is Important since,
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
133
according to Zaheer et al. (1998), exchange processes and outcomes are influenced 
primarily by trust at the organizational level.
The results of the study imply that the perceived benevolence corporate work 
climate has a strong, statistically significant relationship to employees’  levels of trust 
in employer firms. The level of trust, in turn, relates positively to the existence of 
commitment and innovation in employees. Internet-enhanced manufacturing 
companies, therefore, should establish benevolence corporate work climates rather 
than principled climates as found In the study to enhance the commitment and 
innovativeness of their employees.
Inter-organizational trust placed by customer firms on the supplier firms was 
found to have a significant effect on the performance outcomes of the supplier firms 
(Zaheer, et al, 1998). In this study, however, when the relationship was examined 
from the perspective of suppliers, inter-organizational trust did not have a statistically 
significant influence on the existence of commitment and innovation in suppliers. 
Limitation of this Study
The study employed the 26-item ethical work climate questionnaire developed 
and tested by Victor and Cullen (1987, 1988). However, although the study was able 
to tap the five ethical work climate types identified in Victor and Cullen’s 1988 study, 
the study was unable to tap climate types defined by cosmopolitan loci of analysis
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
134
within the benevolence and egoism ethical criteria. Since suppliers were perceived 
traditionally as “external” stakeholders, and since the only climate type defined by the 
cosmopolitan loci of analysis - the principled-cosmopolitan work climate - had a 
positive effect on trust in the study, it was important to examine whether other climate 
types defined by the cosmopolitan loci of analysis also related to levels of trust of 
suppliers.
Yeung, Brockbank, and Ulrich’s (1991) competing value instrument was used 
in the study to measure commitment and innovation. This measure is a perceptual 
measure and, hence, subjective in nature. Subjective measures may involve biases 
such as leniency error, halo error or similarity errors. (Meyer et al., 1990; Murphy & 
Balzer, 1989; Somers & Birnbaum, 1998 cited in Siders et al., 2001) Therefore, 
objective measures that are able to provide the number and degree of innovation taken 
place within or between organizations would have been preferable for establishing or 
refuting a link between commitment and innovation with other variables, such as trust 
and ethical climates.
The cross-sectional research design of the study limits the validity of the 
implied causal relationships among variables examined in the study. As such, 
conducting a longitudinal study, in the future, would provide more insights into the 
relationships examined in this study.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
135
Recommendations for Future Research
The results of the study indicated that there was a statistically significant 
positive relationship between the principle-cosmopolitan corporate work climate and 
trust of the supplier respondents. The study, however, did not examine whether other 
climate types defined by the cosmopolitan loci of analysis also had. an influence on 
trust from suppliers’  perspective. As mentioned earlier, traditionally, suppliers were 
perceived as “external” stakeholders; therefore, it would be interesting to know, 
whether customer firms that base their ethical decisions on external sources of ethical 
reasoning, such as the benevolence-cosmopolitan corporate work climate and 
egoism-cosmopolitan corporate work climate, influence the levels of trust of 
“external” stakeholders.
Victor, Cullen, and colleagues (1993) revised a 36-item ethical climate 
questionnaire. In their study (1993), the social responsibility 
(benevolence-cosmopolitan) climate and the efficiency (egoism-cosmopolitan) 
climate appeared to be discrete climates. Therefore, future research could use the 
36-item ethical climate questionnaire to examine the relationships among ethical 
climate, trust, commitment, and innovation from the perspective of suppliers.
In addition, although no relationship was found between the level of trust and level of 
commitment and innovation for the supplier respondents, future research should
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
136
examine whether interpersonal trust vested by individual boundary spanning 
employees in their counterparts in . customer organizations, as opposed to 
inter-organizational trust examined in this study, influences the level of commitment 
and innovation of boundary spanning employees acting as suppliers from their 
counterparts’  perspectives. According to Van De Ven (1976), the greater the 
boundary spanners’  mutual trust of one another, “the greater their predisposition to 
help one another out by committing their organizations to an IR” (p.31).
Conclusions
Hosmer’s (1994) proposition that an ethical approach to management would 
generate the trust required to bring about the commitment and innovative efforts of 
stakeholders both outside and inside an organization, which are pivotal to success in a 
global economy, was partially supported. Based on the responses of the 108 
boundary spanning employees sampled from the 240 U.S. Internet-enhanced 
manufacturing companies, this study found that suppliers have greater trust in 
customer firms with higher levels of perceived principle-cosmopolitan corporate work 
climate. On the other hand, suppliers have less trust in customer firms with higher 
levels of perceived egoism climate. However, the level of trust in customer firms 
was not related to the existence of commitment and innovation in suppliers.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
137
Contrarily, employees have greater trust in employing firms with a higher level 
of perceived benevolence corporate work climate. Level of trust in employing firms 
was a statistically significant predictor of the existence of commitment and innovation 
in employees. Therefore, it is important for employing firms to establish a 
benevolence corporate work climate. Trust, which related positively with the 
benevolence corporate work climate, brought about the commitment and innovative 
efforts of employees. Trust matters more in intra-organizational relationships.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
1 3 8
APPENDIX A
PERMISSION LETTER TO USE SURVEY INSTRUMENT
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
139
From: "Bill McEvily" <bmcevily@andrew. crriu.edu>
To: "NSU-Manling" <manglilo@nova.edu>
References:  <002001c2bf90$acb60100$e8c834 89@Home>
Subject: Re: Measurement Instrument for Trust 
Date: Sun, 19 Jan 2003 14:37:33 -0500
Mang-Ling,
Yes, by all means. Feel free to use the survey instrument. As a general rule, 
survey instruments that have been published are free to be used provide that you 
cite the original work.
Best,
Bill
  Original Message ----- =20
From: NSU-Manling=2 0
To: bmcevilySandrew.emu.edu=20
Sent: Sunday, January 19, 2003 2:59 AM
Subject: Measurement Instrument for Trust
Dear Professor McEvily,
I am a Taiwanese student studying at Nova Southeastern University. I  am 
currently working on my dissertation entitled "Trust based collaboration in an 
Internet based world. "  As I  did my literature review, I  found an article written 
by you, professor Zaheer and professor Perrone entitled "Does Trust Matter? 
Exploring the Effects of Interorganizational and Interpersonal Trust on 
Performance" to be very beneficial to my research. I  would like to study the impact 
of ethical climate on trust at the macro level and the impact of trust at the 
macro level on innovativeness of the Internet based firms.
Would you please allow me to use the survey instrument adapted by 
you based on a measurement instrument created by Rempel et al.(1985). I  
will quote in mv dissertation the study conducted by you and professor 
Zaheer and professor Perrone. Thank you for your help!
Best Regards,
Mang-Ling Lo
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
140
APPENDIX B
COVER LETTER TO PROFESSIONALS
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
141
Mang-Ling Lo
16461 Racquet Club Rd 
Weston, FL 33326 
Tel (954)384-9445 
ext 14601 
mangl i  io@nova.edu
May 20, 2003 
Dear professional:
I am a doctoral student at Nova Southeastern University. The attached survey serves 
as data collection for my doctoral dissertation entitled “ Trust based collaboration in 
an Internet based world”. You are cordially invited to participate in this approved 
academic research.
The research aims at exploring the relationships between work climates, trust, 
commitment and innovation in the manufacturing industry. It is a multi-firm research 
project and the results will be analyzed at the industry level. You and your company 
will remain anonymous.
Your response to the survey is very important and valuable to the research. It will help 
me bridge the gap between academia and practice, and hence reach a conclusion that 
hopefully will benefit the manufacturing industry.
If you have any questions regarding this research, please contact me at my e-mail 
address manglilo@nova.edu. You can also contact Professor Frank Cavico, the chair 
of my doctoral committee at the Huizenga School of Nova Southeastern University, at 
his e-mail address cavico@nova.edu should you have further inquiry.
I thank you for your participation.
Very truly yours,
Mang-Ling Lo
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
142
APPENDIX C
SURVEY INSTRUMENT USED IN THE STUDY
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
143
Questionnaire format A
Dear Survey Respondent:
Thank you for lending me your time to fill out the questionnaire. The 
questionnaire contains four parts with a totai of 39 items. Your answers to these Items 
will be used as data collection for my doctoral dissertation. Please feel free to answer 
candidly, since the study asks for your current or prior  working experience (no need 
to indicate), arid that the result will be reported in aggregate only, not on an individual 
basis. You and the company under evaluation will be anonymous.
Thank you again fo r your help!
PART I: CORPORATE WORK CLIMATE 
Below are the statements about the overall work 
climate in the company where you currently, or  
previously,  worked (choose the one with longer  term 
of employment as the company for evaluation; no 
need to Indicate) in the same industry. Please answer 
the following in terms of how it really is, or was, in 
the company, not how you would prefer it to be.
Circle the appropriate number on the scale of ©(completely ® g fe h  » ^
^ "3 ** ** 2false) to 5 (completely true). Remember, “ fe j5 J5 H -8^  ssraaa ^
all your responses will remain anonymous. ^  I  1 ^  g-I .8 a a § |
^ 3  Essti L jjjjjjfU S  S  U
1. In this company, doing what is best for everyone is 
the major consideration.0 1 2 3 4 5
2. The most important concern Is the good of the 
people In the company as a whole.0 1 2 3 4 5
3. In this company, people’s concern is always 
what is best for the other person.012 3 4 5
4. In this company, people look out for each other’s good 0 1 2 3 4 5
5. In this company, it is expected that you will always 
do what is right for the customers and public.0 1 2 3 4 5
6. The most efficient way is always the right way in this 
company.0 1 2 3 4 5
7. In this company, each person is expected above all to 
work efficiently.0 1 2 3 4 5
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
144
PART I: Cont’d.
Please answer the following in terms of
how it really is, or was, in the company, not how you
would prefer it to be.
Completely False
Mostly False
Somewhat False
Somewhat True
M ostly True
Completely True
8. People are expected to comply with the law and 
professional standards over and above other 
consideration.0
'2 3 4 5
9. In this company, the law or ethical code of their 
profession is the major consideration.0 1 2 3 4 5
10. In this company, people are expected to strictly 
follow legal or professional standards.0 1 2 3 4 5
11. In this company, the first consideration is whether a 
decision violate any law.0 1 2 3 4 5
12. In this company, it is very important to follow the 
company’s rules and procedure.0 1 2 3 4 5
13. Everyone is expected to stick by company rules
and procedure.0 1 2 3 4 5
14. Successful people in the company go by the book. 0 1 2 3 4 5
15. People in this company strictly obey the company 
policies.0 1 2 3 4 5
16. In this company, people protect their own interests 
above all else.0 1 2 3 4 5
17. In this company, people are mostly out for 
themselves.0 1 2 3 4 5
18. There is no room for one’s own personal morals or 
ethics in this company.0 1 2 3 4 5
19. In this company, people are expected to do anything 
to further the company’s interests, regardless of the 
consequence.0 1 2 3 4 5
20. People in this company are concerned with the 
company’s interests—to the exclusion of all else.0 1 2 3 4 5
21. Work is considered substandard only when it hurts 
the company’s interest.012 3 4 5
22. The major responsibility of people in this company 
is to control cost.0 1 2 3 4 5
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
145
PART I: Cont’d.
Piease answer the following in terms of
how it really is, or was, in the company, not how you
would prefer it to be.
23. In this company, people are expected to follow their 0 
own personal and. moral beliefs.1  2 3 4 5
24. Each person in this company decides for 0 
himself or herself what is right and wrong.1  2 3 4 5
25. The most important concern in this company is 0 
each person’s own sense of right and wrong.1  2 3 4 5
26. In this company, people are guided by their own 0 
personal ethics1  2 3 4 5
PART II: TRUST
Below are the statements of how you, as the 
employee of the company, feel about the 
company under evaluation. Please indicate the 
extent to which you agree or disagree with each 
statement by circling the appropriate number on 
the scale of 1  (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly 
agree).
27. The company has always been evenhanded in its 
negotiation with us.1  2 3 4 5 6y
28. The company may use opportunities that arise to 
profit at our expense.1  2 3 4 5 6 7
29. Based on past experience, we cannot with 
complete confidence rely on the company to 
keep promises made to us.1  2 3 4 5 6 7
30. We are hesitant to transact business with the 
company when the specification is vague1  2 3 4 5 6 7M«S3
Me
2
nan
a
jZ ?
&m
b
1g
MS 3.%
Pi m
©
8 u
%
J B  ^  £
a  * 5 5  s—  ^  -gf e e
S
5
6M )<St I
2
•o©
Xis*f e ee
g
3 5
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
146
PART II: Coat’d.
Please indicate the extent to which you agree or 
disagree with each statement by circling the 
appropriate number on the scale of 1  (strongly 
disagree) to 7 (strongly agree).m
.2Q
a ®ss26 fi
.%a
&t mim
§5
XI
.£ ?
5 5sI r a
|  P “  1
& S d  £> 2
< <  & z.
£  615^ e s
1  1
» g  scMam
31. The company is trustworthy. 5
PART III: COMMITMENT AND INNOVATION
The following statements describe how you, as the
employee of the company, feel about your work Check either agree or disagree for
in relation to the company under evaluation. each statement
Please read each item and indicate whether you
agree or disagree with each statement.
32. The glue that holds my group together is 
commitment to innovation and development.□ Agree □ Disagree
There is an emphasis on being first with products
and services.
33. My group emphasizes growth through developing
new ideas. Generating new products or services is□ Agree □ Disagree
important.
PLEASE CONTINUE ON THE NEXT PAGE
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
147
PART !¥: DEMOGRAPGIC DATA
Please cheek each item listed below to provide the study with background 
information.
34. Gender: (check one): I am □  Male □  Female
35. Organizational form (check one):I work/ worked at
□  Head office of a manufacturing firm □  Branch of a manufacturing firm
□  Other _________________________________
36. The application of the Internet in job performance (check one): I use/used the 
Internet:
□  Yes □  No
37. Customer relationship: I am/was involved in the interaction with customer firms
□  Yes □  No
38. Tenure: I work/worked at the company for:
□  less than 1  year □  between 1-3 years □  between 4-6 years 
D  between 7-9 years D  more than 10 years
39. Job level: I am/was:
□  officer □  supervisor □  manager and above
Thank you very much fo r assisting me with my study!
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
148
Questionnaire format B
Dear Survey Respondent:
Thank you for lending me your time to fill out the questionnaire. The 
questionnaire contains four parts with a total of 39 items. Your answers to these items 
will be used as data collection for my doctoral dissertation. Please feel free to answer 
candidly, since the study asks for your current or prior  working experience (no need 
to indicate), and that the result will be reported in aggregate only, not on an individual 
basis. You and the company under evaluation will be anonymous.
Thank you again fo r your help!
PART I: CORPORATE WORK CLIMATE 
Below are the statements about the overall work 
climate in the company where you currently, or  
previously,  worked (choose the one with shoter  term 
of employment as the company for evaluation; no 
need to indicate) in the same industry. Please answer 
the following in terms of how it really is, or was, in 
the company, not how you would prefer it to be.
Circle the appropriate number on the scale of O(completely 
false) to 5 (completely true). Remember, 
all your responses will remain anonymous.
1. In this company, doing what is best for everyone is
the major consideration.0 1 2 3 4 5
2. The most important concern is the good of the 
people in the company as a whole.0 1 2 3 4 5
3. In this company, people’s concern Is always 
what is best for the other person.0 1 2 3 4 5
4. In this company, people look out for each other’s good 0 1 2 3 4 5
5. In this company, it is expected that you will always 
do what is right for the customers and public.0 1 2 3 4 5
6. The most efficient way is always the right way In this 
company.0 1 2 3 4 5
7. In this company, each person is expected above all to 
work efficiently.0 1 2 3 4 5« 8to
iS5< »
toMIsto
a, J S ?
S «©  SU 2MIs
©
S a< us
£
m©& >
3
< a
Hs
©< J
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
149
PART I: Cont’d.
Please answer the following in terms of
how it really is, or was, in the company, not how you
would prefer it to be.
Completely False
M ostly False
Somewhat False9
£
G Seg
1s©C O
M ostly True
Completely True
8. People are expected to comply with the law and 
professional standards over and above other 
consideration.0 1 2 3 4 5
9. In this company, the law or ethical code of their 
profession is the major consideration.0 1 2 3 4 5
10. In this company, people are expected to strictly
follow legal or professional standards.0 1 2 3 4 5
11. In this company, the first consideration is whether a 
decision violate any law.0 1 2 3 4 5
12. In this company, it is very important to follow the 
company’s rules and procedure.0 1 2 3 4 5
13. Everyone is expected to stick by company rules 
and procedure.0 1 2 3 4 5
14. Successful people in the company go by the book. 0 1 2 3 4 5
15. People in this company strictly obey the company 
policies.0 1 2 3 4 5
16. In this company, people protect their own interests 
above all else.0 1 2 3 4 5
17. In this company, people are mostly out for 
themselves.0 1 2 3 4 5
18. There is no room for one’s own personal morals or 
ethics in this company.0 1 2 3 4 5
19. In this company, people are expected to do anything 
to further the company’s interests, regardless of the 
consequence.0 ! 2 3 4 5
20. People in this company are concerned with the 
company’s interests—to the exclusion of all else.01 2 3 4 5
21. Work is considered substandard only when it hurts 
the company’s interest.0 1 2 3 4 5
22. The major responsibility of people in this company 
is to control cost.0 1 2 3 4 5
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
150
PART I; Cont’d.
Please answer the following in terms of J  « « §
how it really is, or was, in the company, not how you ^  ®  ^  g ^
would prefer it to be. -8 ^  J! jS £  ®
f  £  I  I  £  |
! !  I I |  Im m  S  U
23. In this company, people are expected to follow their 
own personal and moral beliefs.0 1 2 3 4 5
24. Each person in this company decides for 
himself or herself what is right and wrong.0 1 2 3 4 5
25. The most important concern in this company is 
each person’s own sense of right and wrong.0 1 2 3 4 5
26. In this company, people are guided by their own
personal ethics0 1 2 3 4 5
PART II: TRUST
Below are the statements of how you, as the 
employee of the company, feel about the 
company under evaluation. Please indicate the 
extent to which you agree or disagree with each 
statement by circling the appropriate number on 
the scale of 1  (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly 
agree).D C«.58e
D C52
6«
£
ft
Q
&
24 »
©es.3P
% ao
D U
035 1su
is>.MUjfc*
,i=
.BP
m“ S £mI
-Is*
2is©
"53
©B£
-rfsaim
27. The company has always been evenhanded in its
negotiation with us.
28. The company may use opportunities that arise to 
profit at our expense.
29. Based on past experience, we cannot with
complete confidence rely on the company to 
keep promises made to us.
30.We are hesitant to transact business with the 
company when the specification is vague
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
151
PART II- Cont’d.
Please indicate the extent to which you agree or 
disagree with each statement by circling the 
appropriate number on the scale of 1  (strongly 
disagree) to 7 (strongly agree).
31. The company is trustworthy. 1  2 3 4 5 6 7
PART III: COMMITMENT AND INNOVATION
The following statements describe how you, as the
employee of the company, feel about your work Check either agree or disagree for
in relation to the company under evaluation. each statement
Please read each item and indicate whether you
agree or disagree with each statement.
32. The glue that holds my group together is
commitment to innovation and development.□ Agree □  Disagree
There is an emphasis on being first with products
and services.
33. My group emphasizes growth through developing 
new Ideas. Generating new products or services is□ Agree □  Disagree
important.
PLEASE CONTINUE ON THE NEXT PAGEmm.2Q
"3 )eoea:ssm
D f i
.2P
■S 2 i f
■ 8t
8 P.2a
*I *
xs& D
S3 «  S3I
I  f
£» 2■ g  «I  o8U
%
"ma©
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
152
PART IV: DEMOGRAPGIC DATA
Please cheek each item listed below to provide the study with background 
information.
34. Gender: (check one): I am D  Male □  Female
35. Organizational form (check one): I work/ worked at
□  Head office of a manufacturing firm □  Branch of a manufacturing firm
□  Other _________________________________
36. The application of the Internet in job performance (check one): I use/used the 
Internet:
□  Yes □  No
37. Customer relationship: I am/was involved in the interaction with customer firms
□  Yes □  No
38. Tenure: I work/worked at the company for:
D  less than 1  year D  between 1  -3 years D  between 4-6 years
D  between 7-9 years D  more than 10 years
39. Job level: I am/was:
□  officer □  supervisor □  manager and above
Thank you very much fo r assisting me with my studyI
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
153
Questionnaire Format C 
Dear Survey Respondent:
Thank you for lending me your time to fill out the questionnaire. The 
questionnaire contains four parts with a total of 39 items. Your answers to these items 
will be used as data collection for my doctoral dissertation.. Please feel free to answer 
candidly, since the study asks for your opinion on your current or prior  working 
relationships with one of your customer firm (no need to indicate), and that the result 
will be reported in aggregate only, not on an individual basis. You and the company 
under evaluation will be anonymous.
Thank you again fo r your help!
PART I: CORPORATE WORK CLIMATE 
Below are the statements describing the overall work 
climate of the customer firm, which you currently, or  
previously,  associate, or associated with. Select one of your 
memorable long-term customer firm as the basis for 
evaluation (based on your own working history). Please 
answer the following in terms of how it really is, or was, in 
the company, not how you would prefer it to be.
Circle the appropriate number on the scale of O(complete!y 
false) to 5 (completely true). Remember, 
all your responses will remain anonymous.
1. In this customer firm, doing what is best for everyone is 
the major consideration.012 3 4 5
2. The most important concern is the good of the 
people in the company as a whole.0 1 2 3 4 5
3. In this customer firm, people’s concern is always 
what is best for the other person.0 1 2 3 4 5
4. In this customer firm, people look out for each other’s 
good.0 1 2 3 4 5
5. In this customer firm, It is expected that you will always 
do what is right for the customers and public.0 1 2 3 4 5
6. The most efficient way Is always the right way in this 
customer firm.0 1 2 3 4 5
7. In this customer firm, each person is expected above all 
to work efficiently.0 1 2 3 4 5©
■ f t 8 §
l* i e u  ^  M
« « « S  «■ g  fe A M■ a  j f c *  * *
|  S I  I
U §  c ®  ms
£
'Mm
©£
IS
"a
H
©u
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
154
PART I: Comfid.
Please answer the following in terms of
how it really is, or was, in the company, not how you
would prefer it to be.
Completely False
M ostly False
Somewhat False
Somewhat True
M ostly True
Completely True
8. People are expected to comply with the law and 
professional standards over and above other 
consideration.0 1 2 3 4 5
9. In this customer firm, the law or ethical code of their 
profession is the major consideration.0 1 2 3 4 5
10. In this customer firm, people are expected to strictly
follow legal or professional standards.0 1 2 3 4 5
11. In this customer firm, the first consideration is whether
a decision violate any law.0 1 2 3 4 5
12. In this customer firm, it is very important to follow the 
company’s rules and procedure.0 1 2 3 4 5
13. Everyone is expected to stick by company rules
and procedure.0 1 2 3 4 5
14. Successful people in the company go by the book. 0 1 2 3 4 5
15. People in this customer firm strictly obey the company 
policies.0 1 2 3 4 5
16. In this company, people protect their own interests 
above all else.0 1 2 3 4 5
17. In this customer firm, people are mostly out for 
themselves.0 1 2 3 4 5
18. There is no room for one’s own personal morals or 
ethics in this company.0 1 2 3 4 5
19. In this customer firm, people are expected to do 
anything to further the company’s interests, regardless 
of the consequence.0 1 2 3 4 5
20. People in this customer firm are concerned with the 
company’s interests—to the exclusion of all else.0 1 2 3 4 5
21. Work is considered substandard only when It hurts 
the company’s interest.0 1 2 3 4 5
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
155
PART I: Cont’d.
Please answer the following In terms of J1 «
«* ~S S3 U
how it really is, or was, in the company, not how you ^  ^  ^
Xa"  " 3  - ( j  S
would prefer it to be. |  fe ^  ^  ^ 4s#
’e, ^  |  ^  "aST W - 4 a s J  STS  §  g  g  §  sr®  m e o «  ®U ^  cc sc
22. The major responsibility of people in this company 
is to control cost.0 1 2 3 4 5
23. In this customer firm, people are expected to follow 
their own personal and moral beliefs.0 1 2 3 4 5
24. Each person in this company decides for 
himself or herself what is right and wrong.0 1 2 3 4 5
25. The most important concern in this company Is 
each person’s own sense of right and wrong.0 1 2 3 4 5
26. In this company, people are guided by their own 
personal ethics0 1 2 3 4 5
PART II: TRUST
Below are the statements of how you, as the
supplier of the company, feel about the £
customer firm under evaluation. Please indicate the « m£ «
extent to which you agree or disagree with each § § J >
statement by circling the appropriate number on «f p
the scale of 1  (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly fi ^  g  ^  ^
agree). m |  jj
I 1 s ®  • “InO
* §
« *
2& e
§ 55
27. The customer firm has always been evenhanded 
In its negotiation with us.1  2 3 4 5 6 7
28. The customer firm may use opportunities that 
arise to profit at our expense.1  2 3 4 5 6 7
29. Based on past experience, we cannot with
complete confidence rely on the customer firm to 
keep promises made to us.I 2 3 4 5 6 7
30.We are hesitant to transact business with the 
customer firm when the specification is vague1  2 3 4 5 6 7
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
156
PART II: Cont’d.
Please indicate the extent to which you agree or 
disagree with each statement by circling the 
appropriate number on the scale of 1  (strongly 
disagree) to 7 (strongly agree).2
81!«m
p
I  i*
£» " S
6D  i?
1 1M )
5
5 3,ab f i3*  fI
*
M  'g3  k SM
M )5 
©
6i/i
31. The company is trustworthy. 1
PART III: COMMITMENT AND INNOVATION
The following statements describe how you, as the
supplier of the company, feel about your work Check either agree or disagree for
in relation to the company under evaluation. each statement
Please read each item and indicate whether you
agree or disagree with each statement.
32. The glue that holds my group together is
commitment to innovation and development.□ Agree □  Disagree
There is an emphasis on being first with products
and services.
33. My group emphasizes growth through developing 
new ideas. Generating new products or services is□ Agree □  Disagree
important.
PLEASE CONTINUE ON THE N EXT PAGE
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
157
PART IV: DEMOGRAPGIC DATA
Please check each item listed below to provide the study with background 
information.
34. Gender: (check one): 1  am D  Male D  Female
35. Organizational form (check one): 1  work/ worked at
□  Head office of a manufacturing firm Q  Branch of a manufacturing firm
□  Other _________________________________
36. The application of the Internet in job performance (check one): I use/used the 
Internet:
□  Yes □  N o.
37. Customer relationship: I am/was involved in the interaction with customer firms
□  Yes □  No
38. Tenure: I work/worked at the company for:
□  less than 1  year □  between 1  -3 years □  between 4-6 years
□  between 7-9 years □  more than 10 years
39. Job level: I am/was:
D  officer □  supervisor D  manager and above
Thank you very much fo r assisting me with my study  /
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
158
Questionnaire Format D 
Dear Survey Respondent:
Thank you for lending me your time to fill out the questionnaire. The 
questionnaire contains four parts with a total of 39 items. Your answers to these items 
will be used as data collection for my doctoral dissertation. Please feel free to answer 
candidly, since the study asks for your opinion on your current or prior  working 
relationships with one of your customer firm (no need to indicate), and that the result 
will be reported in aggregate only, not on an individual basis. You and the company 
under evaluation will be anonymous.
Thank you again fo r your help!
PART I: CORPORATE WORK CLIMATE 
Below are the statements describing the overall work 
climate of the customer firm, which you currently, or  
previously,  associate, or associated with. Select one of your 
memorable short-term customer firm as the basis for 
evaluation (based on your own working history). Please 
answer the following in terms of how it really is, or was, in 
the company, not how you would prefer it to be.
Circle the appropriate number on the scale of G(completely 
false) to 5 (completely true). Remember, 
all your responses will remain anonymous.
1. In this customer firm, doing what is best for everyone is
the major consideration.0 1 2 3 4 5
2. The most important concern Is the good of the 
people in the company as a whole.0 1 2 3 4 5
3. In this customer firm, people’s concern is always 
what is best for the other person.0 1 23 4 5
4. In this customer firm, people look out for each other’s 
good.0 1 2 3 4 5
5. In this customer firm, it is expected that you will always 
do what is right for the customers and public.0 1 2 3 4 5
6. The most efficient way is always the right way in this 
customer firm..0 1 2 3 4 5
7. In this customer firm, each person is expected above all 
to work efficiently.0 1 2 3 4 5“ S
“ S.fed
"a
SoU§
$&
«to&xa
’ •M 1mos
§ CDa >
5H
I
S
©m£
"8• t o *
a
S©U
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
159
PART I: Cont’d.
Please answer the following in terms of
how it really is, or was, in the company, not how you
would prefer it to be.
Completely False
M ostly False
Somewhat False
Somewhat True&
o
Completely True
8. People are expected to comply with the law and 
professional standards over and above other 
consideration.0 1 2 3 4 5
9. In this customer firm, the law or ethical code of their 
profession is the major consideration.0 1 2 3 4 5
10. In this customer firm, people are expected to strictly 
follow legal or professional standards.0 1 2 3 4 5
11. In this customer firm, the first consideration is whether 
a decision violate any law.0 1 2 3 4 5
12. In this customer firm, it is very important to follow the 
company’s rules and procedure.0 1 2 3 4 5
13. Everyone is expected to stick by company rules 
and procedure.0 1 2 3 4 5
14. Successful people in the company go by the book. 0 1 2 3 4 5
15. People in this customer firm strictly obey the company 
policies.0 1 2 3 4 5
16. In this company, people protect their own interests 
above all else.0 1 2 3 4 5
17. In this customer firm, people are mostly out for 
themselves.0 1 2 3 4 5
18. There is no room for one’s own personal morals or 
ethics in this company.0 1 2 3 4 5
19. In this customer firm, people are expected to do
anything to further the company’s interests, regardless 
of the consequence.0 1 2 3 4 5
20. People in this customer firm are concerned with the 
company’s interests—to the exclusion of all else.0 1 2 3 4 5
21. Work is considered substandard only when it hurts 
the company’s interest.0 1 2 3 4 5
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
160
PART 1: Cont’d.
Please answer the following in terms of J
how it really is, or was5  in the company, not how yon ^
IS"M
fta 
©would prefer it to be.4 >msoee sfe£3H! ► >e sA
1Iib "a
osomaOoa©U
22. The major responsibility of people in this company 
is to control cost.0 1 2 3 4 5
23. In this customer firm, people are expected to follow 
their own personal and moral beliefs.0 1 2 3 4 5
24. Each person In this company decides for 
himself or herself what is right and wrong.0 1 2 3 4 5
25. The most important concern In this company is 
each person’s own sense of right and wrong.0 1 2 3 4 5
26. In this company, people are guided by their own
personal ethics0 1 2 3 4 5
PART II: TRUST
Below are the statements of how you, as the 
supplier of the company, feel about the 
customer firm under evaluation. Please indicate the 
extent to which you agree or disagree with each 
statement by circling the appropriate number on 
the scale of 1  (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly 
agree).os
&
&W )
uo
6D
s
is*
rSma*  “
£ &
s  &£ 5  m as&___&
■s
sIf
'mss
a
27. The customer firm has always been evenhanded 
in its negotiation with us.
28. The customer firm may use opportunities that 
arise to profit at our expense.1  2 3 4 5 6 7
29. Based on past experience, we cannot with 
complete confidence rely on the customer firm ■  
keep promises made to us.2 3 4 5 6 7
30.We are hesitant to transact business with the 
customer firm when the specification is vague1  2 3 4 5 6 7
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
161
PART II: Coat’d.
Please indicate the extent to which you agree or 
disagree with each statement by circling the 
appropriate number on the scale of 1  (strongly 
disagree) to 7 (strongly agree).4 >  M«  egI*  ^© £ ■
Q
MSQ
mP
3?
g
■ 8
J L£M
eg.a
P
.aW )3
_50__«xs
« Nvs 3m1 1 %  1 
5  5  f  <
M laIo 5
31. The company is trustworthy.
PART III: COMMITMENT AND INNOVATION
The following statements describe how you, as the
supplier of the company, feel about your work Check either agree or disagree for
in relation to the company under evaluation. each statement
Please read each item and indicate whether you
agree or disagree with each statement.
32. The glue that holds my group together is
commitment to innovation and development.□ Agree □  Disagree
There is an emphasis on being first with products
and services.
33. My group emphasizes growth through developing 
new ideas. Generating new products or services is□ Agree □  Disagree
important.
PLEASE CONTINUE ON THE NEXT PAGE
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
1 6 2
PART IV: DEMOGRAPGIC DATA
Please check each item listed below to provide the study with background 
information.
34. Gender: (check one): I am D  Male D  Female
35. Organizational form (check one):I work/ worked at
□  Head office of a manufacturing firm D  Branch of a manufacturing firm
□  Other _________________________________
36. The application of the Internet in job performance (check one): I use/used the 
Internet:
□  Yes □  No
37. Customer relationship: I am/was involved in the interaction with customer firms
□  Yes □  No
38. Tenure: I work/worked at the company for:
□  less than 1  year D  between 1-3 years D  between 4-6 years
□  between 7-9 years □  more than 10 years
39. Job level: I am/was:
□  officer D  supervisor D  manager and above
Thank you very much fo r assisting me with my study!
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
163
APPENDIX E
SPSS OUTPUT OF RELIABILITY ANALYSIS
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
'■Factof. -AnaI'y.sis
Cospuftal flies
H i
<3082 1  .-000 . w
<3003 - 1.000 •  .734
a m 1.000 .659
C R 3Q  5 1.000 ■ .705
mm 1.000 .551
C H 007- 1.000 .745
C ® C «  . S  .000 .833
C K H L i.'o o o .730
ocio 1,000. .137
O K U !  ,000 .568
0 0 2 1.000 .785
.0(013 ■  1.000 .784
ck h S.000 .800
CTCI5 . 1.000 .790
0 0 6 1.000 .705-
0017 1.000 .724
c^cfs .  S.000 .682
C3ES9 1.000 .698
d o o 1.000 .652
OC21 1.000 .641
CK22 1.000 .439
0 0 3 S . < M » .548
0 0 4 ! .000 .772
0 0 5 i.O O O .679 •
Extraction 8cl hod: ‘Principal-OwiKmcnt Analysis.
Scree Plot
10
«d0
* 1 5S *S3«O S
t3 o.
III S 3  15 .  17 19 2 1
•Component N u m b e r;fo.-8^si
23 25
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission
Com ponent1
28.500
3.388
2.233• t > |i.  .  1.511
51.4/461.201
7.8958.776
9.706
10.69411. 5311 2.475
13.467
14.419
15.  386
16 3?I
17.329
18.299
19.270
20.2402 1.222
22.  167
23.  161
24.  117
258.868E-G2
26 7.698E-0?Totalln.L t i a 1  Eigenvalue
%  of Varianc
Extraction Method: Princi32.691 
13.03!
S. 589  
5.812
5.671 
4.621 
3.442 
2.985 
2.716
2.671  
2.043 
1.826 
1.797  
1.613  
1.483  
1.429 
1.267  
1.151 
1.038
.924  
.853 
.643 
.618 
.451.
.341 
.296
pal Component Analysis.Cumulative %'Total Variance Explained
Extraction S u m s of Squared fnariRotat ion S u m s
ofVariance Cumulative %» of Variance Cumulative %.500  
3.388  
2.233  
1.511  
1.474  
1.20132.691
13.031
'8.589
5.812
5.671
4.62132.691
45.722
54.310
60.123
65.793
70.4144.21*
4.158
3.244
2.648
2.130
1.91416209 ■16.209
15991 32.200
1 2475 44.675
1 0187 54.862
8191 63.052
7361 70.4i4
o f th e  copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
166
Com ponent Matrix*
C W C I 7
C W C 0 9
0 0 4
01016
C W C 0 1
C W C I 4
0002
C W G 0 3
G W C I 5
C W C 1 0
C W C 0 8c w a i
C W C 1 2
C W C I 1
C W C 1 8
C W C 1 9
C W C 1 3
C W C 2 6
0 0 3
0 0 4  
C W C 2 5  
C W C 2 0  
002 
C W C 0 7  
C W C 0 6
0 0 5-.750  
.749  
.733 
-.732 
.724 
.713 
.708 
.706  
.705 
.693  
.672 
-.637  
.610  
.586  
-.556 
-. 535 
.522  
.2)6 
.376 
.174 
.321 
-.276  
-.124  
.199  
.377.33!
.267
.  -.177 
.270  
-2.912E-02 
.296 
-.262  
-2.664E-02  
.244 
.303 
.410 
23! 
543 
348 
454 
382 
604 
557 
454 
473 
398 
411 
320 
.345  
.365  
J 7 LC nm nonen
.121
.607E-02
.0050-02
.246 
.173 
.502E-02 
.212 
.105 
.123 
-.104 
.4570-02 
.318 
.6250-02 
.  .231 
.9260-02
•4.260E-G2
..365
.586
.522
.482
.430
,401
.246
m q m l■ A,124 
.172 
.353E-02  
127 
1-02 
258 
197148'
252 
122 
.3430-02 
,0400-02 
,7570-02  
.289 
.7090-02  
.5810-02  
,0030-02 
231 
186 
362 
113 
350
459
215■7.5301
-.130
.312
2.5180-02
.39!
.420
.112
-.249
-3.747E-02
.254
-.273
.138
.208
.157
-.268
-.366
-.101
-.374
8.450E-02
..379
-.210
-.228
-6.082E-02
-5.457F.-02-02
186.124 
.162 
-.102 
5.7920-02 
-2.241E-02 
-.361 
-2.874E-03  
-3.682E-02  
-.290 
.359 
.440  
8.4330-02 
-.186 
.173 
.175 
-6.215E-02 
-.252 
6 .470E-02 
-5.8060-02 
-1.9190-02 
8.7440-02 
.136 
-.143  
-6.06IE-02 
3.7980:02  
.614
Exlracl 
a. 6ion M e  I  hod: Pr i 
components extncipal C om poncn! Analysis., 
ractecl.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
167
Rotated Component Matrix*
OKI 3  
C W C 1 2  
C W C 1 4  
C W C 1 5  
C W C 0 9  
CfC.ll 
C W C G 2
0 0 3  
C W C O I 
C W C 0 4  
CiC17 
C W C  1 6  
C W C 2 0  
C W C  19 
C W C 1 8  
C W C 2 1
0 0 4  
C W C 2 6  
C W C 2 5  
0 0 3  
C W C 0 5  
C W C 0 8  
C W C 1 0  
0TO7 
C W C 2 2  
C W C 0 6.  826 
.814 
.793 
.750 
.636  
.440 
5.35 IE-02 
.187 
.288 
.258 
-.192  
-.184  
-1.053E-02  
-7.204E-02 
-2.475E-02  
-.271 
-9 .I48E-03 
-.132 
5.016E-02 
8 .508F.-02  
-8.0250-02 
,526 
.613 
.10! 
4.770E-02 
.205-2
1.9 9 4,
5.4 5 3:
6.746b02 
02 
374 
444 
2 1!  
407 
832 
803 
710 
691 
590 
583 
02 
216 
331 
227 
-02 
-02 
316 
245 
267 
234 
8.535F.-02  
8.850E-02  
-.132  
J5L.5081
.0351-9.Q09E-02
-.107 
-.367 
-3.064B-04 
-.230 
.154 
-.171 
-.319 
-8.7S1E-02 
-.292 
.546 
.544 
.795 
.739 
.696  
.695 
-7.738E-02  
-.215 
.138 
-.145 
-.276  
-  i .587E-02  
-.17!
1 .175E-02  
,215-.337 
-3.8800-02 
-4.289E-03  
.157 
6.48IE-02 
5.I5SE-02 
.230 
•1 .553E-02  
.154  
.115 
-.175 
-3.658E-02  
-3.500E-02  
- 1.3031?- 02  
-.259 
-8.604E-02  
.869  
.805 
.719 
.671 
9.497E-02 
-6.568E-02  
7.207E-02  
8.306E-03  
5.207E-02 
-7.959E j iQ 2-7.225E-02'  
.150 
-4 .1 296-02
-9.4020-03 
.473 
.383 
.  146 
.153 
.179  
.103 
-9.654E-02  
-.161 
1.547E-02■  
-.234 
3.069E-03 
-.159 
-2.225E-02 
6.286E-02  
8.6510-02. 265
-3.637E-03
.731
.704
.647
.1300-02 
-. 126 
.7.15<4.2180-02
-7.275E-02 
2.2946-02  
.189 
9.007E-02  
.130 
7.039E-02 
-7.454E-02 
2.521E-02  
8.3796-02  
.119 
.213 
-.144 
1.4220-02 
9.376E-02  
.130 
-.183 
-9.7636-02  
8.744E-02 
4.392E-02  
-3.796E-02  
.849 
.636 
.676
E x  l ract i  on M e  I  hod:  P i' i  nc
Rola Ii on Meihod:  Var i  m a x  
a. Rouition convergedipal C om ponent Analysis,  
with Kaiser Normalization.
in7 iteratious.
R e d u c e d  w»n permission or me copyrW <  owner. Funner r e p r o d u c e  p r o v e d  wnnou, permission.
168
Component Transformation Matrix
C om ooncnl ..... 
ir
. 5S 12
‘  .610 -  .4015
.346_ _ _ _ _
■  '  .079
575 -.172 .461 -.5 3 7 .149 .342
-.021 .  144 .557 .679 -.062 .45!
4 .448 -.210 .293 .317 -.009 -.754
K -.239 .723 .447 -.333 -. 1 1 6 -.309
6.  328 .174 m .917
Extraction wcinoo: ri im-awi l
Rotation Method: Varimax with Kaiser Normalization.
Component Plot in Rotated Space
n o
.5
>nen t 2 0 0  
-.5
1 .0c f P ^ t
cw cfrw ci i  
c«:c25
22cwc20
n
c S # 'a
C W C  19
.50.0-.5 -.50.0.5!  .0
Component 1Com ponent 3
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission
169
Com ponent Score Coefficient Matrix
C W C 0 1
C W C 0 2
C W C 0 3
C W O M
C W C 0 5
C W C 0 6
C W C 0 7
C W C 0 8
C W C 0 9c w c io
CSC i  ]
0 0 2  
CTCI3 
0 0 4  
C W C I5  
C W C ]  6  
C O  7  
CSCI8 
0 0 9  
C W C 2 Q  
C W C 2 !  
C W C 2 2  
C W C 2 3  
C W C 2 4  
C V C 25 
O V C 2 6C oraponenl
019 
1 2 2  
081 
007 
212 
052 
059 
035 
1 3 .2  
i  14 
033 
253 
278 
269 
250 
039 
022
044 
037 
018 
042 
012
045 
047 
018 
035226
297
298 
209 
010 
055 
000 
049 
095 
160 
08S 
113 
119 
038 
078 
136 
128 
010 
046 
149 
067 
040 
003 
133 
061 
ILL070
000
025
009
058
086
020
008
150
040
052
006
090
126
130
257
249
346
248
004
017
006
169
060-.008 
-.008 
088 
034 
007
056
005 
025 
030
051
006 
013 
020
0 1 1
057 
072
012 
038
052 
015 
009 
049 
262 
380 
287 
332.018 
.021 
.035 
.077 
.491 
.061 
.013 
.385  
.182 
.336  
.154 
.073 
.123 
.235  
.  196  
.029 
.080 
.110 
.079 
.067 
.019 
.094 
.052 
.016 
.039 
.049.001
.040
.047
.056
.047
.328
.474
.053.
.044
.088
.030
.093
.087
.082
.117
.029
.006
.142
:070
.011
.025
.348
.058
.059
.137
.100
Fxtract ion M ethod: Principal C om ponent Analysis. 
Rotation Method: Vari.nax with Kaiser Normal izati on. 
Component Scores.
Component Score Covariance Matrix
Coraponenl r ~ ~ 2 ~ ~ T r ~ T ~ “ 5 6
1 \~Tsm~ | 2 . 138E- !6~ .000 .000 ~  Tc x kH
2 2.I38E-16 1.000 2.448E-16 - I. 102E-1 6 -2.51 IE-16 .000
3 .0(50 2.448E-16 .1.000 •1 .193B-1 6 .000 ,000
4 .000 - I.1020-16 -1. TOE-1 6 1.000 .000 .000
5 .000 -2.51 IE-16 ,000 .000 1.000 .000
6 _  MU .000-1 •  Q0QJ U____ -JML. .000 _ L i M L
Extraction Method: Principal Com ponent Analysis. 
Rotation M ethod: Varimax with Kaiser Normalization. 
Component Scores.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
APPENDIX E
SPSS OUTPUT OF RELIABILITY ANALYSIS
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
171
RELIABILITY A N A L Y S IS  .  -  S C A L E  ( A  I  P  I I  A )
C orrelation Matrix
C W C I 3 C W C  12 C W C  i  4 C W C i 5
C W C  13 i.0000
C W C ! 2 .8200 i .0000
C W C M .6349 .6100 i .0000
C W C  1 5 .  5406 .600! .7225 1.0000
N  of Cases = 108.0
1  tern- total S ta tis tic s
Sea i  e Sea ie Corrected
Mean Variance I tem - Squa red Alpha
if it cm if Item Toial M ultiple i f 1lcm
D e Ictctl Deleted Correlat ion C orrelat ion Dc1eIcd
C W C ! 3 10.4167 6.8808 .7485 .  7030 .8411
C W C  12 10.4444 7.1090 .7687 .7072 .8376
C W C i 4 11.3796 5.9386 .7536 .6064 .8431
C W C 1 5 11.2870 6.6552 .7086 .5650 .8558 ■
Re i  i  a b i1 ity C oefficients 4 iIems
Alpha = .8785 Standardized stem alpha = .8835
******  Melhod 2 (covariance matrix) will be used for tins analysis ******
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
172
RELIABILITY A N A L Y S IS  -  S C A L E  ( A  I  P  I I  A )
C orrelation Matrix
C W C 0 2 C W C 0 3 C W C O I C W C 0 4
C W C 0 2 1.0000
C W C 0 3 .  6948 1.0000
C W C O I .7303 .6037 i.0000
C W C 04 .  5958 .6403 .5424 !.0000
N  of Cases - 105.0
I fern-total St a l i s t ics
Scale Sea 1  e Corrected
Mean Variance 1 1  em - Squa red
if  It cm i  f Itcm To t  a 1 M u  11  i  p 1 e
DeIe t ed De1 e t ed Co r r e !at ion C orrelaii on
O Y C 02 8.2190 8.94J9 .7876 .6449
C T C 03 8.8667 9.8282 .  7479 .  5698
C W C O I 8.0000 9.9038 .7194 .5591
C W C 04 8.3429 10.0736 .6686 .4635
Re!iabi i ily C oefficients 4  i  1  eras
Alpha = .874] Standardized i  tent alpha = .  8741
R elia b ility
******  Method 2 (covariance m atrix) will be used f o r .  t h i s  analysis ******Alpha 
i  f 1 1 etn  
D e 1eIed
:.8151 
.8322 
.8429 
.8625
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
R  ELIA B  I  L  [  T Y A  N  A  L  Y  S  I  S S C  A  L  E ( A  I P  H  A )
Correlat ion Matrix
C W C 0 8  C W C 10
C W C 08 I .0000
C W C IO  .7656 I.0000
N  of Cases = J07.0
I  tern-total Sl.ii is! ics
Scale Scale
M ean Variance
if 11cm  if Item .
De 1  e 1  cci Dele t  ed
C W C 0 8  4 , i  589 .9840
C W C 10 4.1589 .8519
Rc1ia b i1ily C oefficients ■  2 items
Alpha = .8660 StandardizedCorrected
Item- Squared Alpha
Total MulIipie if Item
Correlation ’  Correlation Deleted
.7656 .5861
.7656 .5861
i  tcm aIpha = .8672
R elia b ility
Method 2 (covariance matrix) w i1 1  be used for th is analysis ******
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
R E L I A B I L I T Y  A N A L Y S I S S C A L E  (A L  P  H A )
C orrciation Matrix
C W C 20 C W C  19 C W C  1 8 C W C 2 I
C W C 20 I .0000
C W C I  9 .  5494 1.0000
C W C I  8 .4149 .5249 i.0000
Q Y C 2 1 .  4462 ,5359 .528! i .0000
N  of Cases = 105.0
Item -total St at is tic s
Scale Scale Corrected
Mean Variance I tem- Squared Alpha
i  f i tem if It em Tota 1 M u  11i  p 1e if 11em
Dclcted Deleted Correia I  ion C orrelat ion D c 1 c t  cd
G Y C 20 5.6571 I i . 9005 .5668 .3427 .7714
C W C I9 5.9333 9.8705 .6660 .4510 .7194
C W C I8 5.6190 10.1035 .6010 .3692 .7542
C W C 2 1  5.4476 '  10.1919 .6213 .3887 .7427
ReSi ab ii  i  iy C oefficients .4 items
Alpha = .7984 Standardized item alpha = .  7999
R elia b ility  .
****** Method 2 (covariance matrix) w i iI be used for this ana lysis ******
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
175
R  E L I  A  B  I  L  I  T Y  ANAL Y  S  IS -  S  C  A  L  II (A L  P  H  A )
C o rre la t i o n  M a i  r i x
C W C 2 4 C W C 2 6 C W C 2 5 O Y C 23
C W C 2 4 1.0000
0 0 6 .6232 1.0000
C W C 25 .  4665 .4953 1.0000
C1C23 .4190 .  4364 .4523 1.00(30
N  of Cases = 108.0
Item- total Slat is!ics
Scale Sea le Corrected
Mean V a  riance 1  tem- Squared A1  plia
if I  tern i  f Item- Total M u  11  i  p1e if f1 e m
Deiet ed Dcleled Correlat ion Correlat ion D e  1  e t  c c l
C W C 24 7.6019 7.7746 .6285 .4343 .7193
CWC26 7.1944 8.1394 .  6566 .4576 .7052
C W C 2 5  7.8796 8.7424 .5786 .3368 .  7446
C W C 2 3  7.2407 8.8200 .  5249 .2808 .7706
Re liability  Coe f f i  c i  en t s 4 it eras
Alpha = .7830 Standardized i te m  a lp h a  = .7883
Reliability
****** M e I  hod 2 (covariance ma! r i  x) w ill  be used for this analysis  ******
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
176
R E L I A B I L IT Y  A N A L Y S I S  - S C A L E  (A L P H A )
Corrc i  a ti  on M aIr iK
T27 T28 T29 T30 T 31
T27 1.0000
T28 .5151 I .0000
T 29 .6056 .6723 1.0000
T30 .3000 .4879 .5347 1.0000
T 3 1 ..7267 .4544 .6406 .4056 J.0000
N  of Cases = 107.0
I lem-lolal Si at is!ic s
Scale Scale Corrected
M ean Variance I  tem- Squqred Alpha
j  f I £  cm if  I  lent Toiai M u  1i i p 1 e if I t em
Del c l ed Del c l ed C one!al ion Correlat ion DeIe f  ed
T27 17.7944 38.1649 .6510 .5874 .8185
T28 J8.5MO 34.7050 .6694 .  5008 .8135
T29 18.2336 32.2940. .7859 .6260 .  7783
T30 ' 18.7664 38.3317 .5247 .3374 .8523
T3I 17.0467 39.2714 .6871 .6042 .8135
5  i  I  e r a s
Standardized item alpha = ,8515
R e  liability
******  Method 2  (covariance matrix) will be used for this analysis ******R e 1iabi!i  ty Coefficients 
Alpha = .8476
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
RELIABILITY A N A L Y S IS  -  .SCALE (ALPHA)
CI32
CI33Correlat ion Matrix 
€02' CI33
1.0000
.4909 1.0000
of Cases 108.0
Item-total Statistics
Scale 
M ean 
i  f Item 
Deleted
CI32 
Cl 33.7870
.6296Scale 
Variance 
if Item 
Deleted
.1692
.2354Corrected 
Item- 
Total 
Correlat ion
.  4909 
.4909Squared
Multiple
Correlation
.2410
.2410
R e lia b ility  C oefficients 2 items
Alpha = .6525 Standardized item alpha =  .6585Alpha .  
if Item 
Deleted
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
178
REFERENCES
Andriopoulos, C. & Gotsi, M. (2002). Lessons from a creative culture. Design  
Management Journal,  57-63.
Barnard, C. I. (1938). The Functions of the Executive. Cambridge, MA: Harvard  
University Press.
Beauchamp, T. L. & Bowie, N.E. (1979). Ethical Theory and Business.  Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Boatright, J. R. (2002). Contractors as stakeholders: reconciling stakeholder theory 
with the nexus-of-contract firm. Journal o f Banking & Finance, 26(9),  
1837-1852.
Boverie, P. E. & Kroth, M. (2001). Transforming: The Five Keys to Achieving Trust,  
Commitment, and Passion in the Workplace.  Cambridge MA: Perseus Book.
Butler, J. K. (1991). Toward understanding and measuring conditions of trust: 
Evolution of a conditions of trust inventory. Journal o f Management,17,  
643-663.
DeGeorge, R. (1982). Business Ethics.  New York: Macmillan.
Drucker, P. (1985), Innovation and Entrepreneurship: Practices and Principles.  New 
York: Harper and Raw.
Drucker, P. (2000), Knowledge work. Executive Excellence,  17(4), 11-12.
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989). Agency theory. An assessment and review. Academy o f  
Management Review, 14: 5 7-74.
Fiol, C. M. (2001). Revisiting an identity-based view of sustainable competitive 
advantage. Journal o f Management, 27(6),  691-699.
Gabarro, J. J. (1978). The development of trust influence and expectations. In Athos, 
A. G. & Gabarro, J. J. (Eds.), Interpersonal behaviors: Communication and  
understanding in relationships:  290-303. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
179
Griffiths. M. R. & Lucas, J. R. (1996). Ethical Economics.  New York: St. Martin’s 
Press, Inc.
Hausman, D. M. (2002). Trustworthiness and self-interest. Journal o f Banking &  
Finance, 26(9),  1767-1783.
Healy, K. (2002). What’s new for culture in the new economy. The Journal o f Arts  
Management, Law, and Society, 32(2),  86-103.
Hofstede, G. (1984). The cultural relativity of the quality of life concept. Academy o f  
Management Review, 9,  389-398.
Hosmer, L. T (1987). The Ethics o f Management.  Homewood, IL: Irwin
Hosmer, L. T (1994). Strategic planning as if ethics mattered. Strategic Management  
Journal, 15,  17-34.
Hosmer, L.T. (1995). Trust: The connecting link between organizational theory and 
philosophical ethics. The Academy o f Management Review, 20 (2),  379-403.
Hosmer, L. T (1996). Research notes and communications: Response to ‘do good 
ethics always make for good business?’  Strategic Management Journal, 17(6),  
501.
Jones, T. M. (1995). Instrumental stakeholder theory: A synthesis of ethics and 
economics. Academy o f Management Review, 20(2),  404-437.
Kelly, K. (1999). New Rules for the New Economy: 10 Radical Strategies for a
Connected World.'Hsw  York: Penguin Books.
Koski, J. T. (2001). Reflections on information glut and other issues in knowledge 
productivity. Futures,  33, 483-495.
Levy, P. (1999). Collective Intelligence: Mankind’ s Emerging World in Cyberspace,  
Cambridge, MA: Perseus Book.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
180
Lukas, B. A. Hult, G . T. M., Ferrell, O.C. (1996). A theoretical perspective of the
antecedents and consequences of organizational learning in marketing channels. 
Journal o f Business Research, 36(3),  233-244.
March, J. G & Olsen, I. P. (1989). Rediscovering institutions: The organizational  
Basis o f Politics.  New York: Free Press.
Marshall, E. M. (2000). Building Trust at the Speed o f Change: The Power o f the  
Relationship-Based Corporation.  New York: AMACOM.
Pohjola, M. (2002). The new economy: Facts, impacts and policies, Economics and
Policy, 14, 133-144.
Porter, M. (2001). Strategy and the Internet, Harvard Business Review, 79(3),  62-78.
Reina, D. S., & Reina, M. L. (1999). Trust and Betrayal in the Workspace: Building  
Effective Relationships in your Organization.  San Francisco: Beirett-Koehler
Publisher, Inc.
Rowe. W. G, Barnes, l.G. (1998). Relationship marketing and sustained competitive 
advantage. J. Mark Focused Manage,  2,281-297.
Sims, R. L. & Keon, T. L. (1999). Determinants of ethical decision making: The 
relationship of the perceived organizational environment. Journal o f Business  
Ethics, 19,  393-401.
Spencer, H. (1886). The Factors o f Organic Evolution.  Reprinted in the Essays.!, 
389-466.
Sternberg, R. I. (1987). The Triangle o f Love: Intimacy, Passion, Commitment.  New 
York: Basic Books.
Victor B. & Cullen J.B. (1987). A theory and measure of ethical climate in
organizations. Research in Corporate Social Performance and Policy,  9, 51-71.
Victor B. & Cullen J.B. (1988). The organizational bases of ethical work climates. 
Administrative Science Quarterly,  35,101-125.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
1 8 1
Wilder, C. & Seat, J. (2001, July), The Trust Imperative— Collaborative business 
means a broader set of ethics that places a premium on trust relationship. 
Information Week  — Part three in a series, 34-42.
Wired. 1998. Encyclopedia of the New Economy. <http: hotwired, lycos.com /special 
/ene/>.31  May 2002. Originally published in Wired 6.01, January 1998.
Wolpert, J. D. (2002). Breaking Out of the Innovation Box. Harvard Business Review , 
80(8),  77-83.
Zaheer, A., McEvily, B., Perrone, V. (1998). Does trust matter? Exploring the effects 
of interorganizational and interpersonal trust on performance. Organization  
Science, 9(2),  141-159.
Zand, D. E. (1972). Trust and managerial problem solving. Administrative Science  
Quarterly, 17, 229-239.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
182
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Albert, S., & Whetten, D. A. (1985). Organizational Identity Research in  
Organizational Behavior  7 . Greenwich, CT: JAI Press: 263-295.
Anderson, E, & Weitz, B. (1992, February). The use of pledges to build and sustain 
commitment in distribution channels. Journal o f Marketing Research, 29,
18-34.
Andriopoulos, C. & Gotsi, M. (2002). Lessons from a creative culture. Design  
Management Journal, 13(2),  57-63.
Amichai-Hamburger Y. (2002). Internet and personality. Computers in Human  
Behavior, 18(1),  1-10.
Argandona, A. (1999). Sharing out in alliance: Trust and ethics. Journal o f Business  
Ethics, 21(2/3),  217-228.
Baker, W . E. (1994). Networking Smart: How to Build Relationships for Personal and  
Organizational Success.  New York: McGraw-Hill.
Barbara, S., Walter, A., Gemunden, H.G (2000). Bridging the gap between suppliers 
and customers through relationship promoters: Theoretical considerations and 
empirical results. The Journal o f Business & Industrial Marketing, 15(2/3),  
86-105.
Barnard, C. I. (1938). The Functions o f the Executive.  Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press
Beer, M. (1988). The critical path for change; keys to success and failure in six
companies. In: Kilmann, R. H., Covin, T. I. (eds.), Corporate Transformation  
(pp. 17-45). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Begue, L. (2002). Beliefs injustice and faith in people: Just world, religiosity and 
interpersonal trust. Personality and Individual Differences, 32,  375-382.
Bell, GG, Oppenheimer R.J, Bastien, A. (2002). Trust Deterioration in an
International Buyer-Supplier Relationship. Journal o f Business Ethics, 36,  
65-78.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
183
Boatright, j. R. (2002). Contractors as stakeholders: Reconciling stakeholder theory 
with the nexus-of-contract firm. Journal o f Banking & Finance, 26(9),  
1837-1852.
Boverie, P. E. & Kroth, M. (2001). Transforming: The Five Keys to Achieving Trust,  
Commitment, and Passion in the Workplace.  Cambridge Massachusetts: Perseus 
Book.
Brickerley, J.A, Smith C.W., Zimmerman J.L. (2002). Business Ethics and
Organizational Architecture. Journal o f Banking & Finance, 26(9),  1821-1835.
Brower, H. H., & Shrader, C. B. (2000). Moral reasoning and ethical climate:
Not-for-profit vs. for-profit boards of directors. Journal o f Business Ethics,
26(2), 147-167.
Burt, D. and Doyle, M., 1994. The American Keiretsu: A Strategic Weapon for Global
Competitiveness,  Irwin, Illinois: Business One
Butler, J. K. (1991). Toward understanding and measuring conditions of trust: 
Evolution of a conditions of trust inventory. Journal o f Management, 17,  
643-663.
Butler, J. K. (1995). Behaviors, trust, and goal achievement in a win-win negotiating
role play. Group & Organization Management. 20(4),  486(16).
Calantone, R. J., Cavusgil, S. T., Zhao, Y. (2002). Learning orientation, firm
innovation capability, and firm performance. Industrial Marketing Management,  
31, 515-524.
Camp, L. I. (2000). Trust and Risk in Internet Commerce.  Cambridge, Massachusetts: 
The MIT press.
Chami, R, Cosimano, T. F., Fullenkamp, C. (2002). Managing ethical risk: How 
investing in ethics adds value. Journal o f Banking & Finance, 26 (9),
1697-1718
Chami, R, & Fullenkamp, C. (2002). Trust and efficiency. Journal o f Banking &  
Finance, 26 (9),  1785-1809.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
184
Child, J. (2001). Trast-the fundamental bond in global collaboration. Organizational  
Dynamics, 29(4)  274-288.
Ciancutti, A.R., & Steding, T. L. (2001). Build on Trust: Gaming Competitive  
Advantage in Any Organization.  Illinois: Contemporary Books.
Carayannis, E. & Sagi, i. (2001). “New” vs. “old” economy: Insights on
competitiveness in the global IT industry. Technovation, 21(8),  501-514.
Cousins, P. D. (2002). A conceptual model for managing long-term
inter-organizational relationships. European Journal o f Purchasing & Supply  
Management, 8(2),  71-82.
Cullen, J. B., Victor, B., Bronson, J. W . (1993). The ethical climate questionnaire: An 
assessment of its development and validity. Psychological Reports, 73,  
667-674.
Dalton, D. R., & Metzger, M. B. (1992). Towards candor, cooperation, and privacy in 
applied business ethics. Business Ethics Quarterly, 2,  207-221.
Dalton, D. R., Wimbush, J. C., Daily, C. M. (1996). Candor, privacy, and “ legal 
immunity” in business ethics research: An empirical assessment of the 
randomized response technique (RRT). Business Ethics Quarterly, 6 (1),  87-99
Dalton, D. R., Daily, C. M., Wimbush, J. C. (1997). Collecting “sensitive” data in 
business ethics research: A case for the unmatched count technique (UCT). 
Journal o f Business Ethics, 16(10),  1049-1057.
Das, T. K. & Teng, B. (1998). Between trust and control: developing confidence in 
partner cooperation in alliances. Academy o f Management Review, 23(3),  
491-512.
DeGeorge, R. (1982). Business Ethics.  New York: Macmillan.
Demski, J., & Feltham, G . (1978) Economic incentives in budgetary control systems. 
Accounting Review, 53,  336-359.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
185
Drucker, P . (1985), Innovation and Entrepreneurship: Practices and Principles.  New 
York: Harper and Raw.
Drucker, P. (2000), Knowledge work. Executive Excellence, 17(4),  11-12.
Dutta, S. & .Siren, B (2001), Business transformation on the Internet: .Results from the 
2000 study, European Management Journal 19(5),  449-462.
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989), Agency theory. An assessment and review. Academy of 
Management Review, 14:57-74.
Fair Trade Comission (1993), A Survey on Japanese Automotive Industry,  Tokyo.
Fiol, C. M. (2001). Revisiting an identity-based view of sustainable competitive 
advantage. Journal o f Management, 27(6),  691-699.
Plaster, L. (2002). Small business increasingly using the Internet. Westchester County  
Business Journal; Purchase, 41(22),  16.
Fox, J.A., & Tracy, P. E. (1986). Randomized Response: A Methodfor Sensitive  
Surveys.  Beverly Hills, CA.: Sage Publications.
Freeman, R. (1984). Strategic Management: A Stakeholder Approach.  Marshfield, 
MA: Pitman.
Friedman, R. A., & Podolny, J. (1992). Differentiating of boundary spanning roles:
labor negotiations and implications for role conflict. Administrative Science  
Quarterly, 37,  28-47.
Gabarro, J. I. (1979). Socialization at the top: How CEOs and their subordinates 
evolve interpersonal contracts. Organizational Dynamics,  7, 2-58.
Galunic & Eisenhardt (2001). Architectural innovation and modular corporate forms. 
Academy o f Management Journal .44(6),  1229-1249.
Griffiths, M. R. & Lucas, J. R. (1996). Ethical Economics.  New York: St. Martin’s
Press, Inc.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
1 8 6
Gunst, R.F., & Mason, R.L. (1980). Regression analysis and its applications. New 
York: Marce Dekker, Inc.
Hardin, R. (1992). The street level epistemology of trust. Anal. Krit, 14,  152-176.
Harvey, M.E.O. (2001). The impact of organizational ethical climate and ethical 
ideology on the propensity to create budgetary slack and job satisfaction. 
Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Nova Southeastern University, Florida.
Hausman, D. M. (2002). Trustworthiness and self-interest. Journal o f Banking &  
Finance, 26(9),  1767-1783.
Healy, K. (2002). What’s new for culture in the new economy. The Journal o f Arts  
Management, Law, and Society, 32(2),  86-103.
Hosmer, L. T (1994). Strategic planning as if ethics mattered. Strategic Management
Journal, 15,  17-34.
Hosmer, L.T. (1995). Trust: The connecting link between organizational theory and 
philosophical ethics. The Academy o f Management Review,  20 (2), 379-403.
Imai, K. (1987). Kaizen.  NewYork: Random House.
Internet Software Consortium (2002), Internet Domain Survey, January 2002, 
available at: http://www.isc.org/ds/www-200201/index.html.
Jensen, M. C., & Mecking, W. H. (1976). Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, 
agency costs, and ownership structure. Journal o f Financial Economics,3,  
305-360.
Jones, A. J. I. (2002). On the concept of trust. Decision Support Systems, 33(3),  
225-232.
Jones, G R. & George, J. M. (1998). The experience and expectation of trust:
Implications for cooperation and teamwork. Academy o f Management Review,  
23 (3),  531-546.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
187
Jones, T. M, (1995). instrumental stakeholder theory: A synthesis of ethics and 
Economics. Academy o f Management Review, 20(2),  404-437.
Kandampully, J. & Duddy, R. (1999). Competitive advantage through anticipation, 
innovation and relationships. Management Decision, 37(1)  51-56.
Kim, J., & Michel!, P. (1999). Relationship marketing in Japan: The buyer-supplier 
relationships of four automakers. Journal o f Business & Industrial Marketing,  
14(2),  118-129.
Koski, J. T. (2001). Reflections on information glut and other issues in knowledge 
productivity. Futures, 33,  483-495.
Kramer, R. M. (1999). Trust and distrust in organizations: Emerging perspectives, 
enduring questions. Annual Review o f Psychology, 569(1).
Larkins, E.R., Humes, E.C., Garcha, B.S. (1997). The validity of the randomized 
response method in tax ethics research. Journal o f Applied Business Research,  
13(3),  25-32.
Lee, R. M., & Renzetti, C. M. (1990). The Problems of researching sensitive topics. 
American Behavioral Scientist, 33,5 10-528.
Levy, P. (1999). Collective Intelligence: Mankind’ s Emerging World in Cyberspace.  
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Perseus Book.
Lusch, R. F. & Brown, J. R. (1996, October). Interdependency, contracting, and 
relational behavior in . marketing channels. J  Mark, 60,  19-38.
Mahoney, C. (2001). Global supply chains. Executive Excellence, 18(8),  8-9.
Manev, I. M. and Stevenson, W. B. (1995), Balancing ties: Internal and external
contacts in the organization's extended network, Working Paper o f the Boston  
College,  Chestnut Hill, MA.
March, J. G. & Olsen, J. P. (1989). Rediscovering Institutions: The organizational  
Basis o f Politics.  New York: Free Press, 227.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
1 8 8
Marshall, E. M. (2000). Building Trust at the Speed o f Change: The Power o f the  
Relationship-Based Corporation.  New York: AMACOM.
McCoy, C. (1985). Management o f Values: The Ethical Difference in Corporate  
Policy and Performance.  Marshfield. MA: Pitman/.
Means, G E. & Faulkner, M. (2000). Strategic Innovation in the new economy. The 
Journal o f Business Strategy, 21(3),  25-29.
Meyer, I., Alien, N.J., Gellatly I. (1990). Affective and continuance commitment to 
organization: Evaluation of measures and analysis of concurrent and 
time-lagged relations. Journal o f Applied Psychology, 75,  710-720.
MacBeth, D., & Ferguson, N. (1994). Partnership Sourcing: an Integrated Supply  
Chain Approach,  London, UK: Pitman Publishing
Molm, L. D., Takahashi, N., Peterson, G (2000). Risk and trust in social exchange:
An experimental test of a classical proposition(l). The American Journal of  
Sociology 105(5),  1396-1427.
Moorman, C. Miner, A.S. (1998). Organizational Improvisation and organizational 
memory. Academy Management Review, 23(4),  698-723.
Morath, F. A., & Schmidt, A.P. (1999), Management of knowledge as interface
management: From exo-worlds to endo-worlds, in Jackson P. (Ed.) Virtual  
Working: Social and Organizational Dynamics.  New York: Routledge.
Mudambi, R & Helper, S. (1998). The Close but Adversarial Model of Supplier 
Relations in the U.S. Auto Industry. Strategic Management Journal, 19,  
775-792.
Murphy, K.R., & Balzer, W.K. (1989). Rater errors and rating accuracy. Journal o f  
Applied Psychology, 74,6 19-625.
Nijhof, A., Krabbendam, K., Looise, J.C. (2002). Innovation through exemptions: 
building upon the existing creativity of employees. Technovation, 22,  675-683.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
189
Norman, P.M. (2002). Knowledge acquisition, knowledge loss, and satisfaction in 
high technology alliance. Journal o f Business Research.
Nua Ltd. (2002). How many on Line, Available at:
http://www.nua.com/surveY/how many online/index.html
Nunnally, J. D. (1967). Psychometric theory. New York: McGraw-Hill Book
Nunnally, J.C. (1978). Psychometric theory. New York: McGraw-Hill Book.
Ozer, M. (2003). Process Implications of the use of the Internet in new product
development: a conceptual analysis, Industrial Marketing Management, 32(6),  
517-530.
Patterson, G.A. (1992). New Jersey says Sears advised excess car repairs. Wall Street  
Journal, 18,  p. A5.
Pohjola, M. (2002). The New Economy: facts, impacts and policies, Economics and  
Policy, 14  (2002) 133-144.
Porter, M. (2001). Strategy and the Internet, Harvard Business Review,  79(3), 62-78.
Randall, D.M., & Gibson, A. M. (1990). Methodology in Business Ethics Research: A  
Review and Critical Assessment, 9, 457-471.
Ratnasingam, P. (2001). Inter-Organizational trust in EDI adoption: The case of Ford 
Motor Company and PBR Limited in Australia. Internet Research: Electronic  
Networking Applications and Policy, 11(3),  261-268.
Reich, R.B. (1991). The work o f nations.  New York: Vintage Book.
Reina, D. S., & Reina, M. L. (1999). Trust and Betrayal in the Workspace: Building  
Effective Relationships in your Organization.  San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler 
Publisher, Inc.
Rempel, J. K. & Holmes, J.G (1986). “How do I trust thee?” Psychology Today,  
28-34.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
190
Rempel, J. K. & Holmes, J.G., Zanna, M. P. (1985). Trust in close relationships. 
Journal o f Personality and Social Psychology, 49, 95-112.
Report of the Committee for the Future of the Finnish Parliament, (Committee Report 
1/1997) on the Government Report on Future called Finland and the Future of 
Europe (Government Report 3/1996). Helsinki: Parliament of Finland.
Ring, P. S., & Van de Yen, A. H. (1994). Developmental process of cooperative 
interorganizational relationships, Academy o f Management, 19,  90-118.
Rogers, E.M. & Shoemaker, F.F. (1971). Communication o f Innovations.  New York: 
Free Press
Rousseau,D.M., Sitkin, S. B., Burt, R.S. & Camerer, C. (1998). Not so different after 
all: A cross-discipline view of trust. Academy o f Management Review,23(3),  
393-421.
Rowe. W. G, Bames, J.G. (1998). Relationship marketing and sustained competitive 
advantage. J. Mark Focused Manage, 2,  281-297.
Ruppel, C. P. & Harrington, S. J. (2000). The relationship of communication, ethical 
work climate, and trust to commitment and innovation. Journal o f Business
Ethics, 25,  313-328.
Ruyter, K.D., Moorman, L., Lemmink, J. (2001). Antecedents of commitment and 
trust in customer-suppiier relationships in high technology markets, Industrial  
Marketing Management, 30,  271-286.
Schoenbachler, D. D. & Gordon, G.L. (2002). Trust and customer willingness to 
provide information in database driven relationship marketing. Journal o f  
Interactive Marketing, 16(3),  2-16.
Schrodt, P. (2002). The relationship between organizational identification and
organizational culture: Employee perceptions of culture and identification in a 
retail sales organization. Communication Studies; 53(2),  189-202.
Sharraa, P. (2000). E-transformation basics: Key to the new economy. Strategy &  
Leadership, 28(4),  27-31.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
191
Sider, M. A., George, G., Dharwadkar, R. (2001). The relationship of internal and
external commitment foci to objective job performance measures. Academy o f  
Management Journal, 44(3),  570-579.
Siguaw, J. A., Baker, T. L., Simpson, R M. (2002). Preliminary evidence on the
composition of relational exchange and its outcomes: the distributor perspective. 
Journal o f Business Research,  5790.
Sims, R. L. & Keon, T. L. (1999). Determinants of Ethical Decision Making: The
Relationship of the Perceived Organizational Environment. Journal o f Business  
Ethics, 19,  393-401.
Singhapakdi, A., Karande, K., Rao, C. P. Vitell, S. J. (1999). How important are ethics 
and social responsibility? A multinational study of marketing professtionals. 
European Journal o f Marketing, 35(1/2),  133-152.
Small, M. W. & Dickie, L. (1999). A cinematograph of moral principles: critical 
values for contemporary business and society. The Journal o f Management  
Development, 13, (7),  628-638.
Smith, K. G., Carroll, S. J., Ashford, S. J. (1995). “Intra-and inter-organizational 
Cooperation: Toward a Research Agenda,” The Academy o f Management  
Review, 38(1),  7-23.
Somers, M. J., & Birnbaum, D. (1998). Work-related commitment and job
performance: It’s also the nature of performance that counts. Journal o f  
Organizational Behavior, 19,  621-634
Sonnenberg, F. K. (1994), Managing with a Conscience: How to Improve
Performance through Integrity, Trust, and Commitment.  Palatino: McGraw-Hill, 
Inc.
Stamper, C. L. & Johlke, M.C. (2003). The impact of perceived organizational support 
on the relationship between boundary spanner role stress and work outcomes. 
Journal o f Management, 29(4),  569-588.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
192
Steudel, H. and Desruile, P. (1992). Manufacturing in the nineties,  Van Nostrand 
Reinhold.
Svensson, G. (2001). Extending Trust and mutual trust in business relationships 
towards a synchronized trust chain in marketing channels. Management  
Decision, 39(6),  431-440.
Tether, B. S. (2002). Who co-operates for innovation, and why an empirical analysis. 
Research Policy, 31(6),  947-967.
Tompkin, P.K., & Cheney, G. (1985). Communication and unobtrusive control in  
contemporary organizations. In  R. D. McPhee and P. K. Tompkins (Eds.), 
Organizational communication: Traditional themes and new directions (pp. 
179-210). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Tushman, M. L. and Scanian, T. J. (1981), Boundary spanning individuals: Their role 
in information transfer and their antecedents. Academy o f Management Journal,  
24 (2),  289-305.
Victor B. & Cullen J.B. (1987). A theory and measure of ethical climate in
organizations. Research in Corporate Social Performance and Policy,  9, 51-71.
Victor B. & Cullen J.B. (1988). The organizational bases of ethical work climates. 
Administrative Science Quarterly,  33,101-125.
Werhane, P. H. (2000). Business ethics and the origins of contemporary capitalism: 
Economics and ethics in the work of Adam Smith and Herbert Spencer, Journal  
o f Business Ethics, 24(3),  185-198.
Wilder, C. & Soat, J. (2001, July), The trust imperative— collaborative business means 
a broader set of ethics that places a premium on trust relationship Information  
Week~?&fi  three in a series, 34-42.
Wimbush, J.C. (1991). Ethical Climates and Ethical Behavior. Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation, Virginia Institute and State University, Virginia
Wired. 1998. Encyclopedia of the New Economy, <http:hotwired.lycos.com/
special/ene/>. 31 May 2002. Originally published in Wired 6.01, January 1998.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
193
Wolpert, I. D. (2002). Breaking Out of the Innovation Box. Harvard Business Review,  
80(8),  77-83.
Wong, A. & Sohal, A. (2002). An examination of the relationship between trust, 
commitment and relationship quality. International Journal o f Retail &  
Distribution Mnagement, 30(1),  34-50.
Wu, W. & Lin, C. (2001). Business Research Methods.  Taipei: Hwatai Publisher, Inc.
Yeung, A.K.O., Brockbank, J.W., Ulrich, D. O. (1991). Organizational culture and 
human resource practices: An empirical assessment, in Woodman, R. W., & 
Pasmore, W . A. (eds.), Research in Organizational Change and  
Development, pp.59-81.Greenwich, CT: JAI Press Inc.
Zaheer, A., McEvily, B., Perrons, V . (1998). Does trust matter? Exploring the effects 
of interorganizational and interpersonal trust on performance. Organization  
Science,  9(2), 141-159.
Zaltman, GN., Duncan, R.B., Holbek, I. (1973). Innovations and Organization.  New
York: Wiley.
Zand, D. E. (1972). Trust and managerial problem solving. Administrative Science  
Quarterly, 17,  229-239.
Zhu, K. & Kraemer, K. L. (2002). E-commerce metrics for Net-enhanced
organizations: Assessing the value e-commerce to firm performance in the 
manufacturing sector. Information System Research, 13(3),  275-295
Zucker, L.G (1977). The Role of Institutionalization in Cultural Persistence, 
American Sociological Review, 42 ,726-743.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
