Journal of Relationship Marketing
ISSN: 1533-2667 (Print) 1533-2675 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/wjrm20
The Inﬂuence of Spirituality on Buyer Perception
Within Business-to-Business Marketing
Relationships: A Cross-Cultural Exploration and
Comparison
Rhetta L. Standifer, Kenneth R. Evans & Beibei Dong
To cite this article: Rhetta L. Standifer, Kenneth R. Evans & Beibei Dong (2010) The Inﬂuence of
Spirituality on Buyer Perception Within Business-to-Business Marketing Relationships: A Cross-
Cultural Exploration and Comparison, Journal of Relationship Marketing, 9:3, 132-160, DOI:
10.1080/15332667.2010.505458
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/15332667.2010.505458
Published online: 25 Aug 2010.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 381
View related articles 
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=wjrm20Journal of Relationship Marketing , 9:132–160, 2010
Copyright © Taylor & Francis Group, LLCISSN: 1533-2667 print / 1533-2675 online
DOI: 10.1080/15332667.2010.505458
The Inﬂuence of Spirituality on Buyer
Perception Within Business-to-Business
Marketing Relationships: A Cross-Cultural
Exploration and Comparison
RHETTA L. STANDIFER
Department of Management and Marketing, University of Wisconsin–Eau Claire,
Eau Claire, Wisconsin, USA
KENNETH R. EVANS
Michael F. Price College of Business, University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma, USA
BEIBEI DONG
Department of Marketing, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, USA
Within business-to-business relationship marketing, boundary-
spanning representatives play a crucial role in establishing andmaintaining positive relations between their organizations. Spiri-tuality, a workplace individual-level variable, is proposed to signiﬁ-cantly inﬂuence buyer representatives’ relationship formation withtheir seller counterparts, which subsequently affects the relation-ship development between organizations. Here we identify aspectsof spirituality within buyer representatives and present a conceptualframework that delineates the impact of spirituality upon individ-ual perceptions of relational constructs such as trust and commit-ment. Structural equation modeling analyses support the inclusionof spirituality as a relevant construct in relationship marketingresearch. In addition, because cultural differences are known toexist regarding the role of spirituality, the impact of spirituality
upon perception within relationship marketing is addressed with
data collected from both American and Chinese buying represen-tatives. The results indicate that spirituality is signiﬁcantly related to
The authors wish to recognize the University of Missouri-Columbia Center for Religions,
Professions and the Public for its support of this research.
Address correspondence to Rhetta L. Standifer, Department of Management and Market-
ing, College of Business, University of Wisconsin–Eau Claire, 467 Schneider Hall, Eau Claire,WI 54702. E-mail: standirl@uwec.edu
132Inﬂuence of Spirituality on Buyer Perception 133
perceptions about communication, commitment, and shared val-
ues for both sets of participants.
KEYWORDS business to business, relationship marketing,
spirituality
Since Jackson (1985) ﬁrst made the distinction between transaction mar-
keting and relationship marketing (RM) in business-to-business interactions,the idea of RM has increasingly become a topic of interest to marketersand researchers alike. RM is a social process between organizations; fre-quently, however, the primary (if not sole) contact between organizationsis in the form of the boundary-spanning buyers and sellers who interact
with each other on behalf of their organizations (Crosby, Evans, & Cowles,
1990; McKee, 2003). These individuals play a pivotal role in establishingtrust and commitment between organizations, building and maintaining thefoundation for a strong, successful business-to-business relationship. RM re-searchers have echoed this sentiment, noting that representatives from bothbuying and selling organizations are “key actors” building ties with theircounterparts (Swan & Nolan, 1985, p. 39).
Consequently, the personalities and values of the individuals who
establish and maintain these interpersonal relationships are worthy ofexamination. These employees develop social relationships that extend thecontractual nature of interorganizational interactions and strengthen interor-ganizational relationships through deeper, richer forms of trust than strictlytransactional agreements (Guenzi & Pelloni, 2004; Hakansson & Snehota,2000). In fact, Palmatier, Dant, Grewal, and Evans (2006) found therelational characteristics of the salesperson created a stronger link between acustomer’s judgment and outcomes than did the characteristics of the sellingﬁrm. Thus, RM representatives warrant further investigation. Speciﬁcally, theindividual-level constructs that inﬂuence employee perceptions with regardto established RM key constructs such as trust and commitment have yet tobe fully explored.
In this article, our focus is on one of these potential inﬂuencers in
an RM context—a buyer’s spirituality . As an individual difference variable,
spirituality has received considerable attention recently in the organizationalliterature, particularly as it relates to working relationships. As we discuss,spirituality affects a person’s perception of self, others, and relationships. Byextending the working relationships metaphor to interorganizational market-ing relationships, we explore how a buyer’s spirituality affects perceptionsof trust and commitment in marketing relationships and interactions withsellers. It is our contention that this individual characteristic may serve toexpand relationship marketers’ understanding of a vital antecedent to theformation of trust and commitment in marketing relationships.134 R. L. Standifer et al.
In addition to examining spirituality within an interorganizational mar-
keting relationship, this study also explores the effects of spirituality froma cross-cultural perspective. Much of the organizational research conductedon spirituality has been from a predominantly Western perspective and/orcontext (Ashmos & Duchon, 2000; Jurkiewicz & Giacalone, 2004; Marques,
Dhiman, & King, 2005; Milliman, Czaplewski, & Ferguson, 2003; Mitroff
& Denton, 1999). However, researchers now call for studies that explorewhether individual spirituality differences measured from a Western mind-set generalize to a non-Western culture (Beneﬁel, 2003; Piedmont & Leach,2002).
The purpose of this study is therefore twofold: ﬁrst, to present a con-
ceptual framework that delineates the impact of spirituality upon individualbuyer perceptions of relational constructs such as trust and commitment inmarketing relationships; and second, to compare this effect cross-culturally.To accomplish these objectives, we ﬁrst provide a brief overview of spiritual-ity research, noting in particular the literature on workplace spirituality. Next
we present a conceptual framework that outlines the theoretical relationshipof spirituality to trust and commitment as well as to other established con-structs in the extant RM literature likely inﬂuenced by spirituality, namelycommunication, shared values, and opportunism. Through path modelingwe evaluate our framework and determine the relevancy of spirituality asan RM construct. We offer results involving buyers from both America andChina that compare the role of spirituality across the two cultures, as wellas results of hierarchical regression analyses conducted to test for mediatingeffects. Finally, we summarize and reﬂect upon our ﬁndings and delineatetheir theoretical and managerial implications, as well as offer suggestions for
future research.
SPIRITUALITY RESEARCH
In the 20th century, William James and other psychological researchers re-
lated spirituality to a person’s character or disposition and linked it to thesubsequent actions of that person (Miller & Thoresen, 2003). Over time, thedistinction between religion and spirituality has been addressed, particularlyin Western cultures such as the United States (Koenig, McCullough, & Lar-son, 2001); this is evident in the psychological literature, in which the termspirituality is increasingly used to refer to the personal, subjective side of
religious experience (Hill & Pargament, 2003). Despite a growing body ofspirituality research, a generally accepted deﬁnition of the concept remainselusive (Gotsis & Kortezi, 2008). With that said, the elements of meaning-fulness, inner wholeness, and connectedness to others are common threadsthat have characterized researchers’ conceptualization of spirituality to date(King, 1997; Mitroff, 2003).Inﬂuence of Spirituality on Buyer Perception 135
Distinguishing Between Spirituality and Religion
When discussing spirituality, the role of religion and the extent to which it
is considered an independent construct from spirituality must be addressed.Miller and Thoresen (2003) provided an interesting analogy by saying thatthe ﬁeld of religion is to spirituality as the ﬁeld of medicine is to health.Some researchers (Delbecq, 1999; Hicks, 2003) believe spirituality to beintimately associated with religious-based faith traditions. In contrast, otherresearchers conceptualize spirituality as an independent construct separatefrom any religious context (Mitroff, 2003; Zinnebauer & Paragament, 2005).Gotsis and Kortezi (2008) described spirituality as a universally held viewnot tied to any one faith, a concept that supports an emphasis on valuesystems and community building yet retains an element of transcendence.In non-Western cultures, spirituality often represents a personal concern formoral well-being, whereas religion is indicative of beliefs or practices of aparticular faith or tradition (Ho & Ho, 2007; Paranjpe, 1988).
Our study aligns with the conceptualization of spirituality as a construct
distinctly separate from religion. Although we acknowledge the relatednessof spirituality and religion, we agree that spirituality is universal in its ori-entation and uncoupled from any one speciﬁc religious doctrine (Duchon& Ashmos Plowman, 2005; Gotsis & Kortezi, 2008). Ho and Ho (2007) be-lieve that spirituality is observable in a person’s work, and indeed a largebody of spirituality research is devoted to the topic of spirituality within the
workplace context, to which we now turn.
Workplace Spirituality
Hicks (2003) charted the interest in spirituality research within a workplace
context back to the 1980s. However, its presence as a construct in both theacademic and practitioner organizational behavior literatures has increasedsigniﬁcantly in recent years because of increased competition, downsizing,and the fact that work has become a primary source of community andidentity for workers (Cartwright & Cooper, 1997; Milliman et al., 2003; Shel-lenbarger, 2000). Regardless, workplace spirituality researchers note the lackof one established deﬁnition (Ashforth & Pratt, 2003; Tischler, Biberman, &McKeage, 2002). Gotsis and Kortezi (2008) found no dominant paradigmor prevailing framework within the workplace spirituality literature, citingMilliman et al.’s observations that as a construct spirituality is complex andmultifaceted. There is a call for additional research regarding the outcomes ofindividual-level spirituality in the workplace (Mohamed, Wisnieski, Askar, &Syed, 2004), and such individual-level outcomes are the focus of the present
study.
At the individual level, “workplace spirituality” entails the desire of peo-
ple to convey aspects of their being at work and to be engaged in work theyconsider meaningful (Kinjerski & Skrypnek, 2004). Kinjerski and Skrypnek136 R. L. Standifer et al.
described the phenomenon as a holistic experience in which individuals
share a sense of interconnectedness and an alignment between their valuesand actions. Neck and Milliman (1994) deﬁned workplace spirituality as both
the desire to ﬁnd meaning and purpose and the process of living out one’spersonal values.
Despite the lack of one agreed-upon conceptualization, key elements
of spirituality have emerged in the extant research that inform our concep-tualization of the construct. For instance, deKlerk (2005) focused on theaspect meaning , whereas Marques (2007), Milliman et al. (2003), and Mitroff
and Denton (1999) emphasized both a sense of meaning and connectednesswith others. With regard to interconnectedness and interactions with others,researchers have discussed the importance of mutuality, reciprocity, and pos-itive social relations (Kurth, 2003; Marques, 2006; Pfeffer, 2003). Duchon andAshmos Plowman (2005, p. 625), in their summary of the literature, identiﬁedwhat they called “three fundamental spiritual needs”: meaning, purpose, andbeing connected to others. Based on this summary and the previous litera-ture, we base our conceptualization of individual workplace spirituality onthese three fundamental aspects and deﬁne spirituality as the personal belief
in an inner life that seeks to ﬁnd meaning and purpose nurtured throughmeaningful work, to perform actions congruent to one’s personal values,and to promote a sense of connectedness or community within the contextof that work. In the section that follows, we provide further clariﬁcation ofthis construct and its primary aspects.
Aspects of Spirituality
As Dwyer, Schurr, and Oh (1987) noted, interpersonal relationships matter,and successful RM relies on the interpersonal give-and-take between buyerand seller representatives. How successful these interactions are depends inpart on individual perceptions and values. It is therefore prudent to identifyelements of these individuals’ spiritual perspectives that might affect trustbuilding and relationship strengthening. In this section, we delineate threesuch aspects of spirituality as conceptualized in this study: (a) the recog-nition of one’s inner life; (b) the desire for meaningful work; and (c) theimportance of benevolent, honest relationships with colleagues that stressinterconnectedness and trust building.
I
NNER LIFE
Ashmos and Duchon (2000) described inner life as a need within individuals
to understand and ﬁnd purpose and value in themselves. Within a work
context, it refers to ﬁnding ways to nourish one’s own inner life and useone’s abilities and positive traits to make a difference in a job and in inter-actions with others. Inner life speaks to the development and expression ofInﬂuence of Spirituality on Buyer Perception 137
one’s inner self at work (Ashmos & Duchon, 2000), reminiscent of the “self-
actualization” stage of Maslow’s (1943) hierarchy of needs. The desire forpurpose and the need to make a real contribution in order to enrich the innerlife can inﬂuence and possibly bolster relationship formation, as individualsstrive to exhibit that purpose through connectedness with others in the
course of their work. Furthermore, individuals with an awareness and appre-
ciation for such a connection (Kurth, 2003) are able to act in ways congruentwith that awareness, manifesting in increased trust, honesty, and reciprocity.
M
EANINGFUL WORK
The wish to perform meaningful work appears in the past organizational
literature as motivation and satisfaction; theories about intrinsic motivation,job design, and needs have promoted the idea of a work environment thatencourages and allows for meaningful work among employees. Meaningfulwork refers to the extent to which employees feel their actions at workare consequential, important, or purposeful; it represents how individualsinteract and function at work daily (Milliman et al., 2003). Employees whovalue meaningful work as a spiritual attribute experience long-term beneﬁtssuch as satisfaction. For example, Komala and Ganesh (2007) found thatindividual spirituality manifested at work increased intrinsic job satisfaction.
I
NTERCONNECTEDNESS WITHOTHERS
In addition to ﬁnding meaning and purpose with regard to one’s own life and
work, the basic desire to feel connected to others, to be part of a communityor team, is worth noting, particularly within the context of RM. A spiritual per-son seeks to create interconnectedness through communication with others;to form meaningful, positive, long-term relationships with individuals thatconstitute his or her network or community; and to promote mutual beneﬁtsfor relational partners of that community. In a way, this aspect is similar tostakeholder theory, in that it entails a perception that people involved in awork-related task (e.g., “stakeholders”) should be treated as valuable and asan “end” in and of themselves versus being perceived as strictly a means toan end (McKee, 2003). As such, we propose that relationship formation canbe enriched through this spiritual desire for interconnectedness.
In summary, spirituality researchers such as Ashmos and Duchon (2000)
and Milliman et al. (2003) have conceptualized spirituality as encompass-ing the three aspects just described. Furthermore, researchers have arguedthat, although multifaceted, spirituality is best described as a holistic ex-
perience (Kinjerski & Skrypnek, 2004). Hence, we conceptualize spiritu-
ality as a holistic concept containing the elements of inner life, mean-ingful work, and interconnectedness with others. We theorize that theseaspects of spirituality interact with one another, collectively deﬁning RM138 R. L. Standifer et al.
SpiritualityTrust
CommitmentShared
Values
Opportunism
CommunicationH1a
H1bH2aH2b
H2c 
FIGURE 1 Conceptual Model. H =hypothesis.
representatives’ spirituality, which in turn inﬂuences their perspective on
and subsequent approach to work-related interactions with others. In thenext section, we present our conceptual framework.
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
Figure 1 presents the conceptual model identifying the relationship of spiri-tuality to trust, commitment, and other relational antecedents. As illustratedin Figure 1, spirituality, communication, shared values, and opportunismare the antecedents of trust and commitment. Here we present a series ofhypotheses representing each relationship in the framework.
The Effect of Spirituality on Trust
Trust is the conﬁdence one party has in another party’s integrity and reliabilityand is an underpinning of collaboration (Flores & Solomon, 1998; Morgan& Hunt, 1994; Nicholson, Compeau, & Sethi, 2001; Wicks, Berman, & Jones,1999). Researchers often refer to trust as a global, unidimensional constructencompassing such things as emotions, values, and morals (Kasper-Fuehrer& Ashkanasy, 2001; Lewicki, Tomlinson, & Gillespie, 2006).
Trust is a well-established construct in the RM literature, as researchers
realize the importance trust plays in the relationship-building process (Mor-gan & Hunt, 1994). Similarly, researchers also note the role key individualsplay with regard to their beliefs and actions. In their overview of trust build-ing, Swan and Nolan (1985) described the importance of a representative’spersonality and behavior in facilitating and developing trust. Similarly, Doney
and Cannon (1997) found that trust in a ﬁrm’s salesperson has a positive ef-
fect on trust in the ﬁrm. In contrast, Lewicki et al. (2006) showed that adishonest representative might damage or jeopardize a trusting relationshipbetween organizations.Inﬂuence of Spirituality on Buyer Perception 139
Trust is dependent on individual perceptions of motives and inten-
tions. It is often operationalized as the extent to which one party can rely onanother to behave in a fashion that demonstrates a genuine interest in achiev-ing mutual gain (Ganesan, 1994; Kumar, Scheer, & Steenkamp, 1995; Nichol-son et al., 2001). Trust is contingent on the extent to which a person has
“trusting beliefs” (beliefs that others will be honest) and “trusting intentions”
(a willingness to depend on others; McKnight, Cummings, & Chervany, 1998;Nicholson et al., 2001).
If trust in interorganizational relationships is indeed affected by an indi-
vidual’s actions, it suggests that aspects of a person that mold basic views onintegrity, honesty, and reliability should inﬂuence that person’s perceptionsof trust. Spiritual people seek to nourish their inner life through engaging inmeaningful actions and by ﬁnding opportunities to express spiritual aspectsof their being (Ashmos & Duchon, 2000); thus, spirituality is manifested inan individual’s behavior through honesty and a respect for others. Therefore,a person’s degree of spirituality positively impacts the extent to which thatperson is likely to trust (Kurth, 2003; Marques, 2006). Spirituality inﬂuencesthe extent to which a person believes well in others, and this belief is ex-pressed through outcomes such as trust (Krishnakumar & Neck, 2002). Forthat reason, spirituality should strengthen a buyer’s trust, as he or she shouldbe inclined to believe in the integrity and goodwill of the organizationalcounterpart in a marketing relationship.
H1a: Higher levels of buyer spirituality will correspond to higher levels of
reported trust toward organizational partners in a marketing relationship.
The Effect of Spirituality on Commitment
Commitment is a pledge (implicit or explicit) of relational stability between
partners (Dwyer et al., 1987). The signiﬁcance of commitment is a commontheme in the organizational research on relationships. Researchers view com-mitment as a foundation of successful relationships and a key to achievingpositive outcomes for all parties (Berry & Parasuraman, 1991; Morgan & Hunt,1994; Stanko, Bonner, & Calantone, in press). According to Lehtonen (2006),successful collaborative relationships depend in part on partners’ attitudes;instead of self-seeking behavior, these individuals must exhibit mutual trust,commitment, and openness in the relationship. This illustrates the emotional
component of commitment and, just as with trust, means that individuals can
have an impact on the extent to which commitment occurs and continues.A spiritual person who values himself or herself by ﬁnding meaningful workthat is interconnected with others will seek and ultimately be more successfulin establishing long-term, committed relationships.
H1b: Higher levels of buyer spirituality will correspond to higher levels
of reported commitment to the marketing relationship.140 R. L. Standifer et al.
The Effect of Spirituality on Other Relational Antecedents
In addition to spirituality, we include three other relational antecedents found
by other RM researchers to affect trust and commitment: (a) communica-tion, (b) shared values, and (c) opportunism. We chose to include theseantecedents for a number of reasons. Most important, we expect a certainamount of convergent validity to exist among these three relational con-structs and the construct of spirituality. In other words, the basic tenets ofspirituality delineated previously relate well to the need for communication,a desire for shared values, and an avoidance of opportunism. In addition, wewish to extend the current spirituality research by examining this construct’simpact on variables already established as crucial to relationship formation.
C
OMMUNICATION
Communication is the formal and informal sharing of information among
parties (Morgan & Hunt, 1994), and the sharing of information within thecontext of interorganizational relationships should be meaningful and reli-able (J. A. Anderson & Narus, 1990; Crosby et al., 1990; Putnam & Poole,1987). Such communication commonly occurs between boundary-spanningbuyers and sellers charged with building and maintaining these relationships.
As mentioned previously, a basic tenet of spirituality is the desire for
interconnectedness between individuals and the people associated with theirwork, creating a sense of community. This suggests that a representative whoplaces an importance on spirituality and interconnectedness will be inclinedto engage in activities such as frequent, meaningful communication withpeople in that representative’s “work community.” For boundary-spanners
engaged in marketing relationships with other organizations, that community
extends to include their counterparts from other organizations.
Furthermore, in the continued effort to sustain and nourish the inner
life and to act in ways congruent with the sacred, spirituality promotes thedesire to be honest and to create mutual gains for all parties. Given this, it isreasonable to suggest that a buyer who places an importance on spiritualitywill value communication that is meaningful and honest and hence be moreinclined to engage in such meaningful communication.
H2a: Higher levels of buyer spirituality will correspond positively to buyer
perceptions of open communication within marketing relationships.
SHARED VALUES
Shared values refer to the fundamental beliefs and/or values partners have
in common with regard to goals, behaviors, and policies (Morgan & Hunt,1994; Nicholson et al., 2001). Researchers have found shared values to be anInﬂuence of Spirituality on Buyer Perception 141
inﬂuential component of both trust and commitment in relationships (Dwyer
et al., 1987; Palmatier et al., 2006). In the context of marketing relationships,this applies at both the organizational and the individual levels. In the case ofindividual boundary-spanners, shared values have been shown to increaselikeability (e.g., feelings of friendliness; the belief that a person is “nice”;
Doney & Cannon, 1997; Lewicki & Bunker, 1995).
Although spirituality in and of itself does not guarantee shared values
between individuals, it does increase the likelihood that a person will be-have in ways that promote shared values. For instance, because workers
who demonstrate higher levels of spirituality seek to experience feelingsof connectedness with others, this enhances their degree of mutuality andreciprocity (Marques, 2006), thereby increasing the potential to discover andcreate shared values with the other party.
H2b: Higher levels of buyer spirituality will correspond positively to
buyer perceptions of shared values with the seller.
OPPORTUNISM
In contrast to communication and shared values, opportunism has a negative
effect on relationships (Morgan & Hunt, 1994). Deﬁned as self-interest seek-ing with guile (Lee, Pae, & Wong, 2001; Williamson, 1975), opportunism is
associated with deceitful behavior such as misrepresentation, cheating, andmanipulation (E. Anderson, 1988; John, 1984; Lee et al., 2001). Past researchshows that a desire for mutual gains and cooperation and a long-term orien-tation to the relationship lead to less opportunistic behavior (Dwyer et al.,1987; Ganesan, 1994; Parvatiyar & Sheth, 2000). This suggests that a personwho places importance on spirituality is less likely to engage in behavior per-ceived as opportunistic; to do so would be to deny one’s inner life and thesacred. The aspects of spirituality that stress honesty, meaning, communitybuilding, and the desire to achieve collaborative beneﬁts over the long-termall work to diminish the likelihood of opportunistic behavior in marketingrelationships.
H2c: Opportunism will be negatively related to buyer spirituality.
Spirituality and Cross-Cultural Expectations
Past research investigating international contexts and individual differences(e.g., Hofstede, 2001) suggests that spirituality manifests differently across
cultures. Thus, we wished to examine the extent to which the Western con-
cept of spirituality generalizes to a culture recognized as distinctly differentfrom that of the United States. Based on previous ﬁndings (Hofstede, 2001),we determined China to be a suitable cultural counterpart for our study.142 R. L. Standifer et al.
The cultures of the United States and China differ, particularly on the
dimension of individualism versus collectivism. The extent to which a culturestresses individualism or collectivism would affect an individual’s spiritual-ity, given its emphasis upon community and the value of an individual’sinner life. The foundational assumption of individualistic cultures is that
individuals are independent from one another (Oyserman, Coon, & Kem-
melmeier, 2002). Individualistic cultures therefore stress independence, andties between people are usually loose (Hofstede, 2001). In contrast, the foun-dational assumption of collectivist cultures is that groups “bind and mutuallyobligate individuals” (Oyserman et al., 2002, p. 3). Collectivists tend to di-vide people into categories of in- and out-groups and stress an orientationtoward in-groups and away from out-groups (viewing most business partnersas outsiders; Oyserman, 1993; Triandis, 1989; Wang, 2007).
The United States is an individualistic culture; in fact, Hofstede (2001)
found individualism to be the highest scoring dimension for that culture. TheChinese culture is typically shown by researchers to be collectivist (Hofstede,2001; Huff & Kelley, 2003). Thus, relationships are perceived differently inthe Chinese mindset than in that of their U.S. counterparts; speciﬁcally, theChinese make distinctions between relationships involving in-group mem-bers (e.g., family and relatives) and out-group members (e.g., business part-ners) that are dissimilar from those of U.S. individuals. In their study ofChinese buyer and seller organizations, A. Wong, Tjosvold, and Yu (2005)found that Chinese partners prepared to exploit those considered out-groupmembers. Other researchers have also noted the tendency of collectivists tobe competitive and aggressive toward out-group members, such as mem-bers of other organizations (C. C. Chen, Peng, & Saparito, 2002; Triandis,
1990).
The way in which relationships form and develop may also be different
across these two cultures. Researchers have found established differences inthe manner in which Western and Chinese cultures create and conduct busi-ness relationships. In China, various types of “ties” categorize interpersonalrelationships. An “expressive tie” is formed only with family and personswithin a closed, intimate circle, whereas relationships with “outsiders” areknown as “instrumental ties” (Wang, 2007; Y. H. Wong & Chan, 1999). Mostinterorganizational buyer–seller interactions for business relationships areconsidered instrumental ties. Such classiﬁcation is not evident in Americanbusiness relationships.
The United States and China also differ in the extent to which they trust.
The United States is known as a “high-trust” culture, whereas China is a “low-trust” culture (Atuahene-Gima & Li, 2002; X-P. Chen & Chen, 2004). Finally,although religious beliefs tend to differ between the two cultures, spiritualawareness is present and recognized in both cultures. This is important,because we wish to use participants that allow for religious distinction yetstill permit us to test for the generalizability of spirituality.Inﬂuence of Spirituality on Buyer Perception 143
Hence, there is a fundamental difference between the two cultures with
regard to relationship formation and ongoing interaction among businesspartners. To test for these differences, we generate path analyses guided bythe aforementioned hypotheses for both U.S. and Chinese data samples. Thisallows comparative conclusions to be drawn between the resultant ﬁndings.
Relational Antecedents and Their Effect on Trust and Commitment
Although our interest lies in the impact of spirituality upon trust and commit-ment, we recognize the inﬂuence of other relational antecedents, includingcommunication, shared values, and opportunism, on marketing relationships.Thus, we include these three constructs in our model in order to provide amore comprehensive representation of the phenomenon. Because the effect
of these constructs on trust and commitment (and on one another) is well
established in the extant literature (J. A. Anderson & Narus, 1990; John, 1984;Morgan & Hunt, 1994; Nicholson et al., 2001; Palmatier et al., 2006; Parvatiyar& Sheth, 2000), we do not present formal hypotheses for these relationships.They are included in the testing of the conceptual model and summarizedin our overall results. Next we present our method of data collection and adescription of the included measures, followed by a report of the results.
METHODOLOGY
Data Collection
Our sample represents U.S. and Chinese buyer representatives actively in-
volved in marketing relationships on behalf of their organizations. U.S. par-ticipants were located using a commercially available list and asked to com-plete a mailed survey. Approximately 800 survey requests were mailed; atotal of 136 U.S. buyer representatives participated by completing the sur-vey. Thus, our response rate for U.S. participants was 17%. In China, thestudy was conducted using convenience samples. We collected data fromtwo sources: (a) graduate students of a large Chinese university’s ExecutiveMaster’s of Business Administration program, most of whom had had pre-vious buyer experience in various industries; and (b) buyer representativesworking in a variety of industries, such as banking, manufacturing, con-sulting, and telecommunication services. Overall, 104 Chinese participantscompleted the survey. A Chinese version of the survey was developed usingforward–backward translation techniques and reviewed for accuracy by na-tive speakers. The use of buyer representatives as participants for our studyis appropriate because of their intimate knowledge and personal experi-
ence in buyer–supplier marketing relationships. These buyer representatives
answered survey questions assessing their interactions with key sellers inspeciﬁc marketing relationships.144 R. L. Standifer et al.
MEASURES
The measures used in this study were all adaptations of existing measures
in the literature. (We provide sample items for each variable in the Ap-pendix.) Spirituality was measured using questions adapted from Ashmosand Duchon’s (2000) spirituality scale and questions regarding “sense ofcommunity” from a scale in Milliman et al. (2003). Questions targeted thethree spiritual aspects described previously. When necessary, the wordingof the questions was adapted to reﬂect the interorganizational nature of therelationships to which the participants would be referring.
Trust was measured using an adaptation of Morgan and Hunt’s (1994)
measure of interorganizational trust. Likewise, we assessed commitment us-
ing items from Morgan and Hunt’s measure for interorganizational relation-
ships. We derived our opportunistic behavior scale from John (1984). Com-munication and shared values were measured using scales from Sin, Tse,Yau, Lee, and Chow (2002). For all measures, we used a 6-point Likert-type scale to avoid neutral answers and anchored questions with strongly
disagree/strongly agree .
Analyses
The EQS for Windows program was used for analyses. To test our framework,
we used a two-stage data analysis approach as suggested by J. C. Andersonand Gerbing (1988). We ﬁrst conducted a conﬁrmatory factor analysis (CFA)to test measurement validity, followed by a structural path analysis to testour hypotheses. It should be noted that we performed the CFA with the U.S.data sample ﬁrst and then tested measurement invariance across the U.S. andChinese samples, which we discuss later in this section.
S
ECOND -ORDER CFA
We ﬁrst performed a second-order CFA using the U.S. data sample. Speciﬁ-
cally, in the CFA model, spirituality was examined as a second-order factor,whereas inner life, meaningful work, and community were included as ﬁrst-order factors. The elliptical reweighted least squares procedure was used,given the performance of this procedure with regard to normal and non-normal data and because an assumption of normality is rarely met withthese types of constructs (Mohr & Sohi, 1995; Sharma, Durvasula, & Dillon,1989; Zou & Cavusgil, 2002). The chi-square test was signiﬁcant, χ
2(387)
=614.885, p<.001. Because at least three problems have been identiﬁed
with the chi-square test (i.e., unknown power, inadequate measurement of
goodness of ﬁt, and sensitivity to sample size), additional model ﬁt indiceswere evaluated as recommended by Bagozzi and Yi (1988). The model ex-hibited a good ﬁt: comparative ﬁt index (CFI) =.956, Incremental Fit IndexInﬂuence of Spirituality on Buyer Perception 145
(IFI)=.956, Bentler-Bonett Normed Fit Index (BBNFI) =.950. The stan-
dardized factor loadings of all of the items were found to be positive, highin magnitude, and statistically signiﬁcant. These ﬁndings combined indicatedthat the internal structure of the CFA model was acceptable (J. C. Anderson& Gerbing, 1988).
M
EASUREMENT INVARIANCE
To ascertain that our measures were not culture bound, we examined
the cross-national equivalence of the measurement model. Two-group CFAwas performed to assess measurement invariance across the two samples(Bagozzi & Yi, 1988). The factor structure is speciﬁed as invariant acrossboth samples. At least one of the factor loadings across the two groupshas to be constrained to be equal (i.e., same values for one item loadingacross countries) to achieve partial factor structure equivalence (Netemeyer,Durvasula, & Lichtenstein, 1991). A chi-square difference test was performed
between the two-group model without constraints and the model with partial
constraints (six factor loadings were constrained to be equal). The chi-squaredifference between two models was 6.652 with 6 degrees of freedom ( nsat
p<.05): model without constraints, χ
2(774) =1,249.179; model with partial
constraints, χ2(780) =1,255.831. As the two models did not exhibit signiﬁ-
cant difference in terms of ﬁt, partial measurement invariance was achieved.Furthermore, our analysis revealed that the overall ﬁt of the model withpartial constraints yielded adequate ﬁt (CFI =.931, IFI =.932, BBNFI =
.923).
C
OMMON METHOD VARIANCE TEST
We performed Harman’s one-factor test to examine common method bias.
Because more than one single factor emerged from the factor analysis and nogeneral factor accounted for the majority of the covariance in the variables,common method bias did not appear to be an issue.
Testing Our Model for U.S. and Chinese Data Samples
Similar to the CFA process discussed earlier, we followed the multistep pro-cedure recommended by Bagozzi and Yi (1988) to assess the ﬁt of the pathmodel to the data. Factor scores were computed as a composite of their re-spective items, which is the most frequently used method to compute factorscores in the Journal of Marketing Research and Journal of Consumer Re-
search (Lastovicaka & Thamodaran, 1991). The path model was tested with
the U.S. data sample ﬁrst and then the Chinese sample. Table 1 presents thepath coefﬁcients and tvalues for all of the hypotheses.146 R. L. Standifer et al.
TABLE 1 Results of Path Analysis
U.S. Sample Chinese Sample
Path Model β t S/NS β t S/NS
Hypothesized Relationship
H1a Spirituality →Trust .103 1 .661 NS .265 1 .983 S
H1b Spirituality →Commitment .360 4 .306∗∗S .468 4 .507∗∗S
H2a Spirituality →Communication .494 6 .422∗∗S .565 6 .320∗∗S
H2b Spirituality →Shared Values .226 3 .015∗∗S .496 4 .511∗∗S
H2c Spirituality →Opportunism −.073 −0.775 NS −.008 −0.061 NS
Control Variables
Communication →Trust .276 3 .801∗∗−.052 −0.423
Communication →Commitment .102 1 .034 .110 1 .145
Shared Values →Trust .193 2 .743∗∗.224 1 .896
Shared Values →Commitment .219 2 .300∗.236 2 .562∗∗
Opportunism →Trust −.497 −8.931∗∗.047 0 .457
Opportunism →Commitment −.089 −.1.173 .049 0 .611
Communication →Shared Values .535 7 .137∗∗.085 0 .776
Communication →Opportunism −.325 −3.437∗∗.278 2 .199∗
χ2(df=2) 1.033a4.855b
Bentler-Bonett Normed Fit Index .997 .967
Comparative Fit Index 1 .000 0 .979
Incremental Fit Index 1 .003 0 .980
SRMR .011 .042
Notes: S=supported; NS =not supported; SRMR =standardized root-mean-square residual.
ap=.60.
bp=.088.
∗p<.05
∗∗p<.01
RESULTS
U.S. Sample Results
Maximum likelihood was used to estimate the path model. The chi-square
test was not signiﬁcant, χ2(2)=1.033, p>.05, indicating a good ﬁt. Addi-
tional model ﬁt indices also suggested a good ﬁt of the model (BBNFI =
.997, CFI =1.000, IFI =1.003, standardized root-mean-square residual
[SRMR] =.011; Bagozzi & Yi, 1988). These results combined indicated that
the path model provided an acceptable ﬁt and that the path coefﬁcients couldbe used to test the related research hypotheses. To do this, we examined thesign and signiﬁcance of the path coefﬁcients in the ﬁtted path model.
Our ﬁndings regarding the U.S. sample indicated no signiﬁcant positive
relationship between spirituality and trust, but a signiﬁcant positive relation-ship was found between spirituality and commitment ( β=.360, p<.05);
hence, H1b was supported and H1a was not. Our ﬁndings also indicated
signiﬁcant positive relationships between spirituality and communication(β=.494, p<.01) and spirituality and shared values ( β=.226, p<.05);
hence, H2a and H2b were also supported. A negative but nonsigniﬁcantInﬂuence of Spirituality on Buyer Perception 147
relationship between spirituality and opportunism was found ( β=− .073,
p>.05); hence, H2c was not supported.
Though the relationships among the relational antecedents and
trust/commitment were not formally hypothesized, they were included inthe analysis. Signiﬁcant positive relationships were found in the U.S. data be-
tween communication and trust ( β=.276, p<.05), shared values and trust
(β=.193, p<.05), shared values and communication ( β=.535, p<.01),
and shared values and commitment ( β=.219, p<.05). In addition, sig-
niﬁcant negative relationships existed between opportunism and trust ( β=
−.497, p<.05) and opportunism and communication ( β=− .325, p<.05);
however, no signiﬁcant relationship was found between opportunism andcommitment. With the exception of this last ﬁnding, these results are overallconsistent with previous conclusions in the extant literature.
Chinese Sample Results
The chi-square test was not signiﬁcant, χ2(2)=4.855, p>.05, indicating a
good ﬁt. The model ﬁt indices also indicated a good ﬁt (BBNFI =.967, CFI =
.979, IFI =.980, SRMR =.042; Bagozzi & Yi, 1988).
In contrast to the results for the U.S. sample, we did ﬁnd support for
the hypothesized positive relationship between spirituality and trust ( β=
.265, p<.05). Consistent with the U.S. results, we also found support for the
hypothesized positive relationship between spirituality and commitment ( β
=.468, p<.05); hence, both H1a and H1b were supported. Similarly, our
ﬁndings indicated signiﬁcant positive relationships between spirituality andcommunication ( β=.565, p<.01) and spirituality and shared values ( β=
.496, p<.01); hence, H2a and 2b were also supported. H2c (a negative
relationship between spirituality and opportunism) was not supported, butthe relationship was in the direction theorized.
Regarding the controlled effect of relational antecedents on trust and
commitment, the results for the Chinese sample were contrary to what theliterature would suggest. Overall, we found only two signiﬁcant links amongthose variables: a positive relationship between shared values and com-mitment ( β=.236, p<.05) and a positive (opposite of our expectation)
relationship between communication and opportunism ( β=.278, p<.05).
Furthermore, a surprising ﬁnding indicated positive (albeit not signiﬁcant)
relationships between opportunism and trust and between opportunism andcommitment for the Chinese sample. These ﬁndings run mostly counter towhat would be expected from the previous research and illustrate cross-cultural differences between the U.S. and Chinese participant groups.
In summary, for the U.S. data, we found support for three of the ﬁve
relationships hypothesized. Though we did not ﬁnd support for the effect ofspirituality on trust and opportunism, the relationship was in the directionhypothesized. For the Chinese data, we found support for four out of the148 R. L. Standifer et al.
ﬁve relationships hypothesized, with the exception of the spirituality–
opportunism link.
Mediating Analyses
Because the effect of spirituality on trust is one of the major focuses of ourcurrent study and we found signiﬁcant results for the Chinese sample but notfor the U.S. sample, additional analyses were performed to further explorethe possible mechanisms accounting for the mixed results. One potentialexplanation could be due to the different mediating mechanisms playedby relational antecedents such as communication, shared values, and op-portunism. Using hierarchical regression analyses, we tested the mediationeffects following the methodology delineated by Baron and Kenny (1986).A signiﬁcant relationship was ﬁrst established between spirituality and trustfor both samples. Then we conﬁrmed that signiﬁcant relationships existedbetween spirituality and the three relational variables in our model (shared
values, opportunism, and communication). Such was the case for the U.S.
data; however, for the Chinese data, only shared values and communicationhad a signiﬁcant relationship with trust. Finally, trust was regressed uponspirituality and each relational mediating variable that had met the prerequi-site conditions. Table 2 presents our results.
TABLE 2 Results of Hierarchical Regression Analyses
Path FR2B
U.S. data ( N=136)
Spirituality →Trust 36 .49∗∗∗.219 .677
Spirituality →Shared Values 41 .98∗∗∗.247 .652
Spirituality & Shared Values →Trust 35 .07∗∗.356 .339
.487
Spirituality →Opportunism 9 .15∗∗.066 −.482
Spirituality & Opportunism →Trust 80 .07∗∗∗.554 .455
−.461
Spirituality →Communication 39 .29∗∗∗.233 .514
Spirituality & Communication →Trust 44 .58∗∗.411 .312
.695
Chinese data ( N=104)
Spirituality →Trust 22 .56∗∗∗.192 .688
Spirituality →Shared Values 36 .80∗∗∗.286 .930
Spirituality & Shared Values →Trust 14 .66∗∗.244 .451
.244
Spirituality →Opportunism 1 .10 .012 .168
Spirituality →Communication 40 .07∗∗∗.303 .844
Spirituality & Communication →Trust 7 .72 .145 .609
−.089
Notes: Values are unstandardized coefﬁcients.
∗∗p≤.01,∗∗∗p≤.001.Inﬂuence of Spirituality on Buyer Perception 149
It is notable that the results of our path analyses and the previous me-
diating analyses differed somewhat with regard to the relationships betweenspirituality and trust and spirituality and opportunism in the U.S. sample.Typically, the results of path analyses and hierarchical regression analy-ses will be fairly consistent; however, because they use different estimation
methods, it is not unusual for differences in the results to appear. For ex-
ample, the tvalue of the relationship between spirituality and trust in the
path analysis was 1.661, which is very close to 1.96, the cutoff point for p<
.05. Thus, the signiﬁcant ﬁnding of the hierarchical regression analysis isunderstandable.
Our ﬁndings indicated that all three relational variables partially medi-
ated the link between spirituality and trust for the U.S. sample. In contrast,only shared values appeared to partially mediate the spirituality–trust rela-tionship for the Chinese sample.
DISCUSSION
In this study, we examined spirituality within the context of RM and studied
the impact of spirituality upon the perceptions of trust and commitment
within a cross-cultural context. Here we summarize our ﬁndings.
To begin, our study extends previous RM research by illustrating spir-
ituality’s effect on the perceptions and possible behaviors of buyers withinthese interorganizational contexts. For U.S. participants, spirituality was pos-itively and signiﬁcantly related to communication and shared values; therewas also a direct, signiﬁcant relationship to commitment, demonstrating therole spirituality plays in inﬂuencing the way in which buyers perceive theirinteractions with sellers. For Chinese buyers, spirituality appeared to have asimilar relationship to commitment, shared values, and communication as fortheir U.S. counterparts; hence, there were some similarities across cultureswith regard to spirituality.
However, although spirituality had a signiﬁcant, direct, and positive
effect on trust for Chinese participants, this effect was not signiﬁcant for U.S.participants in our path modeling analyses. Our mediating analyses providedfurther clariﬁcation of the nature of this difference. There appeared to be amore direct effect between spirituality and trust for our Chinese participantsthan for our U.S. participants. Speciﬁcally, for the U.S. sample, the effectbetween spirituality and trust was signiﬁcantly mediated by relational con-structs. A clear reason for this is not evident, but we suspect it has to do withcultural differences in the roles of religion versus spirituality. In the United
States, there is a history of separation of church and state, and that separation
extends in large part to the business world. This explains in part why theidea of workplace spirituality is a relatively new concept in the West andis hard for some Western managers to embrace. Spirituality affects trust in a150 R. L. Standifer et al.
more indirect way (as our model seems to indicate) through communication
in positive ways, creation of shared values, and resisting of opportunistic be-havior (as our mediating analyses would appear to suggest). The Chinese, incontrast, have a recent history of not acknowledging formalized religion, andyet theirs is a very spiritual culture with an emphasis on interconnectedness
and relationships. Thus, spirituality and trust could be perceived as inti-
mately entwined with each other, which also seems to be supported by ourresults.
Our analyses of relational antecedents, although not part of the formal
hypotheses, revealed some interesting cultural differences as well. Althoughsome relationships appeared to be similar between the two cultural samples(e.g., the signiﬁcant positive relationship between shared values and commit-ment), others were not (e.g., relationships between shared values and trustand between shared values and communication were signiﬁcant for U.S.participants but not for the Chinese). The ﬁndings regarding opportunismin the Chinese sample were both unexpected and interesting. Speciﬁcally, apositive (albeit not signiﬁcant) relationship was found between opportunism
and trust, and a positive and signiﬁcant relationship was found between
communication and opportunism.
These ﬁndings may be due to differences between the cultures as to
what constitutes actual “opportunism” in a business context. It should benoted that both U.S. and Chinese cultures consider opportunism to be neg-ative and a “violat[ion] of the norms of reciprocal relationships” (Lee et al.,2001, p. 51). However, what constitutes such opportunistic behavior mightdiffer between Western and Chinese cultures. Our measure for opportunismfocused on the alteration of facts and the extent to which promises are bro-
ken. According to our ﬁndings, U.S. participants consider these actions to be
negative, constituting the Western view of opportunism. In contrast, our Chi-nese participants appear to view these actions as reasonable during business
relationship building and maintenance.
This view of opportunism is evident within the social, economic, and
cultural systems of China. As members of a low-trust country, Chinese peo-ple usually do not feel a strong degree of trust and/or emotional attach-ment to people with whom they have instrumental ties, as they view such
ties as temporary and utilitarian based (Wang, 2007). This increases thechance of exploitation in business relationships with out-group members;in fact, the belief that business relations are essentially opportunistic is ev-ident in the ancient Chinese saying “Among 10 businesspeople, 9 of themare double-dealing.” Given this, there is an established perspective that busi-ness people expect to exploit their partners and to be exploited by theirpartners during the relationship formation process (A. Wong et al., 2005).This may explain why opportunism did not result in signiﬁcant negative out-comes in the Chinese sample. This represents an interesting area for futureresearch.Inﬂuence of Spirituality on Buyer Perception 151
Theoretical Implications
To study spirituality is to study an intangible, highly personal, very abstract
concept. That said, we believe spirituality can (and should) be studied inmuch the same way as other intangible concepts in organizational research,such as leadership and power. Theoretically, we consider spirituality fromanintegrative perspective, as delineated in Giacalone and Jurkiewicz (2003).
That is, we view spirituality as connected to the workplace, capable ofexhibiting causal relationships with other work-related constructs. Hence,we focus on potential outcomes generated by individual spirituality withinand upon workplace contexts.
This study provides a further glimpse into the individuals charged with
making marketing relationships successful. Speciﬁcally, our ﬁndings provideinsight into the buyer’s mindset and predisposition concerning spirituality,which indirectly affect relational constructs such as trust and commitment.Hence, our results suggest that spirituality has an impact on individual buyerbehavior in these relationships. This has implications for the way in whichthese buyers perceive and perform their work within marketing relationships.For instance, buyers who consider their work as a path toward a fulﬁllinginner life and meaningful purpose may put forth greater effort in relationshipbuilding than buyers who see their work only from a monetary perspective(i.e., an extrinsic motivator; Giacalone & Jurkiewicz, 2003).
The participants surveyed represented only buyers; because of this, we
cannot state deﬁnitively that their seller counterparts would provide iden-
tical responses. However, we do theorize that the effect of spirituality onseller representatives will be similar to the results we found with buyers.Both buyers and sellers are working within the same environmental context,experiencing similar boundary-spanning situational factors.
Our study also contributes through its cross-cultural nature. These results
support the idea of studying spirituality cross-culturally, given the similaritiesand differences in individual-level perceptions found between these twocultural samples. Likewise, we have demonstrated that relationships betweenestablished RM variables such as shared values and opportunism differ acrossthese cultures. As RM moves increasingly into a global context, it is importantto know how relationships among these RM variables might vary acrossglobal regions.
Managerial Implications
As stated previously, although organizations as a whole play an important
role in RM, it is primarily the boundary-spanning buyers and sellers who
form and maintain these relationships. It is crucial, therefore, that managersunderstand this and select these representatives with careful considerationof factors that inﬂuence the effectiveness of individuals in these roles. Our152 R. L. Standifer et al.
study demonstrates that the spirituality of buyers inﬂuences key constructs
in the relationship formation process. Some researchers have begun to usethe term spiritual activities to describe spiritually oriented behaviors and
mindsets. These activities include going beyond personal self-interest, act-ing with integrity, using spiritual resources to problem solve, and working
to build collaborative and mutually beneﬁcial partnerships (Emmons, 2000;
George, 2006; Giacalone & Jurkiewicz, 2003). Because of the nature of suchactivities, we suggest that their effect will be more inﬂuential in ongoing,long-term relationships than in single-transaction exchanges; however, weare not in a position to make a deﬁnitive statement to that effect at thispoint.
These results also have implications for the sellers who work as coun-
terparts to these buyers in marketing relationships. As suggested by Kurth(2003), individuals who have an awareness of and appreciation for the kindof connection possible with people who exhibit spiritual “cues” may actin ways that resonant with these individuals. By so doing, there are op-portunities for increased trust, honesty, and reciprocity. Other researchers(Lehtonen, 2006; Swan & Nolan, 1985) have also emphasized the effect arepresentative’s behavior and attitude can have on developing trust and suc-cessful collaborative relationships. To put it in this context, if sellers exhibitbehaviors and attitudes that are in line with those of their “spiritual” col-leagues, this should increase the likelihood of trust building and relationshipstrengthening. The spiritual activities mentioned earlier are examples of waysin which sellers can build a connection. Displaying openness and engagingin frequent, meaningful communication are other ways to create this link.For managers, this further supports the notion of encouraging long-term (vs.
transaction-based) relationships with organizational partners, to allow buy-
ers and sellers to initiate and demonstrate the kind of attitude and behaviorsindicative of this spiritual mindset.
Our ﬁndings also indicate that it would be useful to evaluate the extent
of prospective buyers and sellers’ spirituality along with other individual-level dimensions during the selection process. In fact, we feel our ﬁndingshave implications for managers in the process of recruiting, selecting, andmaintaining personnel in the roles of both buyer and seller. For example,companies may beneﬁt from keeping individuals in place rather than rotat-ing through different buyers/sellers in order for the individual-level effectof a person’s spiritual intelligence to be fully realized. Furthermore, man-agers may consider the extent to which potential hires for these positionsexhibit situational awareness, empathy, and self-awareness—characteristicsthat better equip a person to perceive and act on spiritual cues from others.Moreover, if spirituality does play a role in successful relationship formation,organizations might consider instigating policies that promote or sustain thespirituality of their employees in general and marketing representatives inparticular.Inﬂuence of Spirituality on Buyer Perception 153
Finally, our cross-cultural ﬁndings provide insight into similarities and
differences between U.S. and Chinese perceptions of spirituality and otherRM variables that might affect international RM efforts.
Limitations
The cross-sectional nature of the study limits our ability to capture the oc-currence of some of the constructs used in the study because of our inabilityto represent the possible changes in effects over time; thus, longitudinal re-search may be desired to delve deeper into relationship development andmaintenance. Furthermore, our framework focused on only one side’s per-spective (that of the buyer); future studies could seek to capture dyadicdata within speciﬁc marketing relationships. Qualitative data regarding thebuyer–seller relationship would help in demonstrating convergent validity.This research also relied on a single information source, and although sta-tistical methods were used to control for this potential problem, commonmethod bias is still possible.
Despite the cross-cultural nature of our study, we acknowledge that our
spirituality measure stemmed from a Western perspective. It would be in-teresting to conduct a similar study among U.S. and Chinese buyers/sellersusing a spirituality measure of Eastern orientation. In addition, some re-searchers have pointed out that Asian cultures stress modesty and humility,
which might affect the degree to which Chinese respondents attribute so-
cially desirable characteristics to themselves (Chiu & Yang, 1987; Ho & Ho,2007).
Directions for Future Research
There are a variety of ways in which future research can be extrapolatedfrom our results, particularly with regard to cross-cultural aspects. As men-tioned earlier, our study focused solely on the spiritual perspective of buyerrepresentatives, which is only one side of the dyad. Future work could at-tempt to match the spirituality of the buyer and seller. To what extent doesthe similarity (or dissimilarity) of the buyer and seller on the dimensions ofspirituality inﬂuence the relationship formation process? The cross-culturaleffects of both spirituality and RM in general also warrant more researchfrom a business-to-business perspective. For instance, our study did not tar-get buyer–seller relationships that consisted of international partners; how
might the differences we found between cultures manifest and/or impact
such relationships? Furthermore, can researchers better explain the differ-ence across cultures in the inﬂuence of spirituality by interjecting Hofstedeand/or other cross-cultural theoretical paradigms? In terms of generalizability,154 R. L. Standifer et al.
subsequent studies could attempt to extend our ﬁndings to other countries
as well. Finally, the difference found between the U.S. and China regardingopportunism is noteworthy and deserves further investigation.
Future research might explore the impact of spirituality within other
interorganizational relationships, such as strategic alliances. Often, interor-
ganizational management teams maintain and manage such alliances; how
might the spirituality of these team members affect team effectiveness or thealliance as a whole? The effect of employee “spiritual” behavior within otherstakeholder relationships also warrants further study. Subsequent researchmight also explore the relationship between spirituality and ethics in rela-tionships among organizations.
Conclusion
Individual RM representatives play a crucial role in establishing and main-taining successful marketing relationships. Because of this, it is importantto recognize and understand the impact of the individual-level aspects ofthese people. In our study, we identiﬁed one such aspect, spirituality, andexamined how it affects trust and commitment in marketing relationshipsas well as how it relates to other antecedents established in the RM litera-ture. We also conducted our study within a cross-cultural context in order toprovide insight into the similarities and differences of spirituality and otherrelational antecedents between distinctly different cultures. It is our hopethat our ﬁndings will generate further interest and examination of spiritualityin interorganizational relationships as well as stimulate future studies of thephenomenon from a cross-cultural perspective.
REFERENCES
Anderson, E. (1988). Transaction costs as determinants of opportunism in integrated
and independent sales forces. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization ,
9, 247–264.
Anderson, J. A., & Narus, J. A. (1990). A model of distribution ﬁrm and manufacturer
ﬁrm working partnerships. Journal of Marketing ,54(1), 42–58.
Anderson, J. C., & Gerbing, D. W. (1988). Structural modeling in practice: A re-
view and recommended two-step approach. Psychological Bulletin ,103, 411–
423.
Ashforth, B. E., & Pratt, M. G. (2003). Institutionalized spirituality: An oxymoron? In
R. A. Giacalone & C. L. Jurkiewicz (Eds.), Handbook of workplace spirituality
and organizational performance (pp. 93–107). New York: M. E. Sharpe.
Ashmos, D. P., & Duchon, D. (2000). Spirituality at work: A conceptualization and
measure. Journal of Management Inquiry ,9, 134–145.Inﬂuence of Spirituality on Buyer Perception 155
Atuahene-Gima, K., & Li, H. (2002). When does trust matter? Antecedents and con-
tingent effects of supervisee trust on performance in selling new products in
China and the United States. Journal of Marketing ,66(3), 61–81.
Bagozzi, R. P., & Yi, Y. (1988). On the evaluation of structural equation models.
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science ,16, 74–94.
Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator-mediator variable distinction
in social psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical consider-ations. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,51, 1173–1182.
Beneﬁel, M. (2003). Mapping the terrain of spirituality in organizations research.
Journal of Organizational Change Management ,16, 367–377.
Berry, L. L., & Parasuraman, A. (1991). Marketing services . New York: Free Press.
Cartwright, S., & Cooper, C. L. (1997). Managing workplace stress . Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Chen, C. C., Peng, M. W., & Saparito, P. A. (2002). Individualism, collectivism, and
opportunism: A cultural perspective on transaction cost economics. Journal of
Management ,28, 567–583.
Chen, X-P., & Chen, C. C. (2004). On the intricacies of the Chinese guanxi: A
process model of guanxi development. Asia Paciﬁc Journal of Management ,
21, 305–324.
Chiu, C. Y., & Yang, C. F. (1987). Chinese subjects’ dilemmas: Humility and cog-
nitive laziness as problems in using rating scales. Bulletin of the Hong Kong
Psychological Society ,18, 39–50.
Crosby, L. A., Evans, K. R., & Cowles, D. (1990). Relationship quality in services
selling: An interpersonal inﬂuence perspective. Journal of Marketing ,54(3),
68–81.
deKlerk, J. J. (2005). Spirituality, meaning in life, and work wellness: A research
agenda. International Journal of Organizational Analysis ,13, 64–88.
Delbecq, A. L. (1999). Christian spirituality and contemporary business leadership.
Journal of Organizational Change Management ,12, 345–349.
Doney, P. M., & Cannon, J. P. (1997). An examination of trust in buyer-seller rela-
tionships. Journal of Marketing ,61(2), 35–51.
Duchon, D., & Ashmos Plowman, D. (2005). Nurturing the spirit at work: Impact on
work unit performance. Leadership Quarterly ,16, 625–634.
Dwyer, F. B., Schurr, P. H., & Oh, S. (1987). Developing buyer-seller relationships.
Journal of Marketing ,51(2), 11–27.
Emmons, R. A. (2000). Is spirituality an intelligence? Motivation, cognition, and the
psychology of ultimate concern. International Journal for the Psychology of
Religion ,10, 3–26.
Flores, F., & Solomon, R. C. (1998). Creating trust. Business Ethics Quarterly ,8,
205–232.
Ganesan, S. (1994). Determinants of long-term orientation in buyer-seller relation-
ships. Journal of Marketing
,58(2), 1–19.
George, M. (2006). Practical application of spiritual intelligence in the workplace.
Human Resource Management International Digest ,14, 3–26.
Giacalone, R. A., & Jurkiewicz, C. L. (2003). Toward a science of workplace spiritu-
ality. In R. A. Giacalone & C. L. Jurkiewicz (Eds.), Handbook of workplace spir-
ituality and organizational performance (pp. 3–28). New York: M. E. Sharpe.156 R. L. Standifer et al.
Gotsis, G., & Kortezi, Z. (2008). Philosophical foundations of workplace spirituality:
A critical approach. Journal of Business Ethics ,78, 575–600.
Guenzi, P., & Pelloni, O. (2004). The impact of interpersonal relationships on cus-
tomer satisfaction and loyalty to the service provider. International Journal of
Service Industry Management ,15, 365–384.
Hakansson, H., & Snehota, I. J. (2000). The IMP perspectives: Assets and liabilities
of business relationships. In J. N. Sheth & A. Parvatiyar (Eds.), Handbook of
relationship marketing (pp. 69–94). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hicks, D. A. (2003). Religion and the workplace: Pluralism, spirituality, leadership .
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Hill, P. C., & Pargament, K. I. (2003). Advances in the conceptualization and mea-
surement of religion and spirituality: Implications for physical and mental health
research. American Psychologist ,58, 64–74.
Ho, D. Y. F., & Ho, R. T. H. (2007). Measuring spirituality and spiritual emptiness: To-
ward ecumenicity and transcultural applicability. Review of General Psychology ,
11, 62–74.
Hofstede, G. (2001). Culture’s consequences: Comparing values, behaviors, institu-
tions and organizations across nations . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Huff, L., & Kelley, L. (2003). Levels of organizational trust in individualist versus
collectivist societies: A seven-nation study. Organization Science ,14, 81–90.
Jackson, B. (1985). Winning and keeping industrial customers . Lexington, MA: Lex-
ington Books.
John, G. (1984). An empirical investigation of some antecedents of opportunism in
a marketing channel. Journal of Marketing Research ,21, 278–289.
Jurkiewicz, C. L., & Giacalone, R. A. (2004). A values framework for measuring
the impact of workplace spirituality on organizational performance. Journal of
Business Ethics ,49, 129–142.
Kasper-Fuehrer, E. C., & Ashkanasy, N. (2001). Communicating trustworthiness and
building trust in interorganizational virtual organizations. Journal of Manage-
ment ,27, 235–254.
King, U. (1997). Spirituality. In J. Hinnels (Ed.), A new handbook of living religions
(pp. 667–681). London: Penguin.
Kinjerski, V. M., & Skrypnek, B. J. (2004). Deﬁning spirit at work: Finding common
ground. Journal of Organizational Change Management ,17, 26–42.
Koenig, H. G., McCullough, M. E., & Larson, D. B. (2001). Handbook of religion and
health . New York: Oxford University Press.
Komala, K., & Ganesh, L. S. (2007). Individual spirituality at work and its relation-
ship with job satisfaction and burnout: An exploratory study among healthcare
professionals. The Business Review ,7, 124–129.
Krishnakumar, S., & Neck, C. P. (2002). The “what,” “why” and “how” of spirituality
in the workplace. Journal of Managerial Psychology ,17, 153–164.
Kumar, N., Scheer, L. K., & Steenkamp, J. E. M. (1995). The effect of perceived
interdependence on dealer attitudes. Journal of Marketing Research ,32, 348–
356.
Kurth, K. (2003). Spirituality renewing ourselves at work. In R. A. Giacalone &
C. L. Jurkiewicz (Eds.), Handbook of workplace spirituality and organizational
performance (pp. 447–460). New York: M. E. Sharpe.Inﬂuence of Spirituality on Buyer Perception 157
Lastovicaka, J. L., & Thamodaran, K. (1991). Common factor score estimates in
multiple regression problems. Journal of Marketing Research ,28, 105–112.
Lee, D-J., Pae, J. H., & Wong, Y. H. (2001). A model of close business relationships
in China (guanxi). European Journal of Marketing ,35, 51–69.
Lehtonen, T. (2006). Collaborative relationships in facility services. Leadership &
Organization Development Journal ,27, 449–464.
Lewicki, R. J., & Bunker, B. B. (1995). Trust in relationships: A model of develop-
ment and decline. In M. Deutsch, B. B. Bunker, & J. Z. Rubin (Eds.), Conﬂict,
cooperation, and justice: Essays inspired by Morton Deutsch (pp. 133–173). San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Lewicki, R. J., Tomlinson, E. C., & Gillespie, N. (2006). Models of interpersonal
trust development: Theoretical approaches, empirical evidence, and future di-
rections. Journal of Management ,32, 991–1022.
Marques, J. F. (2006). The spiritual worker: An examination of the ripple effect
that enhances quality of life in- and outside the work environment. Journal of
Management Development ,25, 884–895.
Marques, J. F. (2007). The reciprocity between spirituality in the workplace and
thinking outside the box. Business Renaissance Quarterly ,2, 93–117.
Marques, J. F., Dhiman, S., & King, R. (2005). Spirituality in the workplace: Develop-
ing an integral model and a comprehensive deﬁnition. Journal of the American
Academy of Business ,7, 81–91.
Maslow, A. H. (1943). A theory of human motivation. Psychological Review ,50,
370–396.
McKee, D. (2003). Spirituality and marketing. In R. A. Giacalone & C. L. Jurkiewicz
(Eds.), Handbook of workplace spirituality and organizational performance (pp.
57–75). New York: M. E. Sharpe.
McKnight, D. H., Cummings, L. L., & Chervany, N. L. (1998). Initial trust formation
in new organizational relationships. Academy of Management Review ,23, 473–
490.
Miller, W. R., & Thoresen, C. E. (2003). Spirituality, religion, and health. American
Psychologist ,58, 24–35.
Milliman, J. F., Czaplewski, A. J., & Ferguson, J. (2003). Workplace spirituality and
employee work attitudes: An exploratory empirical assessment. Journal of Or-
ganizational Change Management ,16, 426–447.
Mitroff, I. I. (2003). Do not promote religion under the guise of spirituality. Organi-
zation ,10, 375–382.
Mitroff, I. I., & Denton, E. A. (1999). A study of spirituality in the workplace. Sloan
Management Review ,40, 83–92.
Mohamed, A. A., Wisnieski, J., Askar, M., & Syed, I. (2004). Towards a theory of
spirituality in the workplace. Competitiveness Review ,14, 102–107.
Mohr, J. J., & Sohi, R. S. (1995). Communication ﬂows in distribution channels:
Impact on assessments of communication quality and satisfaction. Journal of
Retailing ,71, 393–416.
Morgan, R. M., & Hunt, S. D. (1994). The commitment-trust theory of relationship
marketing. Journal of Marketing ,58(3), 20–38.
Neck, C. P., & Milliman, J. F. (1994). Thought self-leadership: Finding spiritual ful-
ﬁllment in organizational life. Journal of Managerial Psychology ,9, 9–16.158 R. L. Standifer et al.
Netemeyer, R. G., Durvasula, S., & Lichtenstein, D. R. (1991). A cross-national as-
sessment of the reliability and validity of the CETSCALE. Journal of Marketing
Research ,28, 320–327.
Nicholson, C. Y., Compeau, L. D., & Sethi, R. (2001). The role of interpersonal liking
in building trust in long-term channel relationships. Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science ,29, 3–15.
Oyserman, D. (1993). The lens of personhood: Viewing the self, others, and conﬂict
in a multicultural society. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,65,
993–1009.
Oyserman, D., Coon, H. M., & Kemmelmeier, M. (2002). Rethinking individualism
and collectivism: Evaluation of theoretical assumptions and meta-analyses. Psy-
chological Bulletin ,128, 3–72.
Palmatier, R. W., Dant, R. P., Grewal, D., & Evans, K. R. (2006). Factors inﬂuencing
the effectiveness of relationship marketing: A meta-analysis. Journal of Market-
ing,70(4), 136–153.
Paranjpe, A. C. (1988). Introduction. In A. C. Paranjpe, D. Y. F. Ho, & R. W. Rieber
(Eds.), Asian contributions to psychology (pp. 1–50). New York: Praeger.
Parvatiyar, A., & Sheth, J. N. (2000). The domain and conceptual foundations of
relationship marketing. In J. N. Sheth & A. Parvatiyar (Eds.), Handbook of rela-
tionship marketing (pp. 3–38). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Pfeffer, J. (2003). Business and the spirit. In R. A. Giacalone & C. L. Jurkiewicz
(Eds.), Handbook of workplace spirituality and organizational performance
(pp. 29–45). New York: M. E. Sharpe.
Piedmont, R. L., & Leach, M. M. (2002). Cross-cultural generalizability of the Spiritual
Transcendence Scale in India. American Behavioral Scientist ,45, 1888–1901.
Putnam, L. L., & Poole, M. S. (1987). Conﬂict and negotiation. In F. M. Jablin, L.
L. Putnam, K. H. Roberts, & L. W. Porter (Eds.), Handbook of organization
communication: An interdisciplinary perspective (pp. 549–599). Newbury Park,
CA: Sage.
Sharma, S., Durvasula, S., & Dillon, W. R. (1989). Some results on the behavior of
alternate covariance structure estimation procedures in the presence of non-
normal data. Journal of Marketing Research ,26, 214–221.
Shellenbarger, S. (2000, December 27). More relaxed boomers, fewer workplace
frills and other job trends. Wall Street Journal ,p .B - 1 .
Sin, L. Y. M., Tse, A. C. B., Yau, O. H. M., Lee, J. S. Y., & Chow, R. (2002). The effect
of relationship marketing orientation on business performance in a service-oriented economy. Journal of Service Marketing ,16, 656–676.
Stanko, M. A., Bonner, J. M., & Calantone, R. J. (2007). Building commitment in
buyer-seller relationships: A tie strength perspective. Industrial Marketing Man-
agement ,36(8), 1094–1103.
Swan, J. E., & Nolan, J. J. (1985). Gaining customer trust: A conceptual guide for the
salesperson. Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management ,5, 39–48.
Tischler, L., Biberman, J., & McKeage, R. (2002). Linking emotional intelligence, spir-
ituality, and workplace performance: Deﬁnitions, models and ideas for research.Journal of Managerial Psychology ,17, 203–218.
Triandis, H. C. (1989). The self and social behavior in differing cultural contexts.
Psychological Review ,96, 506–520.Inﬂuence of Spirituality on Buyer Perception 159
Triandis, H. C. (1990). Cross-cultural studies of individualism and collectivism. In
J. J. Berman (Ed.), Nebraska symposium on motivation: Vol. 37. Cross-cultural
perspectives (pp. 41–133). Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Wang, C. L. (2007). Guanxi vs. relationship marketing: Exploring underlying differ-
ences. Industrial Marketing Management ,36, 81–86.
Wicks, A. C., Berman, S. L., & Jones, T. M. (1999). The structure of optimal trust:
Moral and strategic implications. Academy of Management Review ,24, 99–116.
Williamson, O. (1975). Markets and hierarchies: Analysis and antitrust implications .
New York: Free Press.
Wong, A., Tjosvold, D., & Yu, Z. (2005). Organizational partnerships in China: Self-
interest, goal interdependence, and opportunism. Journal of Applied Psychology ,
90, 782–791.
Wong, Y. H., & Chan, R. Y. (1999). Relationship marketing in China: Guanxi,
favouritism, and adaptation. Journal of Business Ethics ,22, 107–118.
Zinnebauer, B. J., & Paragament, K. L. (2005). Religiousness and spirituality. In
R. Paloutzian & C. Park (Eds.), Handbook of the psychology of religion and
spirituality (pp. 21–42). New York: Guilford Press.
Zou, S., & Cavusgil, S. T. (2002). The GMS: A broad conceptualization of global
marketing strategy and its effect on ﬁrm performance. Journal of Marketing ,
66(4), 40–56.
APPENDIX
Sample Survey Items (by Construct)
∗A full version of the survey is available upon request .
A 6-point Likert scale was used, anchored by strongly disagree/strongly agree .
Spirituality
(Adapted from Ashmos & Duchon, 2000; Milliman et al., 2003)
1. My work involving this relationship energizes my spirit.
2. I see a connection between my work on this relationship and the larger
good.
3. My spiritual values inﬂuence the choices I make about this relationship.4. My work for this relationship does not give meaning to me personally or
professionally. (Reverse-scored)
Trust
(From Morgan & Hunt, 1994)
1. In this relationship, the other party has high integrity.
2. In this relationship, the other party can be counted on to do what is right.160 R. L. Standifer et al.
Commitment
(From Morgan & Hunt, 1994)
1. The relationship that my ﬁrm has with this company is something we are
very committed to.
2. The relationship that my ﬁrm has with this company deserves our ﬁrm’s
maximum effort to maintain.
Communication
(From Sin et al., 2002)
1. We can communicate honestly with one another.
2. We communicate and express our opinions to each other.
Shared Values
(From Sin et al., 2002)
1. We share the same feelings towards things around us.
2. We share the same values.
Opportunism
(From John, 1984)
1. To accomplish their own objectives, sometimes the other ﬁrm alters facts
slightly.
2. To accomplish their own objectives, sometimes the other ﬁrm promises
to do things without actually doing them.