270 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT. VOL. 42, NO. 3, AUGUST 1995 
Innovation From Differentiation: 
Pollution Control Departments and 
Innovation in the Printed Circuit Industry 
Andrew King 
Invited Paper 
Abstract-Theory predicts that managers will create specialized 
boundary-spanning departments to insulate a firm from changing 
surrounding conditions. Theory also predicts such insulating 
structures will inhibit adaptation. I find that in response to 
changing water-pollution regulation, top managers indeed created 
specialized pollution-control departments to insulate the existing 
process, but some of these departments acted not as insulators but 
as conduits for information and thereby helped both to improve 
the efficiency of the production process and to reduce pollution. 
The special role of these departments allowed unique access 
to and perspective on information from inside and outside the 
organization and gave them an incentive to use this information to 
improve core processes. Thus my research suggests that pollution- 
control departments may belong to a class of boundary spanners 
that represent a special case for organizational design. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
ANY companies now face the dual challenge of tougher 
M global competition and increasing obligation to protect 
the natural environment. In response. some firms, such as 
Union Carbide, have created “environmental” departments 
to mediate between the firm and environmental regulators. 
while others, such as 3M and Dow, have attempted to in- 
tegrate responsibility for the natural environment into existing 
organizational roles [ I]-[3]. Theory suggests that choosing 
between the two alternatives creates a dilemma for man- 
agers. A separate boundary-spanning department, such as 
Union Carbide’s, allows scale efficiencies, controlled risk, and 
efficient production, while an integrated approach. such as 
3M’s, allows the firm to learn and adapt to new conditions 
[4]-[7]. Organizational theories predict that most managers 
will respond to this dilemma by forming specialized pollution 
control departments to protect existing procedures, processes, 
and structures [4]. 
This paper investigates the formation and behavior of pol- 
lution control departments in the printed-circuit industry. I 
find that top managers created separate pollution control 
departments to insulate the firm from regulators, but that some 
Manuscript received January 11, 1993. This work was supported in pan by 
the Center for Innovation Management Studies at Lehigh University. Review 
of this manuscript was processed by Special Issue Guest Associate Editors T. 
Allen, C. Karlsson, and F. Norrgren. 
The author is with the Department of Management and Operations Man- 
agement, Stem School of Business. New York University. New York. NY 
10012 USA. 
IEEE Log Number 9413094. 
of these departments did not act to insulate the firm, rather they 
provided important process-improving information and inno- 
vative ideas to process engineers. I find that pollution control 
departments were able to make these process improvements 
because they had unique information and that this information 
derived in part from their specialized role. I propose that 
this unexpected behavior suggests extensions of theories of 
organizational design. 
11. THEORETICAL 
BACKGROUND 
Pollution control departments span the boundary between 
the organization and its surroundings. Organizational theory 
provides three main perspectives on the effect and behavior 
of such boundary-spanning entities. Time-honored models 
of organizational design suggest that specialized boundary- 
spanning entities allow organizations to remain efficient in the 
face of changing business conditions, but may inhibit adap- 
tation to changes in external conditions [4], [5]. In contrast, 
proponents of “lean production” or “total quality” argue that 
such departments reduce information flow and thus impede 
adaptation and improvement of process efficiency [7]-[9]. A 
third perspective considers the potential of boundary-spanning 
departments to cause organizational conflict, and thus empha- 
sizes the need for conflict-reducing integrating mechanisms 
[IO]. 
The customary view of the role of specialized boundary- 
spanning departments derives from theories of division of 
labor and efficiency [ 1 11-[ 131. These theories assume that 
focused application of skill and technology best leads to effi- 
ciency and leaming [ 111, [ 131. In this view, lateral interactions 
between tasks or departments require application of scarce 
management resources and distract attention from optimizing 
the task at hand [4], [14]. If changing conditions (such as 
increasing environmental regulation) require the firm to create 
new tasks to address new conditions, these tasks should be 
performed in separate organizational structures so that they do 
not disrupt the production process (which is assumed to be 
optimized). Thus rational firms seek “to isolate their technical 
cores from environmental influence by establishing boundary- 
spanning units to buffer or level environmental’ fluctuations” 
’ Thompson did not. of course, mean to indicate only the natural environ- 
ment but also the general conditions surrounding the firm. 
1057-7149/94$04.00 0 1994 IEEE 
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Oklahoma Libraries. Downloaded on June 18,2026 at 16:28:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

---PAGE---
KING: INNOVATION FROM DIFFERENTIATION. POLLUTION CONTROL DEPARTMENTS 
27 1 
[4, p. 671. In this perspective, since environmental influence 
can only reduce efficiency, rational organizations attempt to 
minimize information processing costs between boundary- 
spanning departments and the core [41, [141-[171. 
In the customary view. such separation and specialization 
of boundary-spanning groups maintains efficiency but hinders 
adaptation. Bums and Stalker [5] argue that reduced division of 
labor, reduced specialization, increased lateral communication, 
and increased task integration allow more rapid recognition of 
new conditions, modification of objectives and acquisition of 
new capabilities. Nevertheless, Burns and Stalker [5] share the 
perspective that in stable environments lateral communication 
patterns and task integration increase communication and coor- 
dination costs without supporting performance improvement. 
Another perspective arises from proponents of “quality” and 
“lean production” who suggest that separation and specializa- 
tion of boundary-spanning groups hinder both efficiency and 
adaptation. Unlike Thompson [4], Galbraith [ 141, and even 
Burns and Stalker [5], who assume that efficiency arises from 
the focused application of specialized skills and technology, 
proponents of “quality” or “lean production” assume that 
efficiency results from the lateral exchange of information 
and broadening of incentives [7], [8]. This efficiency can be 
accomplished, they claim, only by distributing responsibility 
for tasks (such as quality and pollution control) throughout 
the company. Only when this responsibility is shared, do 
workers have the incentive and the ability to transfer relevant 
information, and only when such information transfer occurs 
can organizations make processes more efficient or adapt to 
new conditions IS, p. 99].2 
The above perspectives consider information transfer to be 
central to the influence of structure on performance. In con- 
trast, Lawrence and Lorsch [ lo] emphasize the role of structure 
in fostering or impeding intergroup conflict. Lawrence and 
Lorsch [ lo] argue that precisely because boundary-spanning 
departments mediate between the organization and different 
surrounding institutions, these departments develop differing 
goals, time perspectives, interpersonal orientations and formal- 
ity of structures. These differences then cause conflict between 
groups which must be offset through the use of integrative 
devices (such as meetings and teams) [lo, p. 121. 
In the remainder of this paper, I outline several hypotheses 
consistent with the above theories, and attempt to validate them 
by exploring the behavior of boundary-spanning departments 
that managers of firms in one industry created in response to 
environmental regulation. I show that the above theories do 
not accurately predict the extent, nature, or implications of 
interaction between these boundary-spanning departments and 
the organizational core. I then propose extensions to theory to 
explain this unusual behavior. 
’The “quality” movement has had the greatest influence on professionals 
in industry and analysts in government policy. Bemoski [ 181, Thomas [ 191, 
and Martin [20] argue that pollution control and quality departments have 
analogous roles in the organization. Therefore, they expect pollution control 
groups to buffer the firm from a changing environment, delay and filter 
feedback information, and prevent core-process adaptation [?I], [2 I]. The 
Congressional Office of Technology Assessment, in its seminal report, Serious 
Reduction of Huzurdous Wuste, argues that pollution control departments will 
insulate the firm from environmental requirements, and consequently prevent 
core-process change that might reduce the production of hazardous waste 1221. 
A. Hypotheses 
Thompson [4] predicts that, when faced with changing 
external conditions, rational organizations form separated 
boundary-spanning departments to mediate between the firm 
and its surroundings. While “quality” theorists and industry 
analysts propose that separate pollution control departments 
will impede information transfer and learning, they agree 
with Thompson [4] that firms will respond to changing 
environmental conditions by creating such departments, and 
they expect the relationship between these departments and 
the rest of the organization to be distant [7], 
Piore 
and Sable [6] also anticipate that US firms will respond to 
changing surrounding conditions by creating such boundary- 
spanning departments. Once these departments are created, 
Thompson [4], Galbraith [14], MacDuffie [7], and Womack 
et al. [8] predict that relations between these departments and 
the rest of the organization will be distant. Thompson [4] and 
Galbraith [ 141 predict that interaction with such departments 
will relate predominantly to issues of task coordination. Thus 
my first two hypotheses are: 
Hypothesis 1: In response to changing environmental con- 
ditions, managers will create pollution control departments to 
insulate the firm and maintain the efficiency of core processes. 
Hypothesis 2a: Pollution-control departments and core 
technical and managerial personnel will have little interaction. 
Hjpothesis 2b: Interaction between pollution-control and 
core personnel will relate to environmental issues. 
Thompson [4] and Galbraith (141 both predict the core 
organization will perform best when boundary-spanning de- 
partments effectively insulate the core from surrounding con- 
ditions. In this model, boundary-spanning departments allow 
the core to focus on process efficiency. Thus: 
Hyporhesis 30: Communication between pollution-control 
departments and the process engineering staff will lead to 
process change that improves environmental performance. 
Interaction between pollution-control de- 
partments and the process engineering staff will result in 
process change that increases cost, reduces quality, or limits 
the capability of the production process. 
Hypothesis 3c: In high performing firms (low cost, high 
quality) pollution-control departments will communicate less 
frequently with process-engineering personnel than in low 
performing firms.4 
Hypothesis 3b: 
111. RESEARCH METHOD 
Understanding issues of structure, communication, and per- 
formance requires multiple research methods to compare mul- 
tiple organizations. To allow practical research, one must 
choose between rich, multimethod data and a large sample size. 
I chose to identify a few similar manufacturing organizations 
‘In part for this reason, government has begun to create legislation that 
“does not stop at the boundary of the firm,” and instead requires the adoption 
of pollution control accounting and control practices throughout the firm [23]. 
‘It might also be possible to form an altemative hypothesis from the 
quality literature that interaction with the environmental department will be 
associated with process innovation that improves environmental performance 
and improves core performance, This literature generally assumes, however, 
that such communication is unlikely [8]. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Oklahoma Libraries. Downloaded on June 18,2026 at 16:28:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

---PAGE---
272 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 42. NO. 3. AUGUST 1995 
and then analyze them in detail using qualitative interviews, 
archival records, and several written surveys. I believe that 
in combination, these multiple sources triangle organizational 
behavior. 
A. The Research Setting 
The printed circuit fabrication industry is a rich domain in 
which to study response to environmental regulation and the 
behavior of pollution control departments. The industry in- 
cludes many companies that use similar technology to produce 
commodity products, thereby allowing cross firm comparison 
of performance. In the early 1980’s, printed circuit firms 
faced more stringent regulation of the discharge of metals 
and organic compounds. Most of these regulations became 
standardized around the time of the promulgation of federal 
standards (40CFR413-June 15, 1983). 
All of the plants in my study produce multilayer rigid 
printed circuit boards. All of the companies make medium 
complexity boards for the computer industry, and fewer than 
10% of their production volume (measured in panels) is of high 
complexity.’Sales vary from $5 million to 50 million. Two 
plants are owned by large computer firms; the rest represent 
the chief activity of a closely held firm. 
B. Qualitative Research Method 
I )  Interviews: To understand how printed circuit fabrica- 
tors have responded to new water pollution requirements, 
I investigated the history and behavior of eight plants in 
detail. I began with open-ended interviews of firm presidents, 
plant managers, process engineers, quality personnel, and 
pollution control personnel. To focus the field of inquiry, I 
concentrated on the etching and plating part of the production 
process-usually 
known as the “wet-process.’’ Engineers re- 
sponsible for this part of production are called Wet Process 
Engineers. 
After several exploratory interviews, I inquired about the 
history of the plant and organization, and walked through 
the plant with staff from the departments of wet process 
engineering (WPE), quality, and pollution control (PC). During 
each of these tours, I asked that major process changes be 
identified. I also developed a list of potential improvements 
and sought to determine if firms had discovered and adopted 
these improvements. 
2) Archival Analysis: To uncover responses to water pol- 
lution regulation, I investigated government, institutional and 
company archives from the 1970’s and 1980’s. Sewer author- 
ities inspect each company at least eight times a year and give 
extensive descriptions of technology and practice. 
C. Quantitative Research Method 
The quantitative research measures the extent, nature and 
result of interaction between PC departments and core process 
personnel. Twelve rigid printed circuit firms agreed to par- 
ticipate in the written study and were sent questionnaires for 
5Defined as 1) density of three traces between 0.100’’ centers, or 2) surface 
mount with fine pitch applications. 
the wet process, quality, and pollution control managers. Eight 
firms returned all three surveys, two returned two surveys, and 
two did not respond. I also sent performance surveys to the 
12 firms with questions about quality, production cost, and 
treatment cost. I received responses from seven. 
1 )  Measuring Interaction: To measure the nature of inter- 
action between functional groups, the survey asked managers 
of the wet process, quality, and pollution control departments 
to characterize both their own and their compatriots’ behavior. 
The survey asked questions about time spent communicating 
with personnel from other departments in the firm, the nature 
of interaction and the topics discussed. 
2) Measuring Process Innovation: The managers of wet 
process engineering, quality, and pollution control were asked 
to report the five most important process changes that had 
occurred in the last year and to rate the members of each 
of the three groups in terms of their role in: 1) “identifying 
the opportunity or need that became the impetus for the 
change,” and 2) “in designing the change.” The managers were 
then asked to indicate the effects of these process changes. 
Respondents could choose one or more of the following 
options: improved product quality, improved production 
capabilities, reduced production costs, improved pollution 
control, or otheddon’t know. 
3) Firm PerJbrmance: The performance survey separated 
boards of unusual complexity from commonly produced ones. 
For both types of boards, it measured yield rates at several 
stages and the cost of materials used in production and in 
treatment. Because of differences in cost tracking methods at 
the firms, I was unable to use the responses to questions about 
the cost of production materials. 
Iv. INITIAL RESPONSE 
TO WATER POLLUTION REGULATION 
Early in my investigation, I found support for the hypothesis 
that firms will create specialized departments to respond to 
changing conditions (Hypothesis 1). In eight firms where I per- 
formed intensive interviews and archival analysis, managers 
responded to increased water pollution regulation by purchas- 
ing waste filtration equipment and forming a pollution control 
department to protect the firm from regulatory problems. 
In response to new environmental regulations, a senior 
member of the technical staff and a top manager of each 
facility selected the technology and organizational structure to 
use. Top managers remembered the decision as necessary to 
reduce the risk of regulatory trouble. All of the managers chose 
to buy robust technology and sized this equipment to include 
substantial overcapacity. All eight companies sized treatment 
equipment to between 1.5 and three times that needed for 
growth.(‘ Consider for example, the decision of the president 
of one company: 
“[The plant] presently discharges approximately 20 000 
gal/day.. .or 40 gal/min. Average production has been de- 
termined to be 643 sq/ft/day. Allowing for at least 50% 
increase in production and, consequently, water usage over 
60ne plant sized the facility at “30% over peak load,” and one company 
that purchased a new building inherited a treatment system with three times 
the capacity they expected to need. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Oklahoma Libraries. Downloaded on June 18,2026 at 16:28:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

---PAGE---
KING. INNOVATION FROM DIFFERENTIATION: POLLUTION CONTROL DEPARTMENTS 
Infomaon Conduits: 7he pollution-control depmment attempts to reduce 
waste as well as treat it. PC personnel frequently pass information on 
performance, problem areas and solution ideas to process engineers. 
Quote: “They (PC personnel) are like a sccond pair of eyes and cars for me 
(the prKess managerr 
Feedback Sources: The pollutioncontrol d e p m e n t  insures that the fm 
is in compliance by treating waste, but it should not have to treat waste 
unnecesdy. If a problem occurs in production, PC personnel pass, 
relevant data to production conceming water flow, chemical composition 
and sa forth. Quote: “If something goes wrong, we (Pollution-Control) 
let them know about it.” 
Buffers: The pollutioniontrol depamnent insulates the production process 
from regulatory change by treating waste. PC personnel inform the 
organization of environmental regulations and get involved in production 
issues only when ueatmmt or health issues arise. Quote: “We (Pollution- 
Control) should stay out of process procedures.” 
213 
2 
2 
4 
the next three to four years, the treatment system would have 
to be sized to handle a maximum flow rate of 60 gal/min. 
However the [president] has required that the system be 
designed to handle a maximum flow of 100 gal/min.” 
Managers seem to have purchased large, robust treatment 
systems in a conscious attempt to reduce uncertainty by pre- 
cluding regulatory problems. As the president of one company 
put it, “Make my industry stable, and I’ll look to making my 
industry better.” All but one company purchased a ferrous 
sulfate clarifier to remove metal contaminants from waste 
water. Although more efficient and effective technologies 
were available, ferrous sulfate clarification provides reliable 
and fluctuation-insensitive waste treatment.’ All of the top 
managers initially charged the pollution-control personnel with 
treating and controlling waste at the boundary of the plant. As 
one manager put it, “It’s easier to pay someone to operate a 
waste-treatment plant than put up with meddling in manufac- 
turing.” Pollution control managers at all of the plants agreed 
that in the early 1980’s their job was (as one put it) to “treat 
what production sent them.” 
Thus as suggested by Hypothesis 1, managers chose to 
create pollution control departments to insulate the firm from 
changing external conditions and to maintain the efficiency of 
core processes. 
A. Evidence of Interaction Between Pollution 
Control and the Rest of the Firm 
In numerous interviews, I found behavior that contradicted 
the hypothesis that communication between these specialized 
departments and the organizational core would be infrequent 
and limited [Hypothesis 2(a)]. While in about half the firms 
PC personnel reported seldom conversing with wet process 
personnel, in the other firms they judged such conversations 
to be frequent. Three classes of behavior for pollution control 
departments emerged (Fig. 1). 
My qualitative evidence also contradicted the hypothesis 
that interaction between pollution control departments and the 
organizational core would lead to poorer performance [Hy- 
pothesis 3(b)]. In discussions with wet process and pollution 
control managers, I learned that pollution control departments 
often had information important to improving the production 
process in areas unrelated to environmental protection. Thus 
when WPE managers acquired this information, substantial 
performance improvement could result. In one firm, PC per- 
sonnel had initiated innovations that, over one year, caused 
a 41% reduction in the use of process materials (an annual 
saving of $1 13 000 or about 1% of sales). 
I )  Interaction Between Pollution Control and the Rest of 
the Firm: Contrary to Hypothesis 2(a) (pollution control de- 
partments will seldom interact with the organizational core), 
my data indicate that PC personnel interact extensively with 
the rest of the organization. WPE managers reported speaking 
more often (though not significantly so) to PC personnel than 
to maintenance, management, purchasing, or other engineering 
’One manager jokingly calls this the “American” method, since it is nearly 
foolproof, requires little skill to operate, and waste-treatment operators can 
independently solve most problems simply by adding more ferrous sulfate. 
personnel (usually dry process engineering). Moreover, despite 
the current importance of quality in the industry, PC and 
quality managers did not differ significantly in total time spent 
communicating with the rest of the organization ( N  = 9:,uLpc 
= 
12.7 hrslweek = c = 8.65 pLqual 
= 17.7 hrslweek c = 14.2). 
Quality managers did differ significantly in time spent com- 
municating with “production personnel” and “management” 
0, < 0.05). This difference may be caused by management 
concern about quality and by the direct role quality managers 
often play in certain functions in production (e.g., automatic 
optical inspection). 
The data also indicate that conversations with PC personnel 
frequently include topics other than pollution control [in 
contrast to Hypothesis 2(b)]. While both pollution control and 
wet process managers reported conversations about “waste 
treatment” as “very common,” conversations about “waste of 
material in production” were reported by both as “common.” 
PC managers reported that their own conversations with WPE 
personnel commonly included discussion of “quality” and 
“yield.” 
2) Pollution Control Interaction and Process Innovation: If 
interaction is measured by the effect of the pollution-control 
department on core technology, the data again show that PC 
personnel interact with the organizational core [in contrast to 
Hypothesis 2(a)]. WPE managers rated their own personnel 
as most important in initiating and designing process changes 
(see Table I), but judged quality and PC personnel to be of 
nearly identical importance in initiating process changes.* 
Remarkably, in two firms the Wet Process Engineering 
manager rated PC personnel as more important, on average, 
than his own staff in initiating reported process changes. 
3) Pollution Control Interaction, Process Innovation and 
Firm Perj-ormance: Hypothesis 3(a) predicts that pollution 
control interaction with the core production process will be 
associated with process innovation that leads to improved 
environmental protection. The data support this hypothesis. 
sData about process innovation from the three managers exhibit a substan- 
tial respondent bias. All three types of managers tended to report innovations 
in which their own personnel played a key role. Since WPE managers can best 
judge innovations in their department and likely will underestimate the role 
of other departments, I concluded that WPE manager reports of innovation 
would be informed but conservative. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Oklahoma Libraries. Downloaded on June 18,2026 at 16:28:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

---PAGE---
214 
Qualit? 
WPE 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS O N  ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT. VOL. 42, NO. 3. AUGUST 1995 
1.193 
0.59 
8 
33 
1.45 
0.5 1 
8 
33 
TABLE I 
WET PROCESS ENGINEERING 
MANAGERS 
RATINGS OF IMPOKT-\NCE 
OF PERSONNEI. OF DIFFERENT 
GROUPS 
IN INITIATING 
MOST IMPORTANT PROCESS CHANGES IN PREVIOUS YEAR 
N Process 
Irinoratioris 
As reported by the wet process manager, communication 
time with pollution control personnel was associated with PC 
initiated process innovations (Kendall’s Tau t = .62. p < . I ) ,  
and 84% of these changes resulted in pollution reduction. 
In contrast to Hypothesis 3(b), the data also show that PC 
initiated innovation often led to improvement of the production 
process relative to core objectives. PC initiated innovations 
were as likely to lead to cost reduction as to pollution 
control and often resulted in quality improvement. Out of 
33 reported innovations, PC personnel received the highest 
importance rating for 13. Of these, 84% resulted in pollution 
reduction, 92% in cost reduction, 61% in quality improvement, 
and 38% in extension of production capabilities. Obviously. 
innovations often had numerous outcomes. Surprisingly, WPE 
managers reported that not a single innovation that originated 
from pollution control resulted in only pollution prevention 
improvement; all had some other benefit. 
Data from five firms (from which all surveys were received) 
provide some suggestion that, in contrast to Hypothesis 3(c), 
interaction between pollution control and process engineering 
departments may improve the performance of the core process. 
Three firms that reported PC initiated quality innovation had 
8% higher first pass yields for etched layers (an important 
measure for quality) than two firms reporting no PC initiated 
quality improvements.’ Likewise, WPE managers reported 
discussing quality (along with other nonpollution control top- 
ics) with PC personnel more frequently in three firms with 
high quality than they did in two firms with low quality (as 
measured by first pass yields for etched layers). 
B. C a s e s  of Interaction Between Pollution 
Control and the Rest of the Firm 
Thus as predicted, firms did indeed form boundary-spanning 
(pollution control) departments to buffer themselves from 
changing regulatory requirements. However, contrary to ex- 
pectations, these departments had extensive interaction with 
the core of the firm, and this interaction was correlated with 
performance improvement with regard to both environmental 
protection and core performance. 
One might argue that such behavior is the result of un- 
derlying firm characteristics that really caused the changes in 
innovation and performance. For instance, pollution control 
communication rates could result from an “organic” organ- 
91n an industry as competitive as this such a difference can easily mean 
survival. 
ization, where lateral communication is emphasized. Alter- 
natively, pollution control personnel might have unusual in- 
dividual characteristics (e.g., better education or more recent 
exposure to another company). The data do not show evidence, 
however. that the WPE-PC communication patterns result from 
individual or firm level characteristics. Organizational levels 
of communication, as estimated by the wet process and quality 
managers, are not correlated with the volume of communica- 
tion between the WPE manager and PC personnel (Fig. 2). 
Nor is the total time wet process and PC managers spend 
communicating with the rest of the organization correlated 
with how often they communicate with each other (Fig. 2). 
Additionally, PC managers had somewhat shorter tenure in 
the firm (3.9-6.8 years) but longer job tenure (3.5 years as 
opposed to 1.9) [Neither difference is significant, even at 
p < . I ] .  Three PC managers reported obtaining chemistry 
or chemical engineering degrees. whereas six WPE managers 
reported having chemical engineering degrees. 
My research suggests that pollution control managers, rather 
than inhibiting process improvement, actually can provide use- 
ful information and support. My quantitative data show that it 
was not communication per .se but rather communication about 
certain topics that led to innovation. Communication about 
topics outside of the normal purview of pollution control best 
explained PC initiation of process innovation. Two breadth 
measures comprised of 1 )  quality and yield related topics and 
2) scrap and efficiency topics both correlate strongly with PC 
initiated innovations (Fig. 2). Likewise, breadth correlates with 
communication time, and communication time correlates with 
PC innovation. The partial correlation between breadth and 
innovation, controlling for communication time is still high 
(t = 0.70). The partial correlation between communication 
and innovation, however, is much lower (t = 0.34). 
The clear correlation between the breadth of conversation 
topic and communication time could suggest either that fre- 
quent communication leads to a broadening of discussion 
topics. or that knowledge about a variety of topics encourages 
more frequent communication. To further explore this relation- 
ship, 1 constructed a scale of PC “information helpfulness” 
from reports of 1) PC frequency in requiring (for pollution 
control reasons) process changes and 2) PC frequency in pro- 
viding process improvement information.” I hypothesized that 
pollution control departments that were more likely to provide 
useful information than new demands would communicate 
more frequently with WPE personnel. As predicted, this scale 
is correlated with PC-WPE communication volume (t = .65, 
My quantitative data closely match observations from my 
qualitative study. I often observed PC personnel passing non- 
pollution control information to process engineers. Likewise, 
process engineers frequently asked pollution control personnel 
for information on production chemicals or problems. Several 
interviews with PC managers were interrupted by process 
engineers or personnel who were seeking information or 
assistance. 
p < .05). 
“’The scale was constructed by subtracting scores for frequency of requiring 
change from scores for frequency of providing helpful information. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Oklahoma Libraries. Downloaded on June 18,2026 at 16:28:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

---PAGE---
KING: INNOVATION FROM DIFFERENTIATION: POLLUTION CONTROL DEPARTMENTS 
275 
hganization 
a 
Zommunication Volume 
W E  Manager 
Communication. 
=. 
Volume b 
PC Manager 
Communicatio 
Volume 
Breadth 
of Communication 
Topic between 
W E  
manager and 
N= 8 
PC personnele 
NOTES 
a - h o d w e e k  spent by Quality and 
WPE managers communicating with 
people outside of their own group othei 
than PC personnel 
b - hours/week spent by WPE manager 
communicating with non-PC personne 
outside his department 
c - hours/week spent by P c  manager 
communicating with non-WPE 
personnel outside of his department 
d - h o d w e e k  spent by WPE manager 
taking to PC personnel 
e - breadth measure composed of Likert 
frequency reports of conversations 
about quality. yield, tmcking and 
process control. 
f - W E  manager reports of P c  
involvement in initiating process 
innovation 
Fig. 2. 
Paired Kendall Tau correlations between communication measures and PC initiated process innovation 
TABLE I1 
TOPICS 
WITH PERSONNEL 
FROM THE OTHER GROUP 
COMPARISON OF PC AND WPE REPORTS OF DISCUSSION 
Topic 
Menn Difference 
Std. Dev. 
DF 
Prob 
Quality 
-0.72 
2.08 
8 
0.33 
Yield 
-0.39 
1.50 
8 
0.46 
Waste of Material 
0.17 
1.77 
8 
0.78 
Scrap 
0.056 
1.18 
8 
0.89 
Waste Treatment 
0.89 
1.05 
8 
0.035 
Between Reports 
in Production 
Thus I believe that pollution control departments actually 
have unique and important information that can be used to 
improve the core of the firm. When process engineers tap this 
resource, core process improvements result. Such a claim leads 
to an obvious question: Why do pollution control departments 
have information that is useful in improving the production 
process? My research uncovered several explanations. 
C. Why Pollution Control Has Unique Information 
I )  Different Perspective on Commonly Available lnforma- 
tion: Pollution control personnel work in a forgotten part of 
the production process. They are concerned with discarded 
material, byproducts of the operation, mistakes and waste. 
While process engineers often focus on one process quality 
measure (scrap rate laminar layer), pollution-control managers 
must treat waste from every process and thus must consider 
a wider range of waste sources. Perhaps because of this, 
pollution control personnel bring a different perspective to 
production problems. They have a broader definition of yield 
that includes yield on chemicals, copper anodes, and cleaning 
materials. Their definition of “quality” is also more general 
and includes the reliability of process baths, the predictability 
of variance and the safety and welfare of workers. 
The quantitative data also support these assertions. PC and 
WPE managers disagreed about the frequency with which 
they discussed certain topics with each other (Table 11). The 
data suggest that different perspectives on quality led W E  
managers to report that more conversations related to “waste 
treatment” and pollution-control personnel to report that more 
related to “quality” or “yield.” 
By bringing a different perspective to process problems, 
and by looking at different process signals, pollution-control 
personnel may be able to extract unique information about 
process problems. 
2) Internalizing 
Externalities: 
Pollution-control depart- 
ments must process material that has been was discarded. In 
doing so, they extract information contained in waste. In all 
of the firms that I visited, PC managers knew that this waste 
could be used to diagnose problems in the upstream process. 
Most commonly PC personnel told me that if the water in the 
treatment process turned blue, it meant that chelate copper 
was leaking from one of the pumps in production. Since 
most companies process their cleaning water continuously, 
PC personnel must mindfully respond to process variation and 
thus may be unusually aware of production fluctuations. 
3) Waste Provides Diagnostic Information: By reverse en- 
gineering, pollution control departments can extract the loca- 
tion of problems from waste. Just as a urinalysis provides rich 
information about human health, production waste provides 
extensive information about the health of the production 
process. More than many process signals, the waste stream 
carries information about the location and cause of process 
inefficiencies. For instance, at one firm pollution control 
engineers noticed that they frequently received stacks of 
discarded boards that had been partially etched and plated 
but not electrically tested. Upon investigation they found that 
the plating operation performed best when the hoist contained 
a full load. To ensure the best performance, the ends of 
production jobs were padded with extra boards to the nearest 
full load. Extra boards were then discarded. Wet-process and 
PC personnel designed a system of reusable dummy boards. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Oklahoma Libraries. Downloaded on June 18,2026 at 16:28:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

---PAGE---
216 
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT. VOL. 42. NO 3, AUGUST 1995 
As a result, the firm avoided discarding 5000 boards per year 
at an estimated savings of $25 000 (0.25% of sales).” 
personnel 
have unusually diverse sources of information that allow them 
to gain system-wide perspectives on problems. They gather 
data in the form of waste from stages of production that cross 
regions of authority and technology. For instance, at one local 
firm the PC personnel noticed that several different groups 
(the chemical lab, production, and lithography) would discard 
out-of-date chemicals of the same type at approximately 
the same time. Moreover, they noticed that the supply of 
these chemicals in the stock room fluctuated widely. They 
investigated and found that simultaneous orders from separate 
production centers gave purchasing an incorrect impression 
of increased demand, which in turn caused an overly large 
order and an increase in inventory. To solve the problem, the 
PC engineers developed a computer tracking system and a 
purchasing projection system. 
5) Access to Outside Information: Pollution control engi- 
neers have unique opportunities to access information from 
outside of the company. In some cases. regulation causes them 
to gather and store particularly detailed technical information. 
The rapid pace of technological change also causes PC per- 
sonnel to interact frequently with outside vendors. In addition, 
PC personnel have unique access to information from chemical 
vendors. As one person put it: “When production calls up a 
vendor, they get connected to sales. When we call up, we get 
connected to the lab. They know that we have to know what 
is in it [the vendor’s product] in order to treat it.” 
Pollution control personnel also engage in “know how” 
trading of information with competitors and suppliers of chem- 
icals [24], [25]. Vendors arrange tours of interesting waste 
treatment processes, and many firms welcome visits of waste 
treatment processes from other companies. In Massachusetts, 
local pollution control managers are now forming an informal 
association that will meet monthly to discuss technical issues. 
6) Motivution 
to Improve 
the 
Production 
Process: 
Managers of pollution control departments have an incentive 
to use any useful information that they acquire to improve 
the core process. For instance, one PC manager argues 
that “almost anything that I can do to help the production 
process helps me [to treat waste].” Another argues, that “the 
more I can get the process under control, the better I can 
reduce waste treatment.” Thus some PC managers believe 
that they can improve their own performance by reducing 
waste generated in the production process and by reducing 
swings in production performance. As one of them said, “I 
don’t mind the FM [variance in effluent caused by production 
volume changes], but I sure hate the AM [variance caused 
by mistakes].” Thus PC managers have created tracking 
and control systems for production baths, and automated 
purchasing and inventory systems. Such systems allow PC 
managers to more closely optimize their own treatment 
process. 
4) System- Wide Information: Pollution-control 
”This savings represents just the cost of discarded boards and does not 
include the cost of labor or materials needed to bring the\e boards to this 
production step. 
v. IMPLICATION OF THESE RESULTS 
My research suggests that pollution control departments, in 
the course of conducting their work, acquire information and 
innovative ideas that can be useful to the rest of the organiza- 
tion. When they communicate this information, performance 
improves relative to pre-existing (cost, quality, etc.) and new 
(environmental performance) criteria. 
My research suggests an additional contingency for orga- 
nizational design. It suggests that personnel performing tasks 
that control process waste have unusual incentives and unusual 
information sources, and as a result, organizational structures 
may influence them in unusual ways. 
First, my research suggests that Thompson’s concepts of in- 
terdependency and organization may be contingent on the task 
being performed. Tasks that control core-process waste, even 
if highly interdependent with core processes, may improve 
rather than harm the efficiency of the core. Pollution control 
departments create new interdependencies with and constraints 
on core processes (and thus should reduce performance), but 
these constraints may act as a “process control” to ensure 
minimum standards of efficiency. Moreover, pollution-control 
personnel often work actively to improve process efficiency. 
They capture information in discarded material that otherwise 
would have been lost and use this information to improve the 
efficiency of the core process. 
Second. my research supports the general findings of 
Lawrence and Lorsch [IO] that high differentiation and high 
integration lead to high performance in changing environ- 
ments. My research suggests, however, that specialization and 
differentiation need not lead to conflict, as Lawrence and 
Lorsch [IO] assume, but can instead cause a type of organic 
solidarity based upon expectations of mutual benefit [26]. 
Boundary-spanning departments that mediate core-process 
waste have strong incentives to reduce conflict with the 
core personnel so they can improve the efficiency of the 
core process and thereby reduce waste. Such boundary- 
spanning departments naturally create bridges (communication 
forums, etc.) to the organizational core. Thus interdepartmental 
integration may not require managerial support but may 
instead arise naturally as different departments seek to gain 
access to useful information and innovation sources. 
Third. my research suggests that organic structures are 
not required to facilitate information flow, cross functional 
innovation, and adaptation. In fact, it poses an intriguing 
question. Might the initial specialization of pollution-control 
departments represent a useful stage in adaptation? In their 
separate state they can acquire new perspectives and skills 
that then help the organization to adapt. If so, my findings 
support and extend research on the development of particular 
process innovations. Just as Kazanjian and Drazin [27] and 
Tyre [ 28) suggest that separation and subsequent reintegration 
of innovation projects leads to better innovation, I suspect that 
immediate integration of pollution control tasks would have 
prevented the accumulation of specialized information, and 
unusual perspectives and skills and thus inhibited innovation. 
Thus boundary-spanners that control process waste may 
pose a special case for organizational design. Because of their 
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Oklahoma Libraries. Downloaded on June 18,2026 at 16:28:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

---PAGE---
KING: 1NNOVATION FROM DIFFERENTIATION: POLLUTION CONTROL DEPARTMENTS 
211 
interdependence with core processes, they share efficiency 
goals with the core organization and they acquire useful 
process information. Because of their separation, they have 
new perspectives on old problems and can innovate. For both 
reasons, they help improve the core’s efficiency and speed its 
adaptation to new conditions. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research would not have been possible without the in- 
tellectual assistance of Thomas Allen, John Ehrenfeld, Stephan 
Schrader, and Marcie Tyre. 
REFERENCES 
C. C. Smith, “Corporate environmental management,’’ Union Carbide 
Report, 1990. 
R. Bringer and D. Benforado, “Pollution prevention as corporate policy: 
A look at the 3M experience,” The Environmental Profess.. vol. 1 I ,  pp. 
117-126, 1989. 
K. Nelson, “Are there any energy savings left‘?” Chem. Process.. Jan. 
1989. 
J. D. Thompson, Organiiutions in Action. 
New York: McGraw-Hill, 
1967. 
T. Bums and G. M. Stalker, The Munagement of Innowtion. New 
York: Free Press, 1961. 
M. J. Piore and C. F. Sabel, The Second Indiistrial Ditmide. New York: 
Basic Books, 1984. 
J. P. MacDuffie, “Beyond mass production: Flexible production systems 
and manufacturing performance in the world auto industry,“ Ph.D. 
dissertation, MIT, 1991. 
J .  Womack, D. Jones, and D. Roos, The Machine That Chunged the 
World. 
R. J. Schonberger, Japanese Manufacturing Techniques: Nine Hidden 
Lessons in Simplicity. 
P. R. Lawrence and J. W. Lorsch, Organization and En1,ironmentst Mnn- 
aging Differentiution and Integration. 
A. Smith, “The wealth of nations,” in Classics qfOrgoni,-ation Theur?. 
Pacific Grove, CA: BrooksKole, 1987. 
F. W. Taylor, “The principles of scientific management,” Bull. Taylor 
Soc., 1916. 
L. Gulick and L. Urwick, Ed., Papers on the Science of Administration. 
New York: Inst. of Public Admin., 1937, pp. 3-13. 
J. R. Galbraith, Organization Design. 
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 
1977. 
J. R. Galbraith, “Designing the innovating organization,” in Organi:. 
Djnamics, vol. 10, pp. 5-25, 1982. 
New York: Rawson Assoc., 1990. 
New York: Free Press, 1982. 
Homewood, IL: Irwin, 1967. 
[I61 A. H. Van de Ven and A. L. Delbecq, “A task contingent model of 
work-unit structure,” Admin. Sci. Quart., pp. 183-197, June 1974. 
[I71 A. Van de Ven, A. L. Delbecq, and R. Koenig, “Determinants of 
coordination modes within organizations,” Amer. Sociol. Rev., vol. 41, 
pp. 322-338, 1976. 
[IS] K. Bemoski, “Sorting fact from fiction,” in Qualify Progress, 1991, p. 
21-25. 
[I91 L. M. Thomas and C. C. Smith, “A jewel in the rough: A new global 
initiative . . .,” in The Eni,ironmental Forum, 1990, pp. 10-13. 
[20] J. B. Martin, “Is environmental quality good for business?: Problems and 
prospects in agricultural, energy and chemical industries,” in American 
Enrerprise Insr. Conj, Washington, DC, 1990. 
1211 P. Cebon, “Organizational behavior as a key element in waste manage- 
ment decision making,” in The Environmental Challenge of the 1990s. 
Washington, DC: EPA, 1990. 
[22] The Congress. Office of Tech. Assess., “Serious reduction of hazardous 
waste,” Ofice of Tech. Assessment. US Printing Office, Sept. 1986. 
[23] Interview with R. Reibstein, Office of Tech. Assist., Dept. Environmen- 
tal Manage., State of Mass., 1991. 
[24] S. Schrader, “Informal technology transfer between firms: Cooperation 
through information trading,” Res. Policy, vol. 20, 1991. 
[25) E. von Hippel, “Cooperation between rivals: Informal know-how trad- 
ing.” Res. Policy, vol. 16. pp. 291-302, 1987. 
[26] E. Durkheim, The Dii>i.sion of Labor in Society. 
New York: Macmillan, 
1984. 
[27] R. K. Kazanjian and R. Drazin, “Implementing manufacturing innova- 
tions: Critical choices of structure and staffing roles,” Human Resource 
Munuge., vol. 25. no. 3, pp. 385403, 1986. 
[28] M. J. Tyre, “Managing innovation in the manufacturing environment: 
Creating forums for change on the factory floor,” MIT Sloan School of 
Manage., 1989. 
1291 M. G. Kendall, Rank Correlation Methods. 
New York: Hafner, 1962. 
Andrew King received the B A degree in me- 
chanical engineering from Brown University, the 
M S degree in mechanical engineenng from the 
University of California dt Berkeley, and the Ph.D 
degree from the Sloan School of Management at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
He is presently an Assistant Professor of Opera- 
tions Management at the Stern School of Manage- 
ment at NYU His research focuses on how firms 
respond to changes in the surrounding conditions, 
including increasing demands to protect the natural 
environment. He I \  currently conducting multi-industry research on environ- 
mentally conscious manufacturing 
‘ Qb‘ 
Authorized licensed use limited to: University of Oklahoma Libraries. Downloaded on June 18,2026 at 16:28:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
