
--- Page 1 ---
The  role  of  the  boundary  spanner  in  bringing  about  innovation  in
cross-sector  partnerships
Annmarie  Ryan *,  Lisa  O’Malley
Department  of  Management  and  Marketing,  Kemmy  Business  School,  University  of  Limerick,  Limerick,  Ireland
A  R  T  I  C  L  E  I  N  F  O
Article  history:
Received  20  December  2013
Received  in  revised  form  9  September  2015
Accepted  23  September  2015
Available  online  10  December  2015
Keywords:
Cross-sector  partnerships
Business  and  arts
InnovationBoundary spannerA  B  S  T  R  A  C  T
This  paper  considers  the  mutual  value  co-creation  that  can  occur  when  both  parties  in  a  cross  sector
partnership  learn  to  innovate  within  the  relationship.  Despite  suggestions  that  there  are  often
asymmetrical  returns  to  the  business  partner,  nonpro ﬁt  partners  also  accrue  beneﬁts  (Austin  &  Seitanidi,
2012 ).  In  particular  we  consider  how  the  relationship  is  inﬂuenced  by  the  actors ’  abilities  to
accommodate,  adapt,  learn  and  co-create  solutions  as  they  learn  how  to  do  things  differently  or  better  in
response  to  the  challenges  they  face.  This  is  achieved  using  data  from  a  longitudinal  analysis  of  a  cross-
sector  partnership  between  a  business  and  an  arts  organisation  in  Ireland.  This  offers  a  unique
opportunity  to  trace  the  emergence  of  the  partnership  over  time,  and,  speci ﬁcally,  to  consider  the  impact
of  innovations  co-created  by  the  actors  involved.  Our  analysis  will  demonstrate  that  innovation  at  the
level  of  the  relationship  emerged  from  the  incremental  problem  solving  processes  of  the  individuals
involved.  This  foregrounds  the  impact  of  individual  boundary  spanners  and  the  import  of  social  capital  in
realising  the  potential  of  this  partnership.  In  this  regard  we  put  forward  three  key  boundary  spanning
roles,  boundary  spanner  as  network  builder,  as  entrepreneur,  as  facilitator/mediator.  The  paper  concludes
with  suggestions  for  further  research  and  consideration  of  managerial  implications  arising  from  this
study.
ã  2015  Elsevier  Ltd.  All  rights  reserved.
1.  Introduction
Inter-organisational  relationships  between  business  ﬁrms  and
nonpro ﬁt  organisations  have  become  an  important  source  of
innovative  solutions  to  business  (Murphy,  Perrot,  &  Rivera-Santos,
2012 )  and  social  problems  (Selsky  &  Parker,  2005 ;  Seitanidi,  2008 ).
Waddock  (1988)  deﬁnes  such  arrangements  as  a  commitment  by  a
corporation  to  work  with  a  nonpro ﬁt  organisation  whereby  both
parties  work  co-operatively  to  solve  problems  that  affect  them  all
and  require  time,  commitment  and  active  rather  than  passive
involvement  from  all  parties.  Crane  (1998)  argues  that  developing
partnerships  offers  partners  the  opportunity  to  co-create  solutions
with  experts  in  a  particular  ﬁeld,  whereby  such  solutions  have  the
potential  to  be  a  best  ﬁt  for  both  organisations  involved  and  society
generally.
According  to  Austin  (2010a)  cross  sector  partnerships  need  to
be  conceived  as  learning  organisations  continually  searching  for
more  effective  ways  to  generate  value.  This  establishes  an
important  role  for  innovation  in  these  arrangements.  However,recently  Jamali,  Yianni  and  Abdallah  (2011)  have  asserted  that  the
role  of  innovation  and  its  potential  implications  for  partnership
outcomes  have  so  far  not  been  systematically  explored.  While
innovation  remains  an  understudied  phenomenon  in  cross  sector
partnerships  its  importance  has  been  recognised.  For  example,
Holmes  and  Smart  (2009)  looks  to  business  literature  to  consider
the  beneﬁts  accruing  to  ﬁrms  who  look  outside  the  ﬁrm  for  sources
of  innovation.  However,  we  wish  to  extend  this  to  consider  cross-
sector  partnerships  as  a  source  of  innovation  for  both  parties
(Ameli  &  Kayes,  2011 ),  but  in  particular  the  nonpro ﬁt  organisation.
Much  academic  work  in  the  area  of  cross-sector  relationships
has  focused  on  key  relationship  success  factors  such  as  the  need  for
trust  (Seitanidi  &  Crane,  2009 ),  commitment  and  shared  values
(Austin,  2010b ).  These  success  factors  are  conceived  as  mediating
factors  which  are  either  present  or  not  in  the  relationship.  The
problem  with  this  conceptualisation  is  that  it  obscures  the  efforts
of  managers  in  both  organisations  to  bring  about  an  open
collaborative  environment.  For  example,  it  is  possible  that  the
true  potential  of  any  given  relationship  may  not  fully  be  realised  at
the  outset,  and,  contra  to  Berger,  Cunningham,  &  Drumwright's,
(2004)  assessment,  not  all  partnership  problems  are  predictable
and  capable  of  being  ‘dealt  with ’  at  the  early  stage  of  a  relationship.
As  such,  it  is  conceivable  that  the  presence  of  relationship  success*  Corresponding  author.
E-mail  address:  annmarie.ryan@ul.ie  (A.  Ryan).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scaman.2015.09.002
0956-5221/ ã  2015  Elsevier  Ltd.  All  rights  reserved.Scandinavian  Journal  of  Management  32  (2016)  1–9
Contents  lists  available  at  ScienceDirect
Scandinavian  Journal  of  Management
journa  l  homepage:  www.e  lsevier.com/locate/scaman

--- Page 2 ---
variables  (Parker  &  Selsky,  2004 ;  Arya  &  Salk,  2006 )  have  much  to
do  with  the  behaviour  of  relational  actors,  rather  than,  a  priori,
being  predictors  of  relationship  success.  More  research  is  therefore
required  to  understand  “the  role  of  individuals  in  affecting  value
creation ”  (Austin  &  Seitanidi,  2012,  p.  24)  within  cross-sector
partnerships.  In  this  regard,  it  is  necessary  to  investigate  how
actors,  not  only  envisage  the  potential  of  a  relationship  to  co-create
innovative  solutions,  but  how,  through  their  actions,  they
contribute  to  the  realisation  of  that  potential.  In  particular,  there
is  a  need  to  explore  how  the  relationship  is  inﬂuenced  by  the
actors'  abilities  to  accommodate,  adapt,  learn  and  co-create
solutions.
This  paper  focuses  on  the  role  of  individuals  in  affecting  value
creation  (Austin  &  Seitanidi,  2012 ).  Building  on  the  work  of  Holmes
and  Moir  (2007)  and  Holmes  and  Smart  (2009) ,  it  considers  the
impact  of  individual  actors  in  co-creating  solutions.  Inevitably,  this
demands  analysis  at  the  micro-level  of  the  relationship  Kolk,  van
Dolen,  &  Vock ;  Austin  &  Seitanidi,  2012 ;  Vock,  van  Dolen,  &  Kolk,
2014 )  and  this  is  achieved  using  data  from  a  longitudinal  analysis
of  a  cross-sector  partnership  between  a  business  and  an  arts
organisation  in  Ireland1.  This  offers  a  unique  opportunity  to  trace
the  emergence  of  the  partnership  over  time,  and,  speci ﬁcally,  to
consider  the  impact  of  innovations  co-created  by  the  actors
involved.  Our  analysis  will  demonstrate  that  innovation  at  the  level
of  the  relationship  emerged  from  the  incremental  problem  solving
processes  of  the  individuals  involved.  This  foregrounds  the  impact
of  individual  boundary  spanners  and  the  import  of  social  capital  in
realising  the  potential  of  this  partnership.  In  this  regard  we  will  put
forward  three  key  boundary  spanning  roles,  boundary  spanner  as
network  builder,  as  entrepreneur,  as  facilitator/mediator.
The  paper  is  outlined  as  follows:  ﬁrst  we  will  consider  how
innovation  has  been  treated  within  the  literature  on  cross  sector
relationships  and  what  remains  to  be  done  in  this  area.  In  that  we
will  outline  speci ﬁcally  what  role  there  may  be  for  social  capital
and  boundary  spanners  problem  solving  practices  in  this  regard.
This  is  followed  by  a  detailed  description  of  the  longitudinal  single
case  study  methodology  employed  in  this  study.  The  data  analysis
that  follows  traces  the  emergence  of  particular  problems  in  the
relationship  and  the  efforts  of  boundary  spanners  to  resolve  these
problems  while  demonstrating  particular  boundary  management
skills.  In  our  attempt  to  learn  beyond  this  case  we  follow  this
section  with  an  outline  of  key  boundary  spanning  roles  identi ﬁed
and  how  these  contribute  to  our  knowledge  of  cross  sector
relationships.  The  paper  concludes  with  reference  to  both
theoretical  and  managerial  implications.
2.  Cross-sector  partnerships:  innovation  and  the  role  of  boundary
spanners
This  paper  considers  the  mutual  value  co-creation  that  can
occur  when  both  parties  learn  to  innovate  within  and  because  of
the  partnership,  and  not  just  the  latter.  Despite  suggestions  that
there  are  often  asymmetrical  returns  to  the  business  partner
(Laasonen,  Fougère,  &  Kourula,  2012 )  nonpro ﬁt  partners  also
accrue  beneﬁts  (Austin  &  Seitanidi,  2012 ).  Moreover,  the  relation-
ship  between  the  two  can  also  beneﬁt  from  innovation  as  partners
learn  how  to  do  things  differently  or  better  in  response  to  the
challenges  they  face  (Ameli  &  Kayes,  2011 ).  Importantly,  these  are
not  purely  economic  or  market  based  beneﬁts,  but  also  includesocial  and  personal  beneﬁts  to  the  individuals  involved  (for  a
comprehensive  list  see  Austin  &  Seitanidi,  2012 ).  Innovation  is
conceived  as  (1)  an  interactive  process  involving  multiple  actors
and  relationships;  (2)  involving  the  exchange  of  different  forms  of
knowledge —codiﬁed  and  tacit  knowledge;  and  (3)  a  learning
process  where  innovations  arise  from  the  exchange  of  different
forms  of  knowledge,  their  exploitation  and  gradual  appropriation
and  conversion  into  new  forms  (Jamali  et  al.,  2011 ).  However,  we
add  to  this  to  foreground  the  role  of  individual  boundary  spanners
and  the  incremental  ‘every  day’  problem  solving  that  occurs  in
business-nonpro ﬁt  exchanges.
Further,  while  we  are  concerned  here  with  relational  innovation
and  not  social  innovation  per  se,  we  concur  with  Le  Ber  and  Branzei ’s
(2010)  view  that  relational  processes  enable  or  hinder  innovation;
these  include  the  active  and  deliberate  actions  undertaken  by  both
parties  in  both  organisations  to  respond  to  temporary  failures  or  to
actively  seek  out  opportunities  for  relational  level  innovation.  Unlike
Le  Ber  and  Branzei,  however,  we  consider  speci ﬁcally  the  role  of
social  capital  as  a  driver  of  innovation  as  well  as  the  role  of  the
individuals  in  identifying  opportunities  and  solving  those  problems
that  emerge  during  the  partnership.  The  role  of  social  capital  has
been  deemed  an  important  driver  of  innovation  (Kanter,  1999 ).
However,  further  work  needs  to  be  done  in  this  area  to  understand
more  fully  the  conditions  under  which  innovation  is  more  or  less
likely  (Jamali  et  al.,  2011 ).  We  will  advance  our  discussion  of  these  in
the  following  sections.
Within  the  extant  literature  on  inter-organisational  relation-
ships  is  it  widely  acknowledged  that  the  social  relationships
between  interactants  is  a  key  enabler  to  successful  relationship
development  (Hutt  &  Stafford,  2000 ;  Harris,  Malley,  &  Patterson,
2003 ).  Many  of  the  advantages  of  social  capital  have  been
identi ﬁed,  including:  facilitating  coordination  and  communica-
tion;  amplifying  reputations,  and  facilitating/resolving  dilemmas
accruing  from  collective  action  and  value  creation  (Cohen  &  Prusak,
2001 ;  Gonzalez  et  al.,  2004 ).  Social  capital  may  be  particularly
important  for  innovation  because  knowledge  is  increasingly
embodied  within  networks  and  alliances  (Inkpen  &  Tsang,
2005 ).  Within  cross  sector  partnerships,  social  capital  has  been
demonstrated  to  support  relationship  building  (Murphy  et  al.,
2012 )  and  collective  problem  solving  (Austin,  2010a ).  However,
social  capital  may  not  emerge  so  easily  within  such  partnerships
and  requires  many  elements  including:  strong  connectivity,
incentives  for  sharing  knowledge,  as  well  as  trust  and  commitment
(Jamali  et  al.,  2011 ).  Thus,  it  is  likely  that  boundary  spanners  who
build  relationships  play  an  important  role  particularly  in  knowl-
edge  exchange  (Bennett,  Mousley,  &  Ali-Choudhury,  2008 ;  Holmes
&  Smart  2009 ).  This  is  consistent  with  our  understanding  of
business  relationships  more  broadly  whereby  successful  partner-
ships  owe  much  to  the  actors  who  form  social  bonds  with  their
counterparts  (Marchington  &  Vincent,  2004 )  thereby  supporting
relationship  development.  Boundary  spanners  may  have  formal
responsibilities  to  ‘manage ’  innovation  opportunities  and  out-
comes,  or  may  simply  be  informal  ‘conduits ’  to  locate  oppor-
tunities  for  innovation  (Holmes  &  Smart  2009 ).  Those  who  are
most  successful  at  fostering  innovation  have  a  wide  range  of
interests  that  facilitate  environmental  scanning,  as  well  as  an
internal  locus  of  control  that  allows  them  to  frame  ideas  as
opportunities  (Holmes  &  Moir,  2007 ).  Boundary  spanners  there-
fore  play  a  number  of  important  roles  including  building  effective
personal  relationships  as  well  as  demonstrating  an  ability  to
manage  in  non-hierarchical  decision  environments  through
negotiation  and  brokering  (Williams,  2002 ).
Although  understanding  of  the  role  of  individuals  is  less
developed  within  cross-sector  partnerships,  there  is  an  appreci-
ation  that  micro  level  interactions  between  leaders  and  staff  in
partnering  can  impact  levels  of  trust  and  degree  of  effort  expended1It  should  be  noted  that  the  focal  relationship  under  study  was  considered  by  the
actors  involved  as  a  (community  based)  sponsorship,  but  as  such  it  cannot  be  easily
labeled  transactionary  as  Seitanidi  and  Ryan  (2007)  have  done  as  it  has  clear
integrative  ‘learning  organisation ’  qualities  (Austin,  2010a )  and  therefore  the
relationship  is  being  viewed  generally  as  a  cross-sector  partnership.2  A.  Ryan,  L.  O’Malley  /  Scandinavian  Journal  of  Management  32  (2016)  1–9
--- Page 3 ---
on  implementation,  for  example  (Vock  et  al.,  2014 ).  The  role  of
managers  in  assembling  knowledge  conﬁgurations,  identifying
opportunities  from  innovation  search  activities  and  making
connections  between  network  lines  across  organisational  bound-
aries  has  also  been  acknowledged  (Holmes  &  Smart  2009 ).  Beyond
these  few  studies,  however,  relatively  little  is  known  about  how
managers,  in  boundary  spanning  roles,  bring  about  partnership
level  innovation.
Moreover  boundary  spanners  are  inevitably  confronted  with
“the  accountability  interface  between  their  role  as  organisational
representative  and  that  of  partner  in  a  multi-agency  environment ”
(Williams,  2002,  p.  12);  where  these  accountabilities  may  at  times
be  in  conﬂict.  Thus,  boundary  spanners  must  be  adept  as  resolving
many  kinds  of  emergent  tensions  within  cross-sector  partnerships,
where  they  must  at  once  faithfully  represent  their  own  organisa-
tion,  while  developing  empathetic  relations  within  their  counter-
part  in  the  partner  organisation.  Colloquially  we  might  call  this  a
battle  on  two  fronts.  In  this  paper  we  will  build  on  this  research  on
the  boundary  spanner  to  elucidate  the  many  and  varying  roles
these  actors  play  within  both  organisational  and  the  relationship
level  innovation.
3.  Method
The  cross  sector  relationship  explored  here  focuses  on  a
multinational  telecommunications  organisation  with  a  subsidiary
facility  in  the  west  of  Ireland  (hereafter  referred  to  as  ‘Telco ’)  and  a
local  arts  organisation  who  run  a  multidisciplinary  annual  arts
festival  (hereafter  referred  to  as  ‘ArtOrg ’).  The  formal  relationship
began  in  earnest  in  1991  and  formally  ended  in  2002.2Data  was
collected  pertaining  to  this  period  and  beyond,  using  both
historical  and  real-time  data  collection  methods  (Halinen  &
Törnroos,  1995 ).  See  Table  1  for  an  overview  of  primary  data
collection  phases.  This  research  takes  a  process  focusedperspective,  which  calls  for  methodologies  capable  of  capturing
the  evolution,  co-evolution,  development  and  decline  of  cross
sector  relationships  (Selsky  &  Parker,  2005 ).  Single  point-in-time
studies  are  insufﬁcient  (Pettigrew,  1997 )  with  different  methodol-
ogies  required  to  provide  a  nuanced  understanding  of  how
interaction  inﬂuences  relational  partners  and  the  relationship
itself.  Although  longitudinal  studies  are  the  most  effective  way  to
understand  process  and  structural  changes  in  inter-organisational
relationships  (Halinen,  1998 ),  they  remain  rare  because  of  the
difﬁculty  of  securing  access  to  data  over  time  (Olkkonen,  Tikkanen,
&  Alajoutsijärvi,  2000 ).  This  study  is  one  of  a  very  few  that  enables
key  transition  points  to  be  examined  so  as  to  trace  the  emergence
of  the  relationship  over  time,  and  in  particular  the  role  of  boundary
spanners  in  bringing  about  relational  level  innovation.
While  the  case  itself  is  over  ten  years  old,  the  issues  raised  by
the  study,  the  experiences  of  both  organisations,  and  boundary
spanner  strategies  to  resolve  and  transform  the  relationship  are
contemporary.  Analysis  demonstrates  that  the  relationship
between  Telco  and  Artorg  transformed  from  a  bounded  sponsor/
sponsee  relationship  into  a  multi-dimensionally  cross-sector
relationship,  which  continued  to  meet  the  needs  of  both  parties
in  ways  that  were  novel  and  not  predictable  from  the  outset.
Insights  are  generated  that  are  relevant  beyond  this  case  through
the  process  of  analytical  generalisation  (Yin,  1984 ).  In  our
discussion  of  the  case,  we  demonstrate  how  the  issues  faced  by
the  actors  and  the  nature  of  relationship  development  can  inform
current  thinking  on  Cross  Sector  relationships.
The  evidence  presented  here  is  based  upon  a  high  level  of  access
to  the  data,  which  provides  opportunities  for  historical  and  real-
time  analysis  (Halinen  &  Törnroos,  1995 ).  Real  time  data,  in  the
form  of  in-depth  interviews  (9  in  total),  was  collected  between
2001  and  2005,  and  included  key  boundary  spanners  from  both
organisations.  In  2001  in-depth  interviews  were  undertaken  with
the  Financial  Controller  and  the  Public  Relations  Manager  at  Telco;
the  ﬁnancial  controller  was  able,  due  to  his  long-term  involvement,
to  discuss  the  relationship  from  the  outset.  It  was  hoped  that  other
members  of  Telco  staff  involved  in  the  relationship  could  be
interviewed.  However,  at  this  time  Telco  were  downsizing  and
many  of  these  personnel  had  already  left  the  company.  This
limitation  was  overcome  by  ArtOrg  providing  unprecedented
access  to  historical  and  documentary  evidence.  Interviews  wereTable  1
Overview  of  phases  in  primary  data  collection.
Primary  research  collection  phases
Phase  one
Feburary  ‘01  First  contact  with  Financial  Controller  (telco)  and  General  Manager  (ArtOrg)
May  ‘01  1st  interview  with  General  Manager  (ArtOrg)
May  01  First  interview  with  Financial  Controller  (telco)  and  PR  Manger  (telco)
Phase  two
End  September  beginning  Oct
‘01Desk  research  in  Artorg  (over  3  weeks)
Held  brief  (30  min)  meeting  with  General  Manager  (ArtOrg)  at  end  of  each  day  at  ArtOrg  ofﬁces
Last  week  October  ‘01  2nd  interview  with  Financial  Controller  (telco)
From  September  ‘01  till  ‘06  Numerous  emails  between  General  Manager  (ArtOrg),  Financial  Controller  (telco)  and  researcher
March/April  ‘02  Analysis  of  data  and  development  of  ten  year  case  synopsis
December  2002  Sent  Fergal  McGrath  and  Financial  Controller  (telco)  a  copy  of  “10  year  review ”
June  2002  Conﬁrmation  from  General  Manager  (ArtOrg)  that  10  year  review  was  fair  account  of  relationship  (on  proviso  of  certain  change,  which
were  made)
Up  to  Feburary  ‘03  Further  round  of  literature  review
Phase  three
October  ‘03  Held  interview  with  new  GM  at  ArtOrg  as  well  as  with  the  Artistic  Director,  with  follow  up  phone  interview  with  GM  soon  after
Autumn  ‘03  Integration  of  further  data
May  2003  Financial  Controller  (telco)  signs  of  on  10  year  review  as  fair  account  of  relationship
January  ‘04  Further  integration  of  ﬁeld  work  and  literature
September  ‘05  Final  Interview  with  original  General  Manager  (ArtOrg)
2It  is  important  to  note  that  while  the  formal  relationship  ended  in  2002,
informal  support  between  Artorg  and  Telco  continued  after  this.  Moreover,  staff
who  had  at  this  time  left  Telco  and  went  to  establish  their  own  businesses  or  join
other  locally  based  companies  continued  to  support  Artorg,  thus  widening  their
network  of  supporters.  It  is  difﬁcult  therefore  to  assign  a  single  end  point  to  the
relationship  (see  work  of  Havila  &  Wilkinson,  2002 ).A.  Ryan,  L.  O’Malley  /  Scandinavian  Journal  of  Management  32  (2016)  1–9  3
--- Page 4 ---
also  held  with  the  General  Manager  and  Artistic  Director  at  ArtOrg.
These  had  been  the  only  two  full-time  members  of  staff  at  ArtOrg
at  the  time,  so  a  reasonable  account  of  the  relationship  was
ascertained.  In  October  2003,  a  further  round  of  interviews  was
held  with  the  key  participants  including  the  newly-appointed
General  Manager  of  the  Festival.  Interviews  lasted  between  one
and  two  hours  and  were  recorded  and  transcribed  in  full.
Topics  discussed  included  the  chronological  history  of  the
community  orientated  sponsorship;  the  nature  of  exchange
between  the  organisations;  comparison  of  this  relationship  with
other  business  partnerships;  the  effect  of  the  relationship  on
artistic  programming;  the  reasons  for  staff  involvement;  how  the
relationship  was  managed;  the  role  of  external  recognition;  and
the  nature  of  ﬁnancial  and  in-kind  support.  Triggers  for  further
discussion  came  from  interrogation  of  the  historical  data  made
available  in  response  to  requests  for  further  detail  on  particular
events.  When  a  number  of  contentious  issues  in  the  relationship
were  uncovered,  each  informant  was  asked  to  qualify  the  nature  of
interaction  regarding  resolution  of  the  issues.Historical  data  was  also  collected.  This  included  annual
sponsorship  proposals  (11)  from  ArtOrg  to  Telco  for  the  period
1991 –2001;  annual  joint  submission  to  the  Business  2  Arts3(11)
‘Business  Sponsors  of  the  Year  Award ’  from  1991  to  2001;
numerous  press  cuttings  kept  on  ﬁle  by  ArtOrg;  a  number  of
internal  memos,  reports  and  notes  kept  on  ﬁle  by  ArtOrg  (analysed
on  average  10  per  year).  This  corresponds  to  over  120  documents
(ranging  from  2  page  to  20  pages  in  length)  and  over  200  internal
memos  and  items  of  internal  correspondence  between  the  two
organisations  and  other  3rd  parties,  i.e.  Telco ’s  PR  company.
3.1.  Data  analysis
The  analytical  frame  used  to  interrogate  data  in  the  case  was
processual  in  nature,  which  involved  searching  for  “multiple
intersecting  conditions  which  link  features  of  context  and  processTable  2
Summary  of  the  case  over  four  phases.
Emerging  phase  (yr  1–3)  Learning  phase  (yr  4–6)  Deepening  phase  (yr  7–10)  Transforming  phase  (10–11+)
Context  /C15  Telco  get  new  MD
/C15  ArtOrg  plans  larger  scale  events/C15  ArtOrg  experienced  increased  pro-
duction  costs  and  box  ofﬁce  short-
fall
/C15  ArtOrg  encounters  ﬁnancial  crisis
following  expansion
/C15  Telco  forced  by  higher  management
to  freeze  ﬁnancial  value  of  their
sponsorship  –  portfolio  –  Telco
(Galway)  increased  in-kind  support
to  balance  this/C15  ArtOrg  continue  to  grow,  going
form  1  to  2  week  festival
/C15  Planning  difﬁculties  mean  that
ArtOrg  cannot  run  a  planned  reve-
nue  generating  event
/C15  ArtOrg  face  new  ﬁnancial  difﬁcul-
ties/C15  Telco  face  major  challenges  in  their
external  environment
/C15  Telco  began  to  rationalise  opera-
tions  and  initiated  redundancies
/C15  Telco ’s  problems  intensi ﬁed  over
this  period,  with  increase  redun-
dancies  following
/C15  plant  reduced  to  minimum  staff  at
end  of  this  period
Process  /C15  Formation  and  regular  meeting  of
Telco  festival  committee
/C15  Weekly  communications  between
ﬁnancial  controller  (Telco)  and
festival  managing  director
/C15  ArtOrg  personalised  aspects  of
festival  for  Telco  employees  and
suppliers
/C15  Telco  show  high  level  of  respon-
siveness  to  emerging  ArtOrg
requests
/C15  Tensions  evident  re  co-ordination
of  Telco  employee  free  tickets  and
volunteers/C15  Telco  called  for  greater  ﬁnancial
control  on  part  of  ArtOrg
/C15  Increased  interaction  speci ﬁcally  in
relation  to  responding  to  ﬁnancial
crisis
/C15  ArtOrg  developed  calculative  tools
for  control  of  free  ticket  allocation
(to  Telco)
/C15  Alternative  to  free  tickets  offered  to
Telco  employees  (discounts,  prior-
ity  booking)/C15  ArtOrg  take  pro-active  approach  in
requesting  support  from  Telco  for
new  ﬁnancial  difﬁculties
/C15  Telco  introduce  ArtOrg  to  Deloitte
and  Touche  and  support  an  audit  of
ArtOrg  operations
/C15  ArtOrg  took  control  over  co-ordi-
nation  of  Telco  employee  volun-
teers/C15  Development  of  corporate  part-
nership  deal  took  7  month  process
to  complete;  involving  solicitors  in
signing  contracts  for  the  ﬁrst  time
/C15  ArtOrg  began  to  market  their  event
management  expertise  to  other
organisations  within  the  Telco
network
/C15  Redundant  staff  who  joined  other
ﬁrms,  or  started  new  business
became  part  of  ArtOrg ’s  sponsor-
ship  network
Content  /C15  13  fold  increase  in  ﬁnancial  support
to  ArtOrg  by  Telco
/C15  Free  tickets  to  Telco  staff
/C15  Telco  employees  acting  as  volun-
teer  stewards  at  events
/C15  Venue  branding  op  for  Telco
/C15  Small  scale  corporate  entertain-
ment  events  run  by  ArtOrg  for  Telco
/C15  In-kind  supports:  advice  on  ﬁnan-
cial  management,  logistics  and
ofﬁce  furniture  on  loan
/C15  ArtOrg  staff  attended  Telco  training
courses  in  ﬁnancial  management/C15  Telco  moved  to  more  visible  main
sponsors  of  the  festival ’s  Interna-
tional  Theatre  Programme  (ITP)
/C15  Increase  in  branding  opportunities
for  Telco  (logo  on  tickets,  venue
branding)
/C15  Content  of  sponsorship  remained
largely  the  same,  but  with  decrease
in  Telco ’s  free  ticket  allocation  and
offer  of  alternatives
/C15  In-kind  supports  continued  and
intensi ﬁed/C15  Telco  continue  as  main  sponsor  of
ITP
/C15  ArtOrg  successfully  pitch  for  50%
increase  in  Telco ’s  ﬁnancial  sup-
port/sponsorship
/C15  Telco  received  higher  level  of  free
tickets
/C15  ArtOrg  organise  Telco  ‘family  day’
and  corporate  night  out
/C15  Telco  suppled  ArtOrg  with  state  of
the  art  telecoms  system/C15  After  lengthy  discussions  Telco
become  festival  ‘corporate  partner ’
/C15  New  contract  included  explicit  PR
coverage  requirements  (at  least  one
national  news  story  etc),  increased
number  of  free  tickets  etc
/C15  Telco ’s  ﬁnancial  support/sponsor-
ship  ArtOrg  ceased  in  year  11;  in-
kind  supports  continued  for  3–
4  more  years
Outcome  /C15  Telco:  increased  visibility  in  local-
ity,  enhanced  staff  morale
/C15  ArtOrg:  increase  and  widening  of
audience  base
/C15  Sponsorship  won  national  spon-
sorship  award/C15  ArtOrg:  increased  efforts  re  audi-
ence  projection  techniques  and
audience  development
/C15  ArtOrg  increased  efforts  re  ﬁnancial
management  practices  (e.g.  use  of
BEP)  and  to  control  cost  base/C15  ArtOrg  became  ﬁrst  festival  in
Ireland  to  have  on-line  sales  capa-
bility
/C15  Evidence  of  impact  of  ongoing
relationship  with  arts  within  Telco:
emergence  of  amateur  dramatics
group
/C15  Following  donation  of  system  Teclo
have  more  opportunity  to  discuss
their  products  in  media/C15  Continuation  of  the  sponsorship
during  this  period  acted  as  ‘life  line ’
for  Telco  staff
3B2A  are  the  Irish  Business  Council  for  the  Arts  (B2A).4  A.  Ryan,  L.  O’Malley  /  Scandinavian  Journal  of  Management  32  (2016)  1–9
--- Page 5 ---
to  certain  outcomes ”  (Pettigrew,  1997,  p.  342).  Key  events  were
examined  from  the  documentary  evidence  as  well  as  from
interview  material  in  a  process  of  triangulation  (Denzin  &  Lincoln,
2000 ).  As  part  of  the  case  analysis  a  20,000-word  case  history  was
written  by  the  lead  researcher4;  please  see  Table  2  for  a  summary
of  the  case.  Following  a  more  general  writing  of  the  history  of  the
partnership,  a  further  coding  (manual)  of  the  data  was  undertaken
with  a  view  to  identifying  types  of  innovation  evident.  We
therefore  followed  an  abductive  approach,  that  is,  concepts  from
the  extant  literature  on  inter-organisational  relationships  were
used  deductively  to  develop  an  understanding  of  the  case,  followed
by  more  inductive  coding  which  uncovered  emerging  themes
(Dubois  &  Gadde,  2002 ).  From  this  process  the  notion  of  ‘problem
solving  processes ’  emerged  as  well  as  the  role  of  boundary
spanners.  Following  this  then,  further  literature  reviews  were
undertaken  to  understand  the  boundary  spanner  role  further.  After
this  phase  a  ﬁnal  ‘proﬁling ’  of  boundary  spanners  and  theorising  as
to  their  role  was  undertaken.
4.  The  case  study
We  will  now  introduce  the  key  actors  in  the  cross  sector
relationship  and  provide  some  history  and  context  to  the  case.
4.1.  The  focal  actors
ArtOrg  is  a  nonpro ﬁt  organisation,  part  funded  by  the  Arts
Council  of  Ireland.  The  Festival  was  established  in  1977  and  has
experienced  many  changes  over  its  lifetime.  With  its  origins  in
theatre,  ArtOrg  became  multi-disciplinary  in  1993/4;  its  current
list  of  art  forms  includes  street  art,  spectacle,  comedy,  literature,
music  and  theatre.  The  size  of  ArtOrg  changes  during  the  year,  with
temporary  personnel  joining  around  the  time  of  the  festival,
including  box  ofﬁce  staff  and  a  large  number  of  local  volunteers.
Established  in  1973,  Telco  operated  in  the  telecommunications
sector  and  was  a  subsidiary  of  a  Canadian  multinational.  Initially
offering  basic  telephony,  over  time  it  moved  into  web-hosting,
broadband,  multimedia  communication  servers,  optical  and
wireless  networks.  Telco  emphasised  employee  well-being  and
strong  community  relationships.
4.2.  Overview  of  the  partnership
Telco  regarded  the  sponsorship  of  the  festival  as  a  potentially
valuable  mechanism  to  build  proﬁle  with  the  local  community
and  employees.  The  arrangement  was  typical  of  a  sponsorship,
involving  a  payment  from  Telco  in  return  for  publicity  (recogni-
tion  and  advertising  space  in  a  range  of  festival  brochures);  media
coverage  (assurances  of  local  and  national  media  coverage);  and
venue  branding  (Meenaghan,  1998 ).  However,  as  a  result  of  the
degree  of  interaction  and  involvement  by  Telco  personnel  in  the
arts  events,  the  relationship  was  more  embedded  than  a  typical
sponsorship  arrangement.  From  the  very  ﬁrst  year,  Telco  was
given  a  ticket  allocation  and  thus  participated  as  part  of  the
audience  as  well  as  sponsor.  Additionally,  senior  management  at
Telco  encouraged  employees  to  volunteer  at  events,  creating
opportunities  for  interaction  at  several  levels.  Further  in-kind
support  came  in  the  form  of  ﬁnancial  advice  including  how  to
computerise  accounts,  manage  cash  ﬂow,  project  budgets  and
write  funding  applications.  This  support  had  important  implica-
tions  for  ArtOrg ’s  ability  to  achieve  and  even  expand  its
organisational  goals.  In  this  case  we  will  highlight  the  role
played  by  key  protagonists  in  the  Telco-ArtOrg  relationship;including  Liam  (Telco  Financial  Controller,  and  main  contact  from
Telco  side)  and  Fergal  (Managing  Director  of  ArtOrg  and  main
contact  from  ArtOrg  side).
From  the  outset  Liam  had  a  clear  vision  of  how  the  relationship
should  be  and  this  vision  was  not  unacceptable  to  ArtOrg;  “[Liam]
would  have  been  both  anxious,  adamant  or  enthusiastic,  I  am  not  sure
which  is  the  word,  to  ensure  that  it  wasn ’t  just  a  cheque  being  handed
over,  that  he  wanted  to  get  the  staff  involved ”  Fergal .  The  involvement
of  Telco  personnel  from  the  outset  contributed  to  the  potential  for
informal  interaction  and  the  potential  for  a  ﬂattening  of  hierarchies
(Kolk  et  al.,  2010 ).  However,  as  this  case  demonstrates,  relationship
development  was  not  unproblematic,  and  required  the  attention
and  efforts  of  key  boundary  spanners  to  exchange  knowledge  (
Holmes  &  Smart  2009 )  and,  to  realise  the  potential  of  the
relationship.
4.3.  Boundary  spanning  and  innovation  in  ArtOrg,  Telco  and  the
relationship
Due  to  the  longitudinal  nature  of  our  data,  it  is  possible  to  track
and  therefore  trace  how  both  parties,  in  response  to  speci ﬁc
triggers  and  events,  develop  new  capacities  to  act,  within  the
relationship.  To  elucidate  on  this  we  will  ﬁrstly  focus  on  one  such
case  of  learning  in  the  relationship.  The  focus  here  is  the  events  and
activities  that  followed  two  crises  in  the  partnership.  Both  crises
were  caused  by  ﬁnancial  difﬁculties  faced  by  ArtOrg;  they  occurred
in  year  4  and  year  7  of  our  study.
While  ArtOrg  consistently  experienced  ﬁnancial  pressure  (as
common  for  such  organisations)  in  year  4  of  the  relationship  due
to  some  particular  contextual  factors  they  faced  a  critical  ﬁnancial
deﬁcit  following  the  year  4  festival  and  ArtOrg  turned  to  Telco,
and  Liam  in  particular,  for  extra  support  in  order  to  survive.
However,  at  the  same  time  Telco  (worldwide)  changed  their
policy  regarding  the  level  of  discretion  local  plants  had  in  relation
to  high  value  sponsorship  arrangements,  requiring  all  local
decisions  to  be  signed  of  at  HQ  level.  This  changed  the  Telco/
Artorg  dynamic  by  potentially  invoking  Telco  HQ  in  the
relationship.  However,  rather  than  adhering  to  this  new  policy
Telco's  ﬁnancial  controller  (Liam)  communicated  the  situation
openly  with  Artorg  and  made  suggestions  as  to  how  the  potential
negative  impact  of  this  development  could  be  minimised.  The
idea  being  to  keep  the  direct  monetary  value  of  the  sponsorship
steady,  while  continuing  to  develop  in  kind  supports  i.e.
expertise,  equipment,  technology  share  etc.  This  gives  some
indication  of  the  relationship  Telco  (Galway)  were  willing  to  have
with  Telco  (Headquarters).  Furthermore,  the  reaction  of  both
parties  to  this  ﬁnancial  crisis  transformed  the  nature  of
interaction  between  them.  This  is  evidenced  by  increased
intensity  of  interaction  (meetings,  e-mails  etc),  and  also  by  the
informal,  and  supportive  manner  in  which  the  key  boundary
spanners  were  able  to  deal  with  the  issues.
It  was  an  accountant ’s  view  [i.e.  the  ﬁnancial  controller]  that
our  difﬁculties  weren ’t  at  all  insurmountable,  they  just  needed
to  be  addressed  in  the  immediate  term...  and  then  in  the  long
term  [that]  we  needed  to  see  beyond  the  immediate  crisis.  That
was  just  ﬁnancial  expertise  (Fergal).
For  example,  Liam  proposed  that  ArtOrg  be  more  articulate
about  what  they  needed,  and  explicitly  ask  Telco  for  their
assistance.  ArtOrg  took  this  on  board  as  Fergal  outlines  below:
“We  went  to  Telco  in  the  autumn  of  1994  and  briefed  GK  (Telco
MD)  .  .  .  of  our  difﬁculty  and  in  doing  so,  at  the  same  time,  we
wanted  to  retain  his  conﬁdence  in  our  assets  so  we  went  to  him
with  (i)  we  had  difﬁculty,  (ii)  looking  for  ideas  where  they  might
help  us  an  (iii)  at  the  same  time  retain  their  conﬁdence  in  us”
(Fergal)4A  copy  of  this  is  available  from  the  corresponding  author  on  request.A.  Ryan,  L.  O’Malley  /  Scandinavian  Journal  of  Management  32  (2016)  1–9  5
--- Page 6 ---
In  response,  Liam,  offered  an  accountant  for  a  month  to
computerise  Artorg  accounts;  logistics  support  running  up  to  the
festival;  and  the  loan  of  ofﬁce  equipment.  The  ﬁnancial  controller
also  played  an  important  mediating  role  between  the  formal  senior
management  of  Telco  and  ArtOrg:
As  we  were  advancing  then  to  secure  their  support  on  a  long
term  [basis]  .  .  .  Liam  would  have  just  guided  us  or  advised  us
or  warned  us  that  we  would  have  to  come  up  with  a  fairly
detailed  proposal  that  would  turn  them  on,  and  retain  their
support  and  renew  their  conﬁdence  in  us  to  make  sure  that  they
would  be  excited  by  continuing  to  deal  with  us  (Fergal).
This  mediating  role  was  critical  (Holmes  &  Smart  2009 ;  Jamali
et  al.,  2011 ),  as  it  created  a  safe  space  for  ArtOrg  to  reﬂect  on  their
situation  and  respond  creatively  to  the  requests  made  by  the  Telco
MD,  some  of  which  were  contentious  in  nature.  Moreover,  when
Telco  called  on  ArtOrg  to  act  in  quite  speci ﬁc  ways  to  rescue  the
relationship,  Fergal  acted  to  manage  the  boundary  (Williams,
2002 ).  For  example,  when  the  MD  looked  for  an  explicit  response
for  his  idea  on  a  community  winter  program,  Fergal  pointed  out  in
their  year  5  proposal  that  the  festival  was  already  highly
community  orientated,  thus  subverting  this  explicit  request.  This
response  both  acknowledges  Telco ’s  request  and  asserts  ArtOrg ’s
identity.
What  is  important  to  note  is  that  the  ‘solving ’  of  ArtOrg ’s
ﬁnancial  management  challenges  was  not  a  once  off  issue,  but
required  ongoing  efforts  on  the  part  of  Liam  and  Fergal.  Part  of  this
was  the  internalising  of  ﬁnancial  management  processes,  which
reached  a  pivot  point  in  year  7  when,  using  funding  from  the  Arts
Council  and  Telco,  ArtOrg  commissioned  the  services  of  an  external
ﬁrm  to  audit  the  festival.  This  review  then  highlighted  a  potentially
problematic  issue  within  the  relationship  regarding  the  allocation
of  free  and  also  discounted  tickets  for  Telco  employees.  While  Telco
volunteer  programme  and  allocation  of  free  tickets,  were  an
innovative  feature  of  the  partnership  from  day  one,  it  was  the
ongoing  coordination  of  these  that  became  more  of  a  challenge
than  had  been  initially  conceived.  For  instance,  free  tickets  offered
to  staff  were  a  key  part  of  the  sponsorship,  however,  evidence  from
the  data  suggests  that  discrepancies  formed  between  demand  and
supply.  Eventually  as  ArtOrg  searched  for  ways  to  re-position  itself
in  the  relationship  the  managing  director  learned  to  equate  value
of  free  tickets  to  value  of  cash  given  by  Telco  as  part  of  the
sponsorship  deal.  Following  this  the  value  of  the  free
ticket  allocation  was  recognised,  and  resulted  in  ArtOrg  initiating
strict  parameters  aimed  to  “avoid  administrative/control  difﬁculties
at  [their]  busiest  time ”  (email  from  Fergal  to  Liam  30.5.00).
In  this  example  then  we  can  trace  how  free  tickets  moved  from
a  something  donated,  whose  value  was  not  calculated  to  an
something  exchanged  as  part  of  the  sponsorship  deal,  whose  value
was  precisely  calculated;  evidencing  a  clear  innovation  in  the
partnership.  This,  in  turn,  enabled  ArtOrg  to  internalise  new
thinking  and  develop  the  necessary  management  structures  to
extract  value  from  these:
“They  [Deloitte  &  Touche]  put  in  place  structures  and
procedures  that  could  cope  with  the  scale  of  the  turnover,
[which]  brought  about  a  stability  [in  the]  programming.  It  is  not
that  there  is  ﬁnance  on  one  hand,  and  an  artistic  programme  on
the  other,  the  two  are  closely  linked.  The  artistic  director  works
hand  in  glove  with  the  general  manager  and  the  ﬁnancial
controller.  As  the  programme  is  being  planned,  it  is  being
costed,  it  is  being  factored  [in]  and  the  cumulative  affect  is  being
assessed  as  we  proceed  from  day  one. ”  (Fergal).
An  important  outcome,  therefore,  of  this  review  process  was
the  development  in  Artorg ’s  capacity  to  act  more  strategically,  in  a
manner  that  did  not  negatively  affect  their  innovative  artisticprogramming.  However,  this  was  something  that  required  careful
treatment  by  Fergal  in  order  to  balance  the  artistic  vision  of  the
festival;
“[The  new  systems  do  not]  undermine  the  [artistic]  programme,
it  strengthens  the  programme,  because  at  any  point  in  time  we
know  what  we  have  to  spend,  what  we  have  remaining  to
spend ”(Fergal).
because  we  are  a  small  team,  we  totally  work  together,  I  mean,  I
would  always,  no  matter  what  was  going  on,  communicate  all
the  time —between  me  and  Fergal  .  .  .  we  don ’t  work  in
isolation. ”  (Rose  Artistic  Director  ArtOrg)
ArtOrg  experienced  another  ﬁnancial  crisis  in  year  seven.
However,  due  to  growing  understanding  of  ﬁnancial  management
systems  and  general  level  of  conﬁdence,  Fergal  was  able  to  identify
the  problems,  develop  a  strategy  and  go  to  Telco  with  a  clear  and
detailed  request  for  support.  Here  we  see  how  ArtOrg  was
internalising  learning  from  the  relationship  and  using  it  to  better
manage  the  relationship  with  Telco  and  to  concomitantly  improve
management  of  the  festival.  At  this  time,  Telco  had  a  new  MD,  and,
again,  Liam ’s  role  as  boundary  spanner  was  crucial  in  managing  the
transition:
“It  was  down  to  key  individuals  like  Liam  convincing  the  new
MD  that  he  wanted  to  do  something  dramatic,  but  required
some  capacity  from  us  to  achieve  what  they  were  asking. ”
(Fergal).
Liam  was  clearly  heavily  invested  in  the  ArtOrg/Telco  relation-
ship  (Ryan  &  Blois,  2010 )  and,  importantly,  had  both  the  legitimacy
and  locus  of  control  (Holmes  &  Moir,  2007 )  within  Telco  to
inﬂuence  how  the  relationship  would  develop  under  each  new  MD.
By  the  year  7  ﬁnancial  crisis,  as  soon  as  Fergal  became  aware  of
problems,  he  asked  Liam  for  use  of  an  accountant  for  2/3  days
coming  up  to  the  festival.  Liam  provided  more  than  was  asked  by
organising  a  team  of  ﬁnancial  information  mangers  to  work  closely
with  ArtOrg  to  integrate  their  accounting  procedures.  Moreover,
ArtOrg  took  the  year  seven  crisis  as  an  opportunity  to  engage  both
parties  in  ‘a  state  of  the  relationship ’  review;  following  the  crisis
they  began  to  take  control  over  key  areas  of  the  sponsorship.  For
example,  in  years  ten/eleven  ArtOrg  internalised  control  of  Telco
staff  working  as  stewards,  integrating  them  with  the  other  festival
volunteers.
“This  year  [ten-eleven]  became  more  sophisticated  in  how  we
managed  it.  Traditionally  a  Telco  employee  took  responsibility
for  coordinating  all  the  volunteers  from  their  side.  This  year  at
our  request  we  put  in  place  the  scenario  where  our  volunteer
coordinator  would  have  direct  access  to  those  people,  so  at  the
start  of  the  year  the  production  manager  and  the  festival
manager  went  to  meet  anyone  interested  in  volunteering  from
Telco ”  (Fergal)
“So  you  are  trying  to  ﬁnd  ways  of  bringing  the  costs  down,  or
ﬁnding  ways  or  ﬁnd  a  suitable  sponsor  to  attach  to  a  particular
project.  And  its  quite  sensitive,  because  you  don ’t  want  like
sponsors  banners,  all  over  an  artistic  production,  you  know
what  I  mean,  so  it  is  quite  sensitive  and  you  need  a  sponsor  that
is,  I  don ’t  know...  but  who  would  be  sensitive  to  the  artistic
content  of  the  thing,  or  what  ever.  I  mean  you  wouldn't  just  take
anyone  as  a  sponsor ”  (Rose  AD  ArtOrg)
Through  engagement  with  Telco,  ArtOrg  transformed  into  a
more  professional  organisation.  However,  this  created  further
tensions  for  Fergal,  in  particular,  in  terms  of  his  ability  to  manage
other  external  relationships,  particularly  those  with  the  Arts
Council  and  with  other,  local,  sponsors:
“I  am  sure  that  support  from  a  blue-chip  co,  like  Telco,  [and]
invitations  to  Telco  launches  in  Dublin  etc,  to  key  arts  council
members  and  staff  seeing  the  type  of  shows  and  the  promotion6  A.  Ryan,  L.  O’Malley  /  Scandinavian  Journal  of  Management  32  (2016)  1–9
--- Page 7 ---
of  shows  using  Telco  resources...  I  am  sure  they  would  have
impressed  the  arts  council.  [However]  we  fear  that  our  ability  to
draw  in  people  like  Telco,  might  leave  us  open  to  council  and
others  saying  they  are  ‘ok’,  ‘sure  they  we’ll  get  it  somewhere
else'. ”  (Fergal).
Fergal  was  also  sensitive  to  the  possible  impact  of  the  increased
level  of  sophistication  with  other  more  local  supports  of  the
festival.
“There  is  however  research  to  show  that  charitable  organisation
which  we  are,  or  arts  organisations,  that  there  is  a  very  thin  line
between  being  slick  in  your  marketing  and  being  perceived  as
being  too  slick,  too  efﬁcient.  Too  many  people  think  that  we
waste  our  resources.  The  bad  news  is  they  think  you ’re  getting
slick  .  .  .  So  it’s  just  that  you  have  to  be  cautious  when  you  are
dealing  with  perceptions  and  marketing ”  (Fergal)
The  managing  of  the  boundaries  between  the  artistic  legitimacy
of  the  festival  and  maintaining  the  strong  relationship  with  Telco
was  a  feature  of  Fergal ’s  role  throughout  the  relationship.
Therefore,  not  withstanding  the  level  of  trust  and  clear  levels  of
commitment,  adaptations  and  learning  on  both  sides  Fergal  ﬁnds
himself  balancing  these  two  dimensions  even  after  ten  years  since
the  initiation  of  the  relationship.  The  following  quote  refers  to  a
particular  decision  during  the  year  10/11  negotiations  that  took
place  as  part  of  Telco  coming  on  board  as  corporate  partners.
“For  the  Telco  logo  to  appear  on  our  letterhead  was  a  huge
psychological  barrier  for  us  and  when  we  came  up  with  the  idea
Telco  were  very  interested  in  it  and  we  went  in  with  sample
letters  and  that  and  their  expectation  as  that  the  logo  would  be
far  bigger  but  we  countered  that  request  by  saying  that  the  fact
that  it  was  there  at  all  was  hugely  signiﬁcant  and  it  was  major
break  through.  I  think  they  eventually  realised  what  it  was,  it
was  a  huge  development ”  (Fergal) .
It  is  worth  noting  here  that  Fergal  conceived  of  the  relationship
as  one  that  required  ongoing  ‘re-invention ’,  in  order  to  maintain
Telco ’s  interest:
“The  corporate  partnership  came  about,  I  suppose  you  could  say
it  was  inevitable  development  of  the  relationship  between  the
two  companies,  but  it  was  also  a  response  to  the  need  to
innovate  and  develop  and  advance  the  relationship.  If  we  didn ’t
do  that  it  could  become  susceptible  to  becoming  ﬂat  or
whatever ”  (Fergal).
Given  the  discussion  so  far,  it  might  appear  that  most,  if  not  all,
of  the  learning  occurred  in  ArtOrg.  This  perception  occurs  because
of  the  focus  on  the  micro  issues  that  emerged  at  times  of  crisis
through  problem  solving  and  innovation.  However,  this  alone
would  misrepresent  the  case,  so  it  is  important  to  highlight  some  of
the  impacts  the  relationship  also  had  on  Telco.  For  example,  Telco
staff  became  more  engaged  in  the  arts  as  a  result  of  their
participation  in  the  relationship  highlighting  a  potential  social
beneﬁt  of  the  relationship:
“You  are  getting  people  to  go  to  plays  that  wouldn ’t  normally
have  gone  to,  there  are  now  regular  play  goers  and  would  never
have  before  because  they  would  have  considered  it  too  arty,  it
wasn ’t  something  for  them.  It’s  made  the  arts  more  approach-
able ”  (Liam).
Such  was  their  engagement,  that  Telco  decided  to  create  their
own,  on-site  arts  events.  However,  their  ﬁrst  production  demon-
strated  that  they  lacked  the  necessary  skills  to  successfully  stage
such  an  event:
“There  were  hiccups  in  the  logistics  in  the  production  of  it  but  I
put  that  down  to  (i)  inexperience  on  the  part  of  the  Telco
employees  involved,  (ii)  the  structure  on  the  Telco  side,  there
was  probably  a  committee  of  several  individuals  but  no  oneperson  seemed  to  have  the  over  riding  responsibility  for  driving
the  thing ”  (Fergal)
The  extent  to  which  social  capital  developed  within  the
relationship  became  tangible  when  Telco  faced  its  own  crisis  in
the  end  of  year  10/11,  which  culminated  in  the  eventual  closing
of  the  Telco  plant  in  Galway.  Fergal  understood  that  the  nature
of  the  partnership  had  to  change.  In  particular,  the  amount  of
cash  sponsorship  rapidly  declined.  Despite  this,  ArtOrg  were
grateful  that  they  retained  some  level  of  involvement  with  the
festival:
“Well  they  didn ’t  pull  out,  I  mean  they  were  loosing  staff  all  over
the  place,  they  couldn ’t  be  putting  money  into  the  likes  of  us,
and  literally  lose  staff  at  the  same  time ”  (Rose,  Artistic  Director,
ArtOrg)
Indeed,  despite  the  tension  that  Liam  was  experiencing  as
Financial  Controller  within  Telco,  he  remained  intrinsically
involved  with  ArtOrg  offering  support  and  help  whenever  he  could.
“I  would  have  met  Liam,  still,  more  that  I  have  met  any  other
sponsor...  he’s  very  keen  to  keep  up  the  contact  and  his  advice  is
very  good  as  well,  and  he  has  contacts.  There ’s  no  sense  of  ‘I  am
ﬁghting  for  my  life  here,  go  away ’.  I  mean  he  phones  me  to  meet
for  lunch  saying  ‘have  you  thought  about  this,  have  you  thought
about  that ”’  (John,  MD  ArtOrg  from  year  11  onward)
Perhaps  more  importantly,  the  extent  to  which  ArtOrg
empathised  with  the  plight  of  Telco  workers  facing  redundancies
is  most  telling  of  the  degree  to  which  the  organisations  had
become  embedded:
“They  were  like  our  own  staff  then  .  .  .  just  all  together
mucking  in  .  .  .  It’s  terrible  because  we  knew  them  all  really
well,  we  had  become  friends  with  the  staff  over  the  time,  ‘coz
[sig]  they  did  volunteer  work  with  the  festival  as  well.  It  was
awful  sad  to  see  it,  people  losing  their  jobs ”  (Rose,  AD  ArtOrg)
In  the  ten  year  period  we  discuss,  the  relationship  evolved  from
a  simple  sponsorship  agreement  towards  what  ArtOrg  refer  to  as  a
corporate  partnership.  This  was  not  predictable  at  the  outset  (
Jamali  &  Keshishian,  2009 ),  but  rather  evolved  organically  in
response  to  changing  needs  within  the  relationship  and  more
prosaically,  as  a  result  of  ongoing  efforts  to  solve  problems  and
issues  as  they  emerged.
5.  Discussion
Holmes  and  Smart  (2009)  identi ﬁed  two  boundary  spanning
roles  which  were  seen  to  play  a  signiﬁcant  role  in  the  bringing
about  of  innovation  within  cross-sector  arrangements,  that  of
formal  management  of  innovation,  usually  by  senior  management,
and  a  more  informal  role  framed  as  a  conduit  that  facilitates  search
and  exploration  and  the  location  of  opportunities  through  idea
exchange.  From  our  data  we  concur  that  the  more  informal
boundary  spanner  role  best  describes  our  key  protagonists.
However,  the  term  conduit,  with  its  connotations  of  enabling
ﬂow  of  knowledge  and  learning  does  not  capture  the  varied  roles
played  by  boundary  spanners.  Building  on  Williams  (2002)  we  can
now  offer  three  distinct  roles  that  Boundary  Spanners  were  seen  to
play  in  the  realising  of  relational  level  innovation,  brought  about
through  their  problem  solving  processes.  These  are:  boundary
spanner  as  network  builder,  boundary  spanner  as  entrepreneur,
and  boundary  spanner  as  mediator.  These  roles  are  apparent
throughout  the  relationship ’s  history  and  are  not  conﬁned  to  any
particular  phase  of  the  relationship.  What  we  do  see  however,  is  an
intensi ﬁcation  of  boundary  work  during  times  of  crises  or  marked
changes  in  the  relationship  context.A.  Ryan,  L.  O’Malley  /  Scandinavian  Journal  of  Management  32  (2016)  1–9  7
--- Page 8 ---
5.1.  Boundary  spanner  as  network  builder
An  effective  boundary  spanner  cultivates  inter-personal  rela-
tionships  while  also  appreciating  the  context  of  the  problems  they
wish  to  solve  and  how  these  might  be  interconnected  with  other
issues  or  past  events.  For  example,  in  order  to  legitimately
maintain  his  role  as  managing  director,  it  was  vital  for  Fergal  to
understand  and  respect  the  role  of  artistic  director.  Over  time  he
carefully  worked  to  internalise  processes  and  systems  that  would
enable  the  organisation  to  ﬁnancially  sustain,  while  not  jeopardis-
ing  the  artistic  vision;  in  fact  it  had  the  opposite  effect.  He  also  had
to  painstakingly  work  to  develop  Artorg ’s  professionalism  (in
marketing,  accounting  etc),  while  maintaining  a  positive  relation-
ship  with  the  Arts  Council  and  other  3rd  party  funders.  This
evidences  a  gradual  appropriation  of  new  knowledge  and
conversion  into  new  forms  (Jamali  et  al.,  2011 ).  Fergal  too
understood  the  pressure  that  Liam  was  under,  and  endeavoured
to  bring  about  solutions  that  would  serve  his  interests  as  well  as
the  interests  of  Art  Org.  Liam  too  had  to  appreciate  the  needs  of  not
only  Telco  HQ,  but  of  the  multiple  MDs  that  came  to  the  Galway
plant  over  the  years,  developing  a  relationship  with  each  one,  and
continuing  to  advocate  for  the  relationship  with  ArtOrg.  Therefore,
a  key  aspect  of  boundary  spanner ’s  problem  solving  skills  lies  in
their  ability  to  bridge  interests  within  their  organisation  and  across
inter-organisational  partners.  This  requires  a  sense  of  otherness
and  an  empathic  understanding  of  how  others  deﬁne  the  problem
and  what  they  might  value  in  a  solution  (Hosking  &  Morley,1991  as
cited  by  Williams,  2002 ).
5.2.  Boundary  spanner  as  facilitator  and  mediator
The  role  of  the  boundary  spanner  in  enabling  information  ﬂows
and  mediating  between  varying  ‘interests ’  within  the  organisation
and  across  organisation  is  well  understood  (Holmes  &  Smart  2009 ;
Jamali  et  al.,  2011 ).  However,  in  this  case  the  relational  quality  of
this  role  is  further  emphasised.  For  instance,  in  sharing  important
information  with  Fergal,  Liam  effectively  created  a  ‘backstage ’
between  the  formal  interests  of  both  Telco  and  ArtOrg,  where  he
could,  with  Liam ’s  support,  develop  solutions  to  problems  faced.
Solutions  were  clearly  co-created  through  the  sharing  of  informa-
tion,  which  was  further  enabled  by  the  social  bonds  developed
between  boundary  spanners  (Marchington  &  Vincent,  2004 ),  and
Liam ’s  own  identi ﬁcation  with  the  festival  (see  Ryan  &  Blois,  2010 ).
5.3.  Boundary  spanner  as  entrepreneur
The  entrepreneurial  qualities  of  boundary  spanners  resides  in
their  recognised  capacity  for  visionary  or  lateral  thinking
(Leadbeater  &  Goss,  1998 )  and  in  their  ability  to  bring  together
problems  and  solutions  in  novel  ways.  Throughout  the  case  we
have  examples  of  both  Fergal  and  Liam  ‘seizing  the  day’  in  order  to
drive  the  relationship  forward.  Critically  here  though  we  see
clearly  that  the  boundary  spanner  role  is  not  an  isolated  one.  Fergal
and  Liam  acted  as  a  kind  of  boundary  spanning  team,  identifying
opportunities,  supporting  each  others  work,  and  working  not  only
to  come  up  with  new  ideas  or  solutions,  but  working  hard  to  bring
these  about  in  a  way  appropriate  to  their  organisational  contexts.
This  role  is  certainly  underpinned  by  a  high  level  of  locus  of  control
in  their  organisations  (Holmes  &  Moir,  2007 ),  but  also  the  degree  of
respect  each  had  developed  through  careful  relationship  building.
Further  we  emphasise  that  permeating  this  role  is  a  key
capability  displayed  by  boundary  spanners,  that  is,  to  both  build
bridges  across  organisational  and  inter-organisational  dimensions,
while  at  the  same  time  be  capable  of  creating  a  (temporary)  wall
between  organisations  if  required.  Therefore,  a  key  feature  is  that
they  must  act  on  (at  least)  two,  sometimes  opposing  sides  andtherefore  must  be  adept  at  breaking  down  boundaries  between
themselves  and  the  partner  organisation,  to  listen  more  empa-
thetically  and  build  trust  but  they  also  need  to  enforce  boundaries
to  protect  themselves  from  enmeshment  with  the  other ’s
problems  (Williams,  2002 ).  This  then  requires  careful  judgement
and  skill.  But  further  to  this  we  wish  to  highlight  how  the  actions
played  by  their  counterpart  can  enable  and  facilitate  the  boundary
spanner.  As  such  while  we  are  focused  on  the  individual,  we
recognise  that  the  role  not  only  shapes  interaction,  but  is  shaped  by
it,  and  is  ultimately  relational  in  character.
6.  Conclusion
The  aim  of  this  paper  is  to  highlight  the  role  that  boundary
spanners  play  in  the  realising  of  innovation  within  cross  sector
partnerships  as  they  go  about  their  day  to  day  problem  solving
activities.  In  doing  so  we  also  draw  further  attention  to  what  it
takes  to  realise  the  potential  of  any  cross  sector  partnerships.  From
these  ﬁndings  we  can  say,  that  rather  than  an  ex  ante  phenomena,
the  ‘strategic  ﬁt’  between  the  two  organisations  (for  example  of
this  research  see  Becker-Olsen  &  Hill,  2006 )  may  be  better
conceived  as  an  outcome  of  successful  cross-sector  partnerships  as
the  two  organisations  learn  and  adapt  within  the  partnership.  The
focus  on  the  everyday  problems  solving  enabled  empirical
investigation  of  emergent  innovation  enacted  by  a  willingness  to
respond  to  the  changing  aims  and  expectations  of  the  developing
engagement  (Waddock,  1988 ),  and  an  ability  to  learn  from  the
relationship  and  experiment  with  the  ﬁndings  (Holmes  &  Moir,
2007 ).  Giving  attention  to  individual  managers  in  the  relationship
has  therefore  been  fruitful  in  understanding  how  the  relationship
developed  as  it  did.  Focusing  on  those  individuals  with  boundary
spanning  roles  has  enabled  us  to  elaborate  on  the  interdependent
nature  of  relational  level  innovation,  where  solutions  are  co-
created  in  response  to  ongoing  or  emergent  issues.  While  the
current  literature  on  boundary  spanners  draws  attention  to  the
organisational  and  inter-organisational  dimensions  of  their  work,
in  this  paper  we  have  been  able  to  elucidate  upon  the  relational
nature  of  boundary  spanning,  where,  boundary  spanners  from
both  organisations  can  form  a  kind  of  ‘back-stage ’  between  both
organisations  where  problems  are  discussed  and  solutions
identi ﬁed  and  tested.  In  this  regard  we  have  addressed  the  recent
call  for  more  research  to  understand  the  role  individuals  in
relational  value  creation  (Austin  &  Seitanidi,  2012 ).
Areas  for  future  research
Much  research  on  cross  sector  partnerships  foregrounds  their
importance  in  delivering  innovative  solutions  to  social  problems
(Seitanidi,  2008 ;  Selsky  &  Parker,  2005 ;  Austin  2010a;  Murphy
et  al.,  2012 ).  This  is  achieved  by  the  bringing  together  of  the
resources,  and  competences,  of  both  parties  to  bear  on  a  problem,
where  the  outcome  of  which  is  considered  more  effective,
sustainable,  or  just  than  existing  solutions  (Le  Ber  &  Branzei,
2010 ).  While  there  is  an  assumption  that  that  beneﬁciaries  of  social
innovation  should  be  at  the  societal  level  (Le  Ber  &  Branzei,  2010 ),
improved  relations  between  business  and  nonpro ﬁts  in  itself  has  a
societal  beneﬁt  by  “increasing  greater  empathy  and  understanding
across  sectors,  which  in  turn  can  contribute  to  more  harmonious
communities  with  greater  capacity  for  collective  problem-solving ”
(Austin,  2010a,  p.15 ).  Thus,  effective  cross  sector  relationships  may
represent  a  necessary  while  insufﬁcient  condition  for  more
societal  level  innovation.  Indeed,  we  have  seen  how  ongoing
innovations  brought  about  through  boundary  spanner  problem
solving  created  the  conditions  for  organisational  learning  and
innovation.  This  learning  in  turn  enabled  the  nonpro ﬁt  organisa-
tion  to  be  more  ﬁnancial  sustainable,  and  thus  better  positioned  to8  A.  Ryan,  L.  O’Malley  /  Scandinavian  Journal  of  Management  32  (2016)  1–9
--- Page 9 ---
deliver  social  good.  We  suggest  that  further  research  is  therefore
required  to  understand  the  interaction  between  innovation  at  the
level  of  the  relationship  and  value  creation  at  the  societal  level.
Managerial  implications
In  this  paper  we  have  drawn  attention  to  the  roles  that
boundary  spanners  play  in  bringing  about  innovation  in  cross
sector  partnerships  by  considering  the  boundary  spanner  as
network  builder  as  facilitator/enabler  and  as  entrepreneur.  We
demonstrate  the  importance  of  building  personal  relationships,
developing  empathy  and  understanding.  These  are  of  course  well
known.  However  we  also  see  the  importance  creative  ‘seizing  the
day’  type  problem  solving  processes,  and  also  the  developing  of  a
kind  of  ‘backstage ’  between  boundary  spanners  to  give  room  to
develop  and  test  solutions.  However,  what  is  also  acknowledged
here  is  the  balancing  act  of  boundary  spanners  in  meeting  the
needs  of  (a)  their  organisation,  (b)  their  counterpart  in  the  partner
organisation  and  (c)  other  stakeholders  or  society  more  generally.
This  skill,  to  operate  betwixt  and  between  (after  Turner,  1987 )  is
the  heart  of  the  boundary  spanning  role,  and  should  be  supported
by  management  if  the  potential  of  cross-partnerships  is  to  be
realised.
References
Ameli,  P.,  &  Kayes,  D.  C.  (2011).  Triple-loop  learning  in  a  cross-sector  partnership.
The  Learning  Organization ,  18(3),  175–188.
Arya,  B.,  &  Salk,  J.  (2006).  Cross  sector  alliance  learning  and  effectiveness  of
voluntary  codes  of  corporate  social  responsibility.  Business  Ethics  Quarterly ,  16
(6),  211–234.
Austin,  J.  E.  (2010a).  From  organization  to  organization:  on  creating  value.  Journal  of
Business  Ethics ,  94,  13–15.
Austin,  J.  E.  (2010b).  The  Collaboration  Challenge:  How  Nonproﬁts  and  Businesses
Succeed  Through  Strategic  Alliances ,  vol.  109,  John  Wiley  &  Sons109 .
Austin,  J.  E.,  &  Seitanidi,  M.  M.  (2012).  Collaborative  value  creation:  a  review  of
partnering  between  nonpro ﬁts  and  businesses.  Part  2:  partnership  processes
and  outcomes.  Nonproﬁt  and  Voluntary  Sector  Quarterly  0899764012454685 .
Becker-Olsen,  K.  L.,  &  Hill,  R.  P.  (2006).  The  impact  of  sponsor  ﬁt  on  brand  equity  the
case  of  nonpro ﬁt  service  providers.  Journal  of  Service  Research ,  9(1),  73–83.
Bennett,  R.,  Mousley,  W.,  &  Ali-Choudhury,  R.  (2008).  Transfer  of  marketing
knowledge  within  business-nonpro ﬁt  collaborations.  Journal  of  Nonproﬁt  &
Public  Sector  Marketing ,  20(1),  37–70.
Berger,  I.,  Cunningham,  P.,  &  Drumwright's,  M.  (2004).  Social  alliances:  company/
nonpro ﬁt  collaboration.  California  Management  Review ,  47(1),  58–90.
Cohen,  D.,  &  Prusak,  L.  (2001).  In  Good  Company:  How  Social  Capital  Makes
Organisations  Work .  Boston,  Mass:  Harvard  Business  School  Press .
Crane,  A.  (1998).  Exploring  green  alliances.  Journal  of  Marketing  Management ,  1998
(14),  559 –579.
Denzin,  N.  K.,  &  Lincoln,  Y.  (2000).  Handbook  of  Qualitative  Research .  Thousand  Oaks,
California:  Sage .
Dubois,  A.,  &  Gadde,  L.-E.  (2002).  Systematic  combining:  an  abductive  approach  to
case  research.  Journal  of  Business  Research ,  55(7),  553 –560.
Gonzalez,  G.  R.,  Ingram,  T.  N.,  LaForge,  R.  W.,  &  Leigh,  T.  W.  (2004).  Social  capital:
building  an  effective  learning  environment  in  marketing  classes.  Marketing
Education  Review ,  14,  1–8.
Halinen,  A.  (1998).  Time  and  temporality  in  research  design:  a  review  of  buyer  seller
relationship  models.  In  P.  Naudé,  &  P.  W.  Turnbull  (Eds.),  Network  Dynamics  in
International  Marketing London:  Elsevier  Science .
Halinen,  A.,  &  Törnroos,  J.Å.  (1995).  The  meaning  of  time  in  the  study  of  industrial
buyer –seller  relationships.  Business  Marketing:  An  Interaction  and  Network
Perspective 493 –529.
Harris,  L.  C.,  O’Malley,  L.,  &  Patterson,  M.  (2003).  Professional  interaction:  exploring
the  concept  of  attraction.  Marketing  theory ,  3(1),  9–36.Havila,  V.,  &  Wilkinson,  I.  F.  (2002).  The  principle  of  the  conservation  of  business
relationship  energy:  or  many  kinds  of  new  beginnings.  Industrial  Marketing
Management ,  31(3),  191–203.
Holmes,  S.,  &  Moir,  L.  (2007).  Developing  a  conceptual  framework  to  identify
corporate  innovations  through  engagement  with  non-pro ﬁt  stakeholders,
corporate  governance.  The  International  Journal  of  Business  in  Society ,  7(4),  414–
422.
Holmes,  S.,  &  Smart,  P.  (2009).  Exploring  open  innovation  practice  in  ﬁrm-nonpro ﬁt
engagements:  a  corporate  social  responsibility  perspective.  R&D  Management ,
39(4),  394 –409.
Hosking,  D.-M.,  &  Morley,  I.  E.  (1991).  A  Social  Psychology  of  Organizing .  London:
Harvester  Wheatsheaf .
Hutt,  M.  D.,  &  Stafford,  E.  R.  (2000).  Deﬁning  the  social  network  of  a  strategic
alliance.  Sloan  Management  Review ,  41(2),  51–63.
Inkpen,  A.  C.,  &  Tsang,  E.  W.  (2005).  Social  capital,  networks,  and  knowledge  transfer.
Academy  of  Management  Review ,  30(1),  146 –165.
Jamali,  D.,  &  Keshishian,  T.  (2009).  Uneasy  alliances:  Lessons  learned  from
partnerships  between  businesses  and  NGOs  in  the  context  of  CSR.  Journal  of
Business  Ethics ,  84(2),  277 –295.
Jamali,  D.,  Yianni,  M.,  &  Abdallah,  H.  (2011).  Strategic  partnerships,  social  capital  and
innovation:  accounting  for  social  alliance  innovation.  Business  Ethics:  A  European
Review ,  20(4),  375 –391.
Kanter,  R.  M.  (1999).  From  spare  change  to  real  change:  the  social  sector  as  beta  site
for  business  innovation.  Harvard  Business  Review ,  77(3),  122 –132.
Kolk,  A.,  van  Dolen,  W.,  &  Vock,  M.  (2010).  Trickle  effects  of  cross-sector  social
partnerships.  Journal  of  Business  Ethics ,  94(1),  123 –137.
Le  Ber,  M.  J.,  &  Branzei,  O.  (2010).  (Re)forming  strategic  cross-sector  partnerships
relational  processes  of  social  innovation.  Business  &  Society ,  49(1),  140 –172.
Laasonen,  S.,  Fougère,  M.,  &  Kourula,  A.  (2012).  Dominant  articulations  in  academic
business  and  society  discourse  on  NGO-business  relations:  a  critical
assessment.  Journal  of  Business  Ethics ,  109(4),  521 –545.
Leadbeater,  C.,  &  Goss,  S.  (1998).  Civic  entrepreneurship.  Demos .
Marchington,  M.,  &  Vincent,  S.  (2004).  Analysing  the  inﬂuence  of  institutional,
organizational  and  interpersonal  forces  in  shaping  inter-organizational
relations.  Journal  of  Management  Studies ,  41(6),  1029 –1056 .
Meenaghan,  T.  (1998).  Ambush  marketing:  corporate  strategy  and  consumer
reaction.  Psychology  &  Marketing ,  15(4),  305 –322.
Murphy,  M.,  Perrot,  F.,  &  Rivera-Santos,  M.  (2012).  New  perspectives  on  learning  and
innovation  in  cross-sector  collaborations.  Journal  of  Business  Research ,  65(12),
1700 –1709 .
Olkkonen,  R.,  Tikkanen,  H.,  &  Alajoutsijärvi,  K.  (2000).  Sponsorship  as  relationships
and  networks:  implications  for  research.  Corporate  Communications:  An
International  Journal ,  5(1),  12–19.
Parker,  B.,  &  Selsky,  J.  W.  (2004).  Interface  dynamics  in  cause  based  partnerships:  an
exploration  of  negotiated  culture.  Nonproﬁt  and  Voluntary  Sector  Quarterly ,  33
(3),  458 –488.
Pettigrew,  A.  M.  (1997).  What  is  a  processual  analysis?  Scandinavian  Journal  of
Management ,  13(4),  337 –348.
Ryan,  A.,  &  Blois,  K.  (2010).  The  emotional  dimension  of  organisational  work  when
cultural  sponsorship  relationships  are  dissolved.  Journal  of  Marketing
Management ,  26(7–8),  612–634.
Seitanidi,  M.  M.  (2008).  Adaptive  responsibilities:  non-linear  interactions  across
social  sectors.  Cases  from  cross  sector  partnerships.  Emergence:  Complexity  and
Organization  E:  CO,  10(3),  51–64.
Seitanidi,  M.  M.,  &  Crane,  A.  (2009).  Implementing  CSR  through  partnerships:
understanding  the  selection,  design  and  institutionalisation  of  nonpro ﬁt-
business  partnerships.  Journal  of  Business  Ethics ,  85(2),  251 –477.
Seitanidi,  M.  M.,  &  Ryan,  A.  (2007).  A  critical  review  of  forms  of  corporate
community  involvement:  from  philanthropy  to  partnerships.  International
Journal  of  Nonproﬁt  and  Voluntary  Sector  Marketing ,  12(3),  247 –266.
Selsky,  J.  W.,  &  Parker,  B.  (2005).  Cross-sector  partnerships  to  address  social  issues:
challenges  to  theory  and  practice.  Journal  of  Management ,  31(6),  1–25.
Turner,  V.  (1987).  Betwixt  and  between:  the  liminal  period  in  rites  of  passage.
Betwixt  and  between.  Patterns  Masculine  Feminine  Initiation 5–22.
Vock,  M.,  van  Dolen,  W.,  &  Ans  Kolk  (2014).  Micro-level  interactions  in  business-
nonpro ﬁt  partnerships.  Bus.  Soc.,  53(July),  517–550.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/
0007650313476030  ﬁrst  published  on  February  18,  2013 .
Waddock,  S.  A.  (1988).  Building  successful  partnerships.  Sloan  Management  Review
Summer 17–23.
Williams,  P.  (2002).  The  competent  boundary  spanner.  Public  administration ,  80(1),
103–124.
Yin,  R.  K.  (1984).  Case  Study  Research:  Design  and  Methods .  London:  Sage
Publications .A.  Ryan,  L.  O’Malley  /  Scandinavian  Journal  of  Management  32  (2016)  1–9  9