Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Industrial Marketing Management 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/indmarman 
Social media and customer relationship management technologies: 
Influencing buyer-seller information exchanges 
Omar S. Itania,⁎, Michael T. Krushb, Raj Agnihotric, Kevin J. Trainord 
a Department of Marketing, Adnan Kassar School of Business, Lebanese American University, Beirut, Lebanon 
b College of Business Administration, Marketing Department, Kansas State University, 4021 Business Building, Manhattan, KS 66506, USA 
c Ivy College of Business, Iowa State University, 2167 Union Drive, Ames, IA 50011, USA 
d Marketing, The W.A. Franke College of Business, Northern Arizona University, USA  
ARTICLE INFO  
Keywords: 
Social media CRM 
Information communication 
Information sharing Buyer-seller ABSTRACT  
Due to the increasing array of sales technology, salespeople must understand how each application assists them. 
This study examines how business-to-business salespeople use different forms of sales technology to meet their boundary-spanning roles. Our research draws from social exchange theory and task-technology fit theory to test a model that examines how salespeople use CRM and social media technologies differentially to support com
-
petitive information collection, product information communication, and buyer information sharing. Dyadic data from industrial buyers and sellers is used to analyze the technology-behavior relationships. Our study's results reveal social media use and CRM technology both positively influence buyer-seller information ex
-
changes; however, each technology takes a distinct route to enable the information exchange between the buyer and the seller. The results also suggest that managers need to champion the use of both technology applications to their salesforce.   
1. Introduction 
Effective information exchange between buyers and sellers is crucial 
for salesperson success. Buyers serve as a major source of market in -
telligence for sellers. Further, the means of communication between 
buyers and sellers via information technology continues to rapidly 
progress. Technologies such as social media and customer relationship 
management (CRM) facilitate two-way information exchanges between 
buyers and sellers and provide an additional lever for value co-creation. 
Information technologies, such as these, support the collection and 
assimilation of information from internal and external environments 
(Lacoste, 2016; Ward & Zhou, 2006) and help build durable relation -
ships with customers (Trainor, Andzulis, Rapp, & Agnihotri, 2014). In 
general, increasing information communication channels and in -
formation sources enables boundary-spanning employees to collect 
more information leading to improved individual and organization 
performance (Moncrief, Marshall, & Rudd, 2015; Teigland & Wasko, 
2003). 
The extant literature shares a reasonable consensus that social 
media and customer relationship management technologies are valu -
able enablers of the buyer-seller interface (Agnihotri, Dingus, Hu, & 
Krush, 2016; Guesalaga, 2016). Social media usage increases marketing opportunities for salespeople (Andzulis, Panagopoulos, & Rapp, 2012;  
Guesalaga, 2016) through market-sensing (Trainor, 2012). It can also 
be a powerful tool to collect market intelligence (e.g., Pérez-González, 
Trigueros-Preciado, & Popa, 2017; Scuotto, Del Giudice, & Carayannis, 
2017). In a similar vein, sales organizations use customer relationship 
management technology to attain sustainable competitive advantage 
(Phan & Vogel, 2010; Zahay & Griffin, 2004) by improving marketing 
strategies, facilitating communication with buyers, and providing better services and support (Wang, Hu, & Hu, 2013). Buyer-seller 
partnership success depends to a great extent on communication be
-
haviors such as information sharing and participation (Mangus, Bock, 
Jones, & Folse, 2020; Monczka, Petersen, Handfield, & Ragatz, 1998). 
Information sharing is a key relational behavior in industrial re -
lationships (Itani, Goad, & Jaramillo, 2019; Mangus et al., 2020;  
Newell, Ellegaard, & Esbjerg, 2019) as it can reduce information 
asymmetry and uncertainty between organizations (Dyer & Chu, 2003;  
Pei & Yan, 2019). Information acquisition from buyers helps sellers gain 
information and leverage the buyer's information advantage (Li, Zheng, 
Sethi, & Guan, 2018). Today's marketplace increasingly expects the 
professional salesperson to function as a knowledge broker (Verbeke, 
Dietz, & Verwaal, 2011) who ensures information sharing occurs within 
the business relationship. Information sharing within business 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2020.07.015 
Received 2 October 2019; Received in revised form 2 June 2020; Accepted 24 July 2020    ⁎Corresponding author. 
E-mail addresses: omar.itani@lau.edu (O.S. Itani), mikekrush@ksu.edu (M.T. Krush), raj2@iastate.edu (R. Agnihotri), kevin.trainor@nau.edu (K.J. Trainor). Industrial Marketing Management 90 (2020) 264–275
Available online 06 August 2020
0019-8501/ © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Trelationships can be difficult, however, because most buyers are not 
willing to share their information for nothing (Li et al., 2018). 
Researchers have examined the rising utilization of sales technolo -
gies such as customer relationship management systems and social 
media and their transformative effects on sales processes (
Ancillai, 
Terho, Cardinali, & Pascucci, 2019; Guesalaga, 2016; Limbu, 
Jayachandran, & Babin, 2014; Trainor et al., 2014). Despite this in -
creased attention to the effects of these technologies, few studies have 
explored how these tools can engage buyers to co-create value through 
two-way information exchange (
Agnihotri, Trainor, Itani, & Rodriguez, 
2017). 
To address this gap in the literature, this study examines the impact 
of customer relationship management and social media technologies used by sellers on buyer information sharing in a business-to-business 
selling context. Specifically, we assert that the social media and cus
-
tomer relationship management technologies uniquely aid salespeople in carrying out two major job tasks, that of competitive intelligence 
collection and product information communication. 
We present a conceptual model grounded in social exchange theory 
and task-technology fit theory
. The model outlines our hypothesized 
pathway from the salesperson's use of social media technology and 
customer relationship management technology to the buyer's intent to 
share information. Next, we forward our hypotheses and analyze our 
model using buyer-seller dyadic data. Also, we offer a post-hoc analysis 
where we examine the extent to which the technologies have a differ -
ential effect based upon the degree of salesperson's experience. The 
paper ends with a presentation of our findings and a discussion of our 
contributions and the academic and managerial implications of our 
findings. 
2. Theoretical lens and conceptual model 
2.1. Social exchange theory 
Social exchange theory (
Blau, 1964; Cook, Cheshire, Rice, & Nakagawa, 2013; Cropanzano & Mitchell, 2005; Emerson, 1976) and 
task-technology fit theory (Goodhue & Thompson, 1995; Rapp, 
Agnihotri, & Forbes, 2008) serve as the theoretical underpinnings for 
our examination of how sales technology enables behaviors that benefit 
buyers and ultimately lead to reciprocating behaviors that benefit 
sellers. We argue that individuals are motivated to interact by an ex -
pectation to benefit economically or socially from the interaction (per social exchange theory) (
Blau, 1964) and that they can extract benefits 
of technology only if they use technology and align its use with the task 
in hand (per task-technology fit theory) (Goodhue & Thompson, 1995). 
Integrating these theoretical notions, our model is built upon the logic 
that a seller's relationship efforts, involving the use of different sales 
technologies (i.e., social media and customer relationship management) 
for specific tasks (i.e., market-sensing and customer-linking), will en -
courage the buyer to share his or her market intelligence due to the 
norm of reciprocity. 
Social exchange theory has been invoked to examine relational 
behaviors in intra-organizational contexts (e.g., Nowlin, Walker, & 
Anaza, 2018
) as well as exchanges involving buyers and sellers from 
different organizations (e.g., Griffith, Harvey, & Lusch, 2006; Pulles, 
Schiele, Veldman, & Hüttinger, 2016). In both contexts, social exchange theory supports the notion that social relationships between parties are 
established and maintained because the parties offer reciprocal benefits 
to one another over time. The premise that relational behaviors such as 
communication and information sharing are influenced by norms of 
reciprocity serves as an underlying driver for this study. The determi
-
nation of behaviors is often based on the difference between the cost of an interaction and the reward from the interaction (
Cook et al., 2013). 
In other words, the more often an action is rewarded, the more likely a participant in the exchange will act again. Furthermore, when exchange 
participants benefit from an interaction, they develop a sense of ob
-
ligation and are likely to reciprocate with “appropriate attitudinal and 
behavioral responses” (
Griffith et al., 2006, p. 86). Such reciprocation 
captures a dyadic effect and is best explicated as quid pro quo com -
munication (
Posey, Lowry, Roberts, & Ellis, 2010) or “you tell me and 
Fig. 1. Hypothesized model.  O.S. Itani, et al.   Industrial Marketing Management 90 (2020) 264–275
265I'll tell you” (Jourard, 1971, pp. 25–26). Moreover, this reciprocation 
leads to additional rounds of exchanges and provides the foundation for 
the nurturing of an ongoing social exchange relationship (Cropanzano 
& Mitchell, 2005). 
We suggest that when the salesperson provides competitive in -
telligence and product information to the buyer, it creates an oppor -
tunity for reciprocity, through an intent to share information. For in -
stance, information is a commodity that individuals share based on the 
model of reciprocal exchange (
Constant, Kiesler, & Sproull, 1994). This 
line of logic is also supported by the literature that suggests individuals share information with the expectations of reciprocation (Foa & Foa, 
1980; Lussier & Hall, 2018). For instance, a salesperson sharing in
-
formation regarding product information or competitive information may engender a sense of reciprocity by the buyer. 
As shown in our conceptual model (
Fig. 1) we identify two different 
paths that each lead to buyer information sharing. The sales technology 
literature (Hunter & Perreault Jr, 2006; Rapp et al., 2008; Salo, 2017) 
endorses a consistent premise: the relationship from sales technology 
tools to sales effectiveness occurs through different pathways. Hunter 
and Perreault (2007, p. 30) posit that each specific technology has 
“differential effects on various aspects of performance … thus, how a 
sales representative uses technology and on which behavioral tasks 
(work processes) matters.” 
2.2. Sales technology and buyer-seller information exchange 
Salespeople, as technology users, respond to benefits and dis -
advantages from using certain technology. They understand when a 
given technology can assist or hinder their performance on different 
tasks (
Goodhue, 1995). As such, they “will choose those tools and 
methods that enable them to complete the task with the greatest net 
benefit” (Dishaw & Strong, 1999, p. 11). To positively impact desirable 
outcomes, the functionality of the technology must be compatible with 
the task requirements (Goodhue, 1998). Therefore, a high degree of fit 
between technology and task is defined as “the degree to which a 
technology assists an individual in performing his or her portfolio of 
tasks” (Goodhue & Thompson, 1995, p. 216). Our conceptual model 
aligns with this logic and demonstrates how the use of two distinct 
technology tools, customer relationship management, and social media, 
facilitate the exchange of buyer-seller information through two im -
portant salesperson tasks: market-sensing and customer-linking (
Day, 
1994). 
Customer-linking describes the ability to develop and sustain re -
lationships with the customer (
Rapp, Trainor, & Agnihotri, 2010). 
Market-sensing describes the ability to use market intelligence to enable 
a market focus, including an awareness of its marketplace (Day, 1994) 
and the competitive environment. The literature reaffirms the im -
portance of these behavioral tasks. From a customer-linking standpoint, the salesperson is the main customer interface and represents, “the most 
critical vehicle for building and maintaining strong customer relation
-
ships.” (
Palmatier, 2008, p. 83) and “salespeople have long played a key 
role in managing relationships and information flow between selling 
firms and their customers” (Hunter & Perreault, 2006, p. 99). According 
to Sangtani and Murshed (2017), “salespeople play a vital role as firms 
seek to develop market-sensing and customer-linking capabilities.” (p. 726). Therefore, our model conceives product information commu
-
nication as a means of customer linking and integrates seller competi -
tive information collection as one means of market sensing. We posit 
that customer-linking and the market-sensing tasks possess distinct 
characteristics. Thus, to carry out the tasks most effectively, the sales -
person chooses to use either social media or customer relationship 
management technology (e.g., Avlonitis & Panagopoulos, 2005
;  
Goodhue & Thompson, 1995; Zigurs & Buckland, 1998). 
Customer relationship management technology helps salespeople 
convert increasing volumes of data into a practical form that can be communicated to and shared with buyers in an efficient and organized way (Hunter & Perreault Jr, 2006). This technology facilitates a sales
-
person's evaluation of “alternative proposals” and “prepare graphics to 
help communicate a recommendation” (
Hunter & Perreault, 2007, p. 
21). Customer relationship management technology will help sales -
people gather and analyze data regarding the product use patterns of 
customers in the past. Customer relationship management databases 
are also used to accumulate information regarding service requests and 
other challenges related to the customers' product use. The information 
gleaned from customer relationship management technology helps 
salespeople configure current product offerings or service warranties, 
solutions per customer needs. Customer relationship management 
technology, therefore, is valuable for ensuring salespeople are well- 
versed as well as for executing product information communication 
behaviors. Social media technology, on the other hand, is best aligned 
with market-sensing tasks that help salespeople learn more about 
competitors as well as customer reactions to their own and competing 
products within their social network. Therefore, our model highlights 
the two distinct paths that social media and customer relationship 
management technology will directly influence and, ultimately, posi -
tively affect the likelihood of buyer information sharing. 
3. Hypothesis development 
3.1. Social media effects 
Social media technology offers ample opportunity for salespeople to 
access knowledge and learn about competitors and customers (
Andzulis 
et al., 2012; Rodriguez, Peterson, & Krishnan, 2012). Social media is 
recognized as a tool that can be used to collect market information 
(Dey, Haque, Khurdiya, & Shroff, 2011; Pérez-González et al., 2017). 
Salespeople may use a range of social media platforms such as, Lin -
kedIn, Facebook, and Twitter to collect information about competitors. 
These platforms hold valuable tools (e.g., social monitoring and lis -
tening) for businesses to explore and capture knowledge about com -
petitors (
Scuotto et al., 2017). As such, social media is viewed by 
businesses as a mechanism to collect competitive and market in -
telligence (
He et al., 2015; He, Zha, & Li, 2013). Competitive in -
telligence collection describes the salesperson's behaviors of “gathering information concerning competitors and the competitive environment” 
(
Rapp, Agnihotri, & Baker, 2015, p. 360). A salesperson using social 
media can follow the updates of competitors' social media pages, cus -
tomers communicating their perspectives about competitors' products, 
and other user-generated content concerning the competitive environ -
ment. 
Further, competitive intelligence collection adds to organizational 
knowledge, especially, when this collection occurs at lower levels of the organization. This type of information helps discover opportunities as 
well as risks and guides managerial decisions. Competitive intelligence 
collected by the salesperson is unique because of its usability and 
practicality, thereby allowing timely responsive reactions (
Agnihotri & 
Rapp, 2011; Rapp, Agnihotri, & Baker, 2011). For example, Scuotto 
et al. (2017), found the use of social media to acquire competitive in -
telligence can enhance the firm's innovative performance. As such, we argue that the greater the usage of social media, the greater the degree 
of seller competitive information collection. 
H1a. : Seller social media utilization will have a positive effect on seller 
competitive information collection. 
We also argue that social media has a positive impact on buyer 
information sharing intention. Social media is recognized as an im
-
portant buyer-seller communication channel (
Siamagka, 
Christodoulides, Michaelidou, & Valvi, 2015; Wang, Pauleen, & Zhang, 
2016) and is considered a powerful two-way communication and in -
teraction tool for marketing, sales, and customer service (
Huang, 
Baptista, & Galliers, 2013; Shang, Wu, & Li, 2017). By using social 
media, salespeople provide buyers with an easier and faster O.S. Itani, et al.   Industrial Marketing Management 90 (2020) 264–275
266communication channel. This allows social media to facilitate the 
buyer-seller information sharing process. For instance, Tajudeen, 
Jaafar, and Ainin (2018) studied the effect of social media usage among 
organizations. Their study shows that the use of social media improves 
information accessibility as well as customer relationships by helping 
users easily share information. 
Information exchanges through social media can enable positive 
relationship experiences and an ongoing sense of relationship trust and 
satisfaction (Agnihotri et al., 2016; Ahearne, Jelinek, & Jones, 2007). 
Social exchange theory suggests that these positive experiences will lead buyers and sellers to engage in more frequent communications. 
Increased frequency of interactions between business entities reduces 
perceptions of risk, enhances the trust in the relationship, and thereby 
engenders greater cooperation (Palmatier, Dant, Grewal, & Evans, 
2006). Furthermore, the relationship marketing literature provides 
evidence that sellers will be inclined to invest more (time, effort, and 
resources) in their relationships with their buyers, leading to expecta
-
tions of “reciprocation that can help strengthen and maintain a re -
lationship” (
Palmatier et al., 2006, p. 140). Hence, we argue that social 
media use facilitates a greater intention by the buyer to share in -
formation within the relationship. 
H1b. : Seller social media utilization will have a positive effect on buyer 
information sharing intention. 
Our next hypothesis proposes that seller competitive information 
collection positively affects buyer information sharing intention. We 
suggest that the salesperson's collection of competitive information 
serves as a valuable resource for the buyer. Menon and Varadarajan 
(1992) note the value of information associated with the marketplace. 
Competitive information collection provides a source of information 
and knowledge because competitors affect the buyer's needs and pre -
ferences and the way a market functions (
Kohli & Jaworski, 1990). 
Further market information and intelligence “represents real, action -
able information” (
Rapp et al., 2015, p. 358). Market information is an 
important knowledge source for organizations as it supports marketing 
planning capabilities (Morgan, Zou, Vorhies, & Katsikeas, 2003). 
Moreover, a salesperson's effort to collect competitive information 
demonstrates an investment in the relationship that will likely be no -
ticed by buyers. Armed with competitive intelligence, the salesperson can demonstrate a greater understanding of the competitive market by 
asking questions of increasing depth. The buyer will likely recognize 
this depth of understanding as an investment made by the seller. As 
stated earlier, such relationship investments have been shown to lead to 
enhance relationships and lead to feelings of reciprocity (
Palmatier 
et al., 2006). By receiving knowledge resources from a seller, the buyer 
will likely feel inclined to reciprocate and consider sharing some of 
their market and competitor information. 
Finally, the competitive information collection efforts that include 
asking buyers about competitive information may increase the level of 
buyer information sharing intentions. The collection provides a basis of 
expertise, which has been shown to positively affect the trust in the 
relationship (Crosby, Evans, & Cowles, 1990; Doney & Cannon, 1997). 
H2. : Seller competitive information collection efforts will have a positive 
effect on buyer information sharing intentions. 
3.2. CRM technology enabled information activities 
Customer relationship management technologies are defined as a 
“group of information systems that enable organizations to contact 
customers and collect, store and analyze customer data to provide a 
comprehensive view of their customers” (Khodakarami & Chan, 2014, 
p. 27). These information systems are integrated across organizations to 
support collaboration (Kim & Lee, 2010) and facilitate the electronic 
transmission of information within organizations and between organi -
zations leading to improved performance outcomes (
Ward & Zhou, 2006). With time, buyer-seller relationships develop and allow sellers to 
gather and move buyer information throughout the organization 
(Zahay & Griffin, 2004). The customer relationship management system 
is “designed to help the sales organization meet its objectives in 
managing customer relationships” (Hunter & Perreault, 2007, p. 17). 
Customer relationship management systems help organizations collect 
and constantly generate customer knowledge and intelligence (Garrido- 
Moreno, Lockett, & García-Morales, 2014; Khodakarami & Chan, 2014). 
These systems facilitate the knowledge creation processes 
(Khodakarami & Chan, 2014), knowledge management (Garrido- 
Moreno et al., 2014), and customer-based performance, which support 
business growth (Zahay & Griffin, 2004). For instance, due to their data 
collection abilities, customer relationship management systems enable 
firms to better align products and services with customer requirements 
and aid in creating of customer-centered product information (Mithas, 
Krishnan, & Fornell, 2005). 
Organizations invest substantially in customer relationship man -
agement technology to facilitate the sharing of information with cus -
tomers (
Soltani & Navimipour, 2016) and create a customer-seller 
learning relationship (Zahay & Griffin, 2004). The ability of a sales -
person to communicate information with buyers is enriched with the use of sales technology (
Agnihotri, Rapp, & Trainor, 2009). The tech -
nology enables the salesperson to understand their firm's product portfolio and serves as a resource of product knowledge. Research 
shows that technologies, such as customer relationship management, 
enable a richness of information and ease of access to the information 
(e.g., Chuang & Lin, 2013
; Li & Mao, 2012; Wang et al., 2013) and can 
create a clear, more precise level of communication valued by the buyer 
(Agnihotri et al., 2009). Customer relationship management technology 
allows better knowledge sharing and partnering, which in turn in -
creases organizational responsiveness leading to increased customer 
satisfaction (
Dobrzykowski, Callaway, & Vonderembse, 2015). Cus -
tomer relationship management technology, therefore, provides an in -
formational resource that the salesperson can easily access and dis -
seminate to the customer base. We suggest that as customer 
relationship management technology use increases, product informa -
tion communication will also increase. Therefore, 
H3a. : Seller customer relationship management technology utilization will 
have a positive effect on seller product information communication. 
Next, we suggest that the greater use of customer relationship 
management sales technology leads to buyer intention to share market 
information. The sales technology literature notes “A central purpose of 
information technology is to help users connect available data into 
information that can be used effectively” (
Hunter & Perreault, 2006, p. 
99). Similarly, customer relationship management technologies are found to positively enhance knowledge management by collecting 
buyer information, disseminating the knowledge across the different 
departments, and applying the knowledge to provide solutions (Hunter 
& Perreault Jr, 2007; Phan & Vogel, 2010). 
A seller's use of customer relationship management technology is in 
effect an investment in the buyer-seller relationship. As the seller in
-
vests more time, he/she is developing expertise, a greater knowledge base, and investing in the relationship. The literature suggests that re
-
lationship investments that involve time, effort, and resources, such as in the case of customer relationship management utilization, create 
opportunities for creating a sense of trust within the relationship 
(
Palmatier et al., 2006) and ultimately open opportunities for sharing. 
Hence, we propose the following hypothesis. 
H3b. : Seller customer relationship management technology utilization will 
have a positive effect on buyer information sharing intentions. 
Next, we suggest that as seller product information is increasingly 
communicated, the buyer's intention to share information also in -
creases. The information that the salesperson shares with a buyer is a 
fundamental unit of exchange. This exchange may include information O.S. Itani, et al.   Industrial Marketing Management 90 (2020) 264–275
267about the products and services, usage methods, previous user reviews, 
and recommendations (Khodakarami & Chan, 2014). As noted in the 
literature, quality information is critical for planning activities and 
preparation processes (Hunter & Perreault Jr, 2006). Information 
communication reveals customer-contact employee knowledge which, 
according to Froehle (2006), is a key characteristic that contributes to 
customer satisfaction. Further, effective information demonstrates an 
investment made by the salesperson toward understanding the cus -
tomer and creating meaningful value (
Hunter & Perreault Jr, 2006;  
Itani, Jaramillo, & Paesbrugghe, 2020). As such, the communication of 
product information can provide valued resources to assist the buyer's 
in meeting business responsibilities and facilitate the buyer's will -
ingness to reciprocate. 
The salesperson's communication of information can also reduce the 
level of risk perceived by the buyer (
Johnston & Lewin, 1996), and, 
thereby, create a greater willingness by the buyer to share information. 
Research suggests that reciprocity engenders a strong effect on in -
dividuals' communication behaviors (
Allen, Long, O'Mara, & Judd, 
2008). According to Teigland and Wasko (2003), reciprocity is a co -
operation mechanism that facilitates informal information sharing in cross-boundary exchanges. According to Hughes, Le Bon, and Rapp 
(2013)
, a salesperson can “creates an environment conducive to the 
reciprocal nature of the social exchange, encouraging the buyer to re -
spond in kind with something of benefit” such as “the sharing of in -
formation that might be unknown to and useful to the salesperson” (p. 
95). Accordingly, we hypothesize: 
H4. : Seller product information communication efforts will have a positive 
effect on buyer information sharing intentions. 
4. Methodology 
4.1. Sample 
Buyer-seller dyadic and time-lag data were collected from industrial 
salespeople and buyers. The use of dyadic data reduces the opportunity 
for common method bias (e.g., Doty & Glick, 1998
; Podsakoff, 
MacKenzie, Lee, & Podsakoff, 2003; Rindfleisch, Malter, Ganesan, & 
Moorman, 2008). Sales organizations located in India and operating in 
an industrial-market setting were randomly chosen and sent an in -
vitation to participate in our study. The setting provides an opportunity 
for greater theoretical and managerial understanding. The literature 
notes the value of studies using samples outside of traditional western- 
based settings (e.g., Bagozzi, 2006
; Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Paine, & 
Bachrach, 2000; Purani & Sahadev, 2008) as examinations are rela -
tively sparse, especially within a sales context. 
Upon identification, sales organizations were approached for pos -
sible participation and were told about the academic purposes of the 
study. Upon the organization's consent to participate, salespeople were 
randomly chosen within each organization. Salespeople surveyed re -
presented various industries (e.g., automotive, financial, information technology, etc.). See Appendix 1 for a breakdown by industry. 
The sales organization was asked to provide a list of buyers served 
by each of the salespeople. The buyers surveyed were randomly chosen. 
Within each group of buyers submitted, the randomly chosen buyer was 
approached for completing the questionnaire. The buyers were con
-
tacted, and the academic purpose of the study was discussed. The buyer was informed that the data collected was not to evaluate the perfor
-
mance of the salesperson. In the case that the buyer refused to parti -
cipate or was not able to be contacted, another buyer was randomly 
chosen. The process was repeated until data from a buyer matched that 
of a salesperson. The questionnaires of salespeople and buyers were 
assigned identifying codes to allow matching between the ques -
tionnaires. In some cases, the responding salesperson was dropped from 
the final sample when none of the counterpart buyers could be con -
tacted. On average the time between a salesperson filling out their survey (Time 1 or T1) and a buyer completing his or her survey (Time 2 
or T2) was one fiscal quarter. Fifty-seven responding salespeople could 
not be part of the final sample because of missing buyers' data. The final 
data set consisted of 162 salesperson-buyer dyads. 
For our study, salespeople served as the respondents to the fol -
lowing constructs: social media utilization, customer relationship 
management technology utilization, and competitive information col -
lection. The salesperson also served as the respondent for the following control variables: adaptability, polychronicity, and other demographics 
and work-related factors. Buyers served as the respondents to the fol
-
lowing constructs within our study: seller product information sharing, 
and buyer information sharing intentions. The buyer also served as the 
respondents for the following control variables: buyer perceived in -
ducements, and buyer satisfaction with the seller. 
4.2. Measures 
Before collecting the data for this study, seller and buyer ques -
tionnaires were pretested on two different samples of salespeople and 
buyers, respectively. The pretest helped us confirm the clarity and ap -
plicability of the statements and questions used. Moreover, three sales scholars from India and the US examined the questionnaire. Very minor 
refinement to some of the questions was recommended. 
The measures utilized in this study were adapted from prior studies. 
We utilized 7-point Likert scales for all the variables in our model. The 
measures utilized were generally utilized and validated in prior studies. 
The scale used by Sundaram, Schwarz, Jones, and Chin (2007) was 
adapted to measure seller customer relationship management tech
-
nology utilization. This multi-item scale captures the extent to which 
salespeople use customer relationship management technology. It in -
cludes items such as, “
My use of CRM technology on the job has been 
integrated and incorporated at the highest potential.” The seller social media utilization scale was adapted from Agnihotri et al. (2016). It 
describes the extent to which salespeople use social media and includes items such as, “My use of social media is pretty much integrated as part of 
my normal work routine.” 
A four-item scale developed by Ahearne et al. (2007) was used to 
measure product information communication. We adapted the scale of  
Le Bon and Merunka (2006) to measure seller competitive information 
collection. The dependent variable, buyer information sharing inten
-
tion, was measured by a three-item scale based on the information 
sharing scale developed by Cannon and Homburg (2001) in a buyer- 
supplier context. The items were modified to fit in the current context 
and specifically tapped both ease and willingness to share market in -
formation. 
In terms of the control variables, buyer satisfaction with the sales -
person (e.g., Gabler, Agnihotri, & Itani, 2017
) was included to control 
for its effect on buyer information sharing intentions because satisfied 
buyers are likely to hold positive intentions toward the salesperson 
(e.g., word-of-mouth, repurchase, information sharing intentions). We 
controlled for several seller variables (adaptability, polychronicity, 
education level) and two firm-level variables (number of employees, 
industry type). Adaptability was measured using a scale adapted from 
(Spiro & Weitz, 1990). Buyer perceived inducements were measured 
based on a scale adapted from Ahearne et al. (2007). Polychronicity 
was measured using a scale of three-item adapted from Conte, Rizzuto, 
and Steiner (1999). The number of employees is used as a proxy of the 
firm size. The list of the measurement scales is provided in Appendix 1. 
4.3. Measurement model 
Partial least square path modeling technique was used to test the 
conceptual model using SmartPLS 3.0 software. Partial least square 
path modeling allows us to analyze complex models with small sample 
sizes as it is the case in our study (Chin, 1998; Hair, Sarstedt, Ringle, & 
Mena, 2012). The psychometric properties of the constructs used were O.S. Itani, et al.   Industrial Marketing Management 90 (2020) 264–275
268examined. We calculated coefficient alpha (α), composite reliabilities 
(CR), and average variance explained (AVE) of the measures used as a 
means of assessing the reliability and validity of the measures deployed. 
All factor loadings were significant at p  <  .01, supporting the 
convergent validity of the measures. Moreover, none of the items have 
higher loading than perspective construct loading onto other constructs 
(Gefen & Straub, 2005). All multi-item scales have a Cronbach alpha 
greater than or equal to 0.7 level, and CR greater than or equal to 0.75 
level, demonstrating evidence of the reliability of the measures used. 
AVE exceeded the 0.5 cutoff level for all variables. The inter-correla -
tions of each construct with other constructs in the model were com -
pared to the construct square root of the AVE. None of the inter-factor 
correlations was greater than the construct square root of the average 
variance extracted, demonstrating evidence of discriminant validity. 
Moreover, a second test was conducted to check for discriminant va -
lidity. The “heterotrait–monotrait ratio” test (HTMT) (
Henseler, Ringle, 
& Sarstedt, 2015). The test shows that the HTMT between different 
pairs of the latent factors was lower than the cutoff level of (0.85) 
providing additional evidence of discriminant validity (Henseler et al., 
2015; Voorhees, Brady, Calantone, & Ramirez, 2016). Table 1 shows 
correlations, reliability indices, and AVE. 
5. Results 
An overall structural model using the full sample was analyzed by 
examining the standardized coefficients of the relationships hypothe -
sized and their relevant significance levels utilizing the bootstrapping 
technique. The models that were analyzed also included an interaction 
that represents the product-term between seller customer relationship 
management technology utilization and seller social media utilization 
referred to as SocialCRM following the study of (
Trainor et al., 2014). 
Within the market-sensing activities, our results show a positive 
effect of seller social media utilization on the seller's competitive in -
formation collection (
β = 0.17, p  <  .05) in support of H1a. 
Nevertheless, seller social media utilization effect on buyer information 
sharing intentions is not significant (β = 0.02, p  >  .1). Seller com -
petitive information collection effort is hypothesized to increase buyer 
information sharing intentions. Results didn't support a significant as -
sociation between seller competitive information collection and buyer 
information sharing intentions (
β = 0.08, p  >  .05). No support of H2 
is found. 
Salespeople are also responsible for customer-linking activities. We 
find that seller customer relationship management technology utilization is positively related to product information communication (β = 0.26, p  <  .01) and buyer information sharing intentions 
(β = 0.27, p  <  .01) in support of H3a and H3b. The results demon
-
strate the customer-linking capabilities of customer relationship man -
agement. Furthermore, the seller's product information communication 
effort is positively related to buyer information sharing intentions 
(
β = 0.42, p  <  .01) in support of H4. 
5.1. Post-hoc analysis 
SocialCRM: While not initially proposed, our data collection and 
study also offer a few interesting additional analyses. Based on prior 
studies, we conducted additional analyses related to the interaction 
between seller social media utilization and seller customer relationship 
management technology utilization or SocialCRM. The literature sug -
gests that integrating the power of social networking, applications, and 
online communities with customer relationship management systems 
hold marketing, communication, and interactive opportunities 
(
Wongsansukcharoen, Trimetsoontorn, & Fongsuwan, 2015). According 
to Greenberg (2009), “Social CRM takes that traditional CRM set of 
functions and capabilities applicable to sales, marketing, and customer 
support and extends it by integrating the social tools for communication 
with the customers - and to allow you to capture even richer knowledge 
of that particular customer or that deal opportunity.” (pp. 6–7). In our 
post hoc analysis, we analyzed the effects of an interaction term, So -
cialCRM, (i.e. seller social media utilization and customer relationship management technology utilization) on our three endogenous vari
-
ables. Results demonstrate that the interaction term, SocialCRM, posi -
tively affects seller competitive information collection (β = 0.22, 
p  <  .01) in the overall model. The results of the overall model are 
summarized in Table 2
. 
Multi-group analysis: We also test whether the effects of seller social 
media utilization and the effects of customer relationship management 
technology differ according to seller experience level. We suggest that 
less experienced sellers will initially possess a limited, but potentially 
expanding, knowledge base related to buyers and their organizations. 
To compensate for their inexperience, these sellers may utilize tech -
nology to a greater extent than their more experienced counterparts (
Ko 
& Dennis, 2004). For instance, a newly hired seller may be motivated to build her business network through LinkedIn or Facebook. Conversely, 
a more experienced seller may have had more time to grow their 
business network. Thus, the seller from high experience group may feel 
less dependent upon social media to build and expand their social Table 1 
Correlations, descriptive statistics, reliability and average variance extracted.              
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10  
1. Seller social media utilization 0.85 0.27 0.49 0.09 0.17 0.12 0.17 0.15 0.46 0.13 
2. Seller CRM technology utilization  −0.24⁎⁎ 0.85 0.47 0.33 0.42 0.20 0.10 0.23 0.24 0.07 
3. Seller competitive information collection 0.44⁎⁎ −0.42⁎⁎ 0.92 0.14 0.26 0.13 0.15 0.46 0.73 0.12 
4. Seller product information communication a collection communication a −0.02 0.28⁎⁎ −0.08 0.81 0.78 0.28 0.32 0.14 0.21 0.17 
5. Buyer information sharing intentions a −0.09 0.31⁎⁎ −0.12 0.55⁎⁎ 0.79 0.58 0.09 0.31 0.23 0.09 
6. Buyer Perceived Inducements a 0.04 0.04 0.10 −0.08 −0.19⁎ 0.71 0.22 0.08 0.25 0.06 
7. Buyer satisfaction with seller a −0.13 −0.08 −0.07 0.02 0.47⁎⁎ 0.18⁎ b 0.05 0.09 0.10 
8. Seller polychronicity 0.14 −0.19⁎ 0.39⁎⁎ 0.16⁎ 0.20⁎⁎ 0.03 0.13 0.92 0.32 0.15 
9. Seller adaptability 0.28⁎⁎ −0.20⁎ 0.60⁎⁎ −0.08 −0.11 0.16⁎ 0.04 0.22⁎⁎ 0.78 0.09 
10. Firm size - Number of employees 0.13 −0.07 10 −0.13 −0.12 0.02 −0.11 −0.17⁎ 0.07 b 
11. Seller education level 0.05 −0.20⁎ 0.19⁎ −0.04 0.01 0.06 0.16⁎ 0.17⁎ 0.15 0.09 
Mean 5.75 4.73 5.69 4.55 4.01 2.34 6.10 4.31 5.89 113 
Standard deviation 1.19 1.11 1.69 1.16 1.08 0.97 1.32 2.14 0.95 347 
Cronbach's alpha α 0.82 0.90 0.92 0.83 0.70 0.70 b 0.92 0.71 b 
Composite reliability 0.89 0.93 0.95 0.88 0.83 0.75 b 0.95 0.82 b 
Average variance extracted 0.73 0.72 0.86 0.65 0.62 0.51 b 0.86 0.61 b 
* p  <  .05; ** p  <  .01. Correlations are added below the diagonal. The numbers added along the diagonal are the square root average variance extracted. The 
numbers above the diagonal represent the HTMT values. a buyer data, b single item. 
The number of employees is used as a proxy of seller firm size. CRM: Customer relationship management.  O.S. Itani, et al.   Industrial Marketing Management 90 (2020) 264–275
269connections while “salespeople with more experienced learned how to 
be effective without the use of modern sales technologies” (Hunter & 
Perreault, 2006, p. 98). Similarly, less experienced sellers may be more 
motivated to exploit the rich data available in a customer relationship 
management repository. More experienced sellers, on the other hand, 
have a wealth of personal experiences and product knowledge from 
which to draw. As such, the experienced sellers may feel less dependent 
on customer relationship management technology to gain contextual knowledge about their firm and their customers. Further, the high ex
-
perienced seller may have more self-efficacy in their abilities and choose not to rely on technology. 
To conduct the post-hoc analysis we relied on the mean-splitting 
approaches used by prior studies (e.g., Ju & Gao, 2017
; Laroche, Yang, 
Kim, & Richard, 2007; Menon & Dubé, 2007). In this approach, sales -
people were categorized into low experience (mean years = 3.49) 
versus high experience (mean years = 9.39). This categorization 
method was supported using the K-means clustering approach. Before 
running the multi-group analysis (MGA), the measurement invariance 
for composite models (MICOM) approach proposed by Henseler, Ringle, 
and Sarstedt (2016) was conducted to establish measurement in -
variance. MICOM approach follows a three-step procedure. The first 
step is configural invariance; the second step is compositional in -
variance; and, the third step is the equality of composite mean values and variances Henseler et al. (2016)
. The results demonstrate full 
measurement invariance with configural invariance, compositional in -
variance, and equality of mean values and variances between the high 
and low seller experience group. Based on the MICOM results, the MGA 
was conducted using the bootstrapping method (
Hair Jr, Sarstedt, 
Ringle, & Gudergan, 2017). The Partial Least Squares Multi-Group Analysis (PLS-MGA), as well as Parametric Test, approaches within the 
SmartPLS provide evidence of the significant differences in some of the 
path coefficients between the High and Low seller experience groups 
(Henseler, Ringle, & Sinkovics, 2009; Sarstedt, Henseler, & Ringle, 
2011). 
The results from the MGA demonstrate that the positive link be
-
tween seller social media utilization and seller competitive information collection is greater for less experienced salespeople (
β = 0.22, 
p  <  .01) compared to more experienced salespeople (β = −0.06, 
p  >  .05). The coefficient difference between the two groups 
(∆β = 0.28, p  <  .05) is significant. The results demonstrate a stronger 
positive effect of seller social media utilization on buyer information sharing intentions for less experienced salespeople (β = 0.15, p  <  .05) 
versus more experienced salespeople (β = −0.14, p  >  .05). The 
coefficient difference between the two groups (∆β = 0.29, p  <  .05) is 
significant. 
The findings also show a positive effect of customer relationship 
management technology on product information communication for 
less experienced salespeople (β = 0.41, p  <  .01) compared to a 
nonsignificant effect for high experienced salespeople (β = 0.13, 
p  >  .05). This finding suggests that less experienced salespeople are 
more likely to assist themselves with customer relationship manage -
ment technology when sharing information with buyers. The coefficient difference between the two groups (∆
β = 0.28, p  <  .05) is significant. 
The effect of seller customer relationship management technology uti -
lization on buyer information sharing intentions is positive and sig -
nificant for low and high experienced groups. No significant differences were found between the two groups. 
6. Discussion 
In today's buyer-seller relationships, the buyer is increasingly per
-
ceived as a value co-creator (
Vargo & Lusch, 2008). Information tech -
nology and digitization have allowed industrial buyers to conduct ex -
tensive research, collect market information, and better understand 
competitive offerings. As such, buyers serve an important role in the 
development of market knowledge (
Menguc, Auh, & Uslu, 2013) and 
the provision of market intelligence (Hughes et al., 2013; Rapp et al., 
2015). Buyers can provide knowledge about products and services 
within their industry and information regarding competitive offerings 
and their distinct benefits (e.g., Khodakarami & Chan, 2014). Hence, 
buyers have evolved into an increasingly valued source of information 
by salespeople and the selling organization. Salespeople can integrate 
buyer-developed information into their firm's knowledge base, thereby 
aiding the selling organization in developing more valued market of -
ferings and creating a competitive barrier. 
However, the salesperson faces a challenge. She must ensure her 
activities create an opportunity for the buyer to share information. Our 
study focuses on this vital salesperson role. We attempt to understand 
how the salesperson's use of technology may enable the willingness of 
the buyer to share information with the seller. 
Using task-technology fit theory and social exchange theory, we 
suggest that the salesperson must ensure alignment between the Table 2 
Results – overall model.      
Predictors Dependent variables 
Competitive information 
collection Product information communication Buyer information sharing 
intentions  
Seller social media utilization 0.17⁎ (0.07) [H1a: Supported] 0.12 (0.07) 0.02 (0.05) 
[H1b: Not supported] 
Seller CRM technology utilization −0.25⁎⁎ (0.05) 0.26⁎⁎ (0.08) [H3a: Supported] 0.27⁎⁎ (0.06) 
[H3b: Supported] 
Seller competitive information collection   0.08 (0.07) 
[H2: Not supported] 
Seller product information communication   0.42⁎⁎ (0.05) 
[H4: Supported] 
SocialCRM (Social media utilization × CRM technology 
utilization) 0.22⁎⁎ (0.05) −0.09 (0.07) 0.06 (0.06)  
Controls 
Buyer Perceived Inducements −0.01 (0.05) −0.20⁎⁎ (0.07) −0.25⁎⁎ (0.07) 
Buyer satisfaction with seller −0.10⁎ (0.04) 0.18 (0.10) 0.49⁎⁎ (0.05) 
Seller polychronicity 0.26⁎⁎ (0.05) 0.17⁎ (0.07) 0.06 (0.05) 
Seller adaptability 0.44⁎⁎ (0.06) −0.11 (0.08) −0.04 (0.05) 
Firm size (number of employees) 0.05 (0.02) −0.08 (0.05) 0.04 (0.04) 
Seller educational level 0.03 (0.05) −0.03 (0.07) −0.01 (0.04) 
Industry −0.12⁎ (0.06) 0.10 (0.08) 0.06 (0.05) 
*p  <  .05; ** p  <  .01. Standardized coefficient is reported with standard deviation in parentheses. Industry (1 = service; 0 = product).  O.S. Itani, et al.   Industrial Marketing Management 90 (2020) 264–275
270technology tools used and the sales behavior required (Goodhue & 
Thompson, 1995; Hunter & Perreault Jr, 2007). Accordingly, our model 
focuses on understanding how a salesperson's investment of time and resources in sales technologies may yield returns, such as the buyer 
sharing information with the salesperson. More specifically, we posit 
that a seller's relationship efforts, including the use of time and re
-
sources in sales technologies, will encourage the buyer to share his or 
her market intelligence due to the norm of reciprocity. 
Our results contribute to the literature by demonstrating that social 
media and customer relationship management technology are tools that 
aid the salesperson in fulfilling two distinct roles, that of market sensing 
activities and customer-linking activities. Specifically, our findings 
show that a seller's social media utilization enhances the competitive 
information collection abilities of the seller. Conversely, the seller's use 
of customer relationship management enabled information activities to 
help with the seller's ability to communicate product information. As 
such, we demonstrate that salespeople may be increasingly expected to 
understand and harness distinctive forms of sales technology to meet 
their ever-expanding boundary-spanning role. 
Second, we contribute to the literature by demonstrating a specific 
pathway that originates from the salesperson's use of technology 
through a customer-linking mechanism that influences the buyer's 
willingness to share market information. Our results show that seller 
customer relationship management technology utilization positively 
affects the level of seller's product information communication and that 
seller's product information communication facilitates buyer informa -
tion sharing intentions. While, in the past, the investment in customer relationship management technology has been questioned (
Rapp et al., 
2010), our findings demonstrate the value created by customer re -
lationship management utilization. Our results highlight that sales -
person customer relationship management use can facilitate important 
tasks related to customer linking. 
In a similar vein, our results also demonstrated a direct path from 
the use of customer relationship management technology to buyer in -
formation sharing intention. This finding reinforces the value of the 
salesperson's use of customer relationship management. We suggest 
such use demonstrates a relationship investment that is valued by the 
buyer (
Palmatier et al., 2006). As such, this investment in the re -
lationship plausibly garners additional resources from the buyer, 
namely information sharing. Further, this finding contributes to the 
literature, as many scholars have noted the relative hesitation of 
salespeople to fully adopt customer relationship management tech -
nology (e.g., King & Burgess, 2008
; Rapp et al., 2010). We suggest our 
research demonstrates the value for salespeople in understanding and 
using customer relationship management technology. 
Third, we demonstrate how the use of sales technology is related to 
an important salesperson objective, that of the buyer sharing informa -
tion. Previously, research has examined the role of social media and customer relationship management on more salesperson performance- 
based results, such as relational performance (
Ogilvie, Agnihotri, Rapp, 
& Trainor, 2018; Rodriguez, Ajjan, & Peterson, 2016; Trainor et al., 
2014), selling performance (Itani, Agnihotri, & Dingus, 2017; Schultz, 
Schwepker, & Good, 2012), and brand sales performance (Rapp, Beitelspacher, Grewal, & Hughes, 2013). Our research makes a unique 
contribution by examining an important but relatively under-re
-
searched performance outcome, that of the buyer's intention to share 
information. As such, we examine a distinct form of customer engage -
ment and value creation (
Brodie, Hollebeek, Jurić, & Ilić, 2011). 
Fourth, we also contribute to the literature by demonstrating one 
potential limitation involved with the salesperson's usage of social 
media. We align with prior literature that has suggested the value of 
salesperson's usage of social media lies in enabling important sales- 
based activities, such as knowledge-gathering, identifying buying 
needs, and determining sales opportunities (Ancillai et al., 2019;  Andzulis et al., 2012). Our findings add another valued activity in 
which social media use can assist the salesperson, that of competitive 
information collection. Interestingly, we find the seller's use of social 
media does not directly facilitate the buyer's information sharing in -
tention. Nor do our results show that seller competitive information 
collection efforts possess a positive effect on buyer information sharing 
intention. We suggest that the findings show that while social media 
enables a valuable market-sensing responsibility, (i.e. competitive data 
collection,) the seller's investment of time and resources into social 
media may not be a highly valued relationship investment by the buyer 
(
Palmatier et al., 2006). Similarly, the expertise generated by the sell -
er's competitive data collection may not be a valued form of expertise by the buyer (
Palmatier et al., 2006). Perhaps a buyer may perceive that 
competitive data information collection serves as a more beneficial 
outcome for the seller as compared to the benefit accruing to the buyer. 
In summary, our results provide a more nuanced view regarding the 
salesperson's use of social media. 
7. Managerial implications 
Our findings also provide several implications for managerial 
practice. The salesperson's boundary spanning role encompasses many 
activities and responsibilities. The expectations for salesperson perfor -
mance continue to increase and the role continues to be redefined. 
For B2B firms that promote a value-based selling approach to serve 
their customers, our study serves as an advisory on seller social media and customer relationship management utilization and provides direc
-
tion on both forms of sales technology. 
First, our findings suggest that a more nuanced view may be needed 
concerning the salesperson's use of sales technology and the activity in 
which she is attempting to fulfill. Sales organizations are required to 
support boundary spanning and information sourcing from internal as 
well as external sources (
Krush, Agnihotri, Trainor, & Nowlin, 2013;  
Teigland & Wasko, 2003). Our findings demonstrate that distinct forms 
of sales technology enable the salesperson to carry out distinct activities 
within their boundary-spanning role. Because social media use is better 
equipped for competitive intelligence collection and customer re -
lationship management technology is better suited for enabling product information communication, the salesperson will increasingly need to 
be versed in both technologies. 
This finding is managerially relevant because an important sales 
manager role is to enable salesforce productivity. By championing the 
value of both customer relationship management technology and social 
media, the manager encourages an approach to enable more productive 
customer interactions. The salesperson will possess technological 
competencies that enable him/her to understand competitive offerings 
and better understand how the solution may align with the customer's 
needs. 
Second, managers often champion the need for salespeople to en
-
hance buyer-seller engagement. Our findings make a strong case for 
dual-use and integration of social media and customer relationship 
management that delivers a seamless experience to both, the seller and 
the buyer, as they build meaningful and productive information op -
portunities and the potential to co-create and share value. Hence, 
managers can enable these competencies in their salesforce through 
either selection or training. When selecting salespeople, sales managers 
may want to ensure candidates possess experience in customer re -
lationship management and social media technologies. This might be 
done by asking for a portfolio of previous work, examining past social 
media, or providing a skills assessment focusing upon customer re -
lationship management technology. 
For salespeople, in their first role, managers may choose to use an 
onboarding process that provides training in customer relationship management and social media. Further, the onboarding process could: O.S. Itani, et al.   Industrial Marketing Management 90 (2020) 264–275
271a) instill the value of using both forms of sales technology and, b) de -
monstrate the unique value that each technology brings as applied to 
specific activities within the sales role. Social media enabled informa -
tion activities to enhance the information collection abilities of the seller concerning competitive information and the salesperson's use of 
customer relationship management enabled information activities 
provides a pathway from product information communication to the 
information sharing intentions of the buyer. 
Third, our post-hoc multi-group analysis provides additional insight 
to managers. Our results demonstrate that lesser experienced sales
-
people rely more heavily on these sales technologies to understand their competition and develop product communication. Perhaps, this sug
-
gests that lesser experienced salespeople need and utilize social media and customer relationship management technologies earlier in their 
career, as their personal network may not be as developed as a more 
tenured salesperson. Therefore, the sales technologies serve as an early- 
career substitute for a formal, developed professional network. Sales 
managers should consider deploying salespeople with lesser experience 
with more experienced salespeople in team-selling situations. This 
combination may provide an interesting combination of resources and 
knowledge. 
8. Limitations and future research 
We recognize several limitations of this study, many of which offer 
research opportunities for scholars. First, the study sample was cross- 
sectional and represented a very broad and diverse set of industries. 
Given that durable business relationships develop over time, a long
-
itudinal study can better inform our understanding of how relational investments develop into reciprocal norms that can aid salespeople. 
Further, it is possible that the relationships tested in this study may be 
less applicable to certain industries that may not see demand among 
customers for social media use. Future studies examining the applic
-
ability of these findings to different industries and settings is necessary 
and encouraged. 
Similarly, future studies may focus on singular industries or collect 
samples that allow cross-industry comparisons. Considering the nascent 
nature of social media research in the business-to-business realm, re -
searchers have several enticing opportunities to better understand the relationship between sales technology use and information sharing and 
exchange. 
Second, our measurement of social media and customer relationship 
management technology utilization relies on self-reported measures of 
seller technology usage. While this approach is commonly found in 
sales technology research, an opportunity exists to empirically test the 
effect of these technological tools using objective usage data from these 
systems, rather than rely on a salesperson's recollection of how they use 
these tools. The use of social media and customer relationship man -
agement technology can be plausibly measured and quantified. Such an approach would also allow researchers to tease out how the frequency 
of use and how the type of technology usage influences the constructs in 
our model. This would provide researchers with a more nuanced un
-
derstanding of how these sales technologies facilitate or hinder sales 
processes, and activities. 
Third, we only evaluated two distinct sales technologies. Future 
studies could involve several distinct sales technologies, other than 
social media and customer relationship management. Insight into other 
applications and their use would advance substantially the sales lit -
erature by comparing various sales technology applications and un -
derstanding their role within the sales process. 
Fourth, our research was situationally set in India. Future research 
could focus on other countries, multiple countries, or make compar -
isons across distinct countries or regions (e.g. North America and South 
America). By doing so, sales researchers could better understand the 
contextual effects on the relationships within our study.1 
Fifth, our post-hoc examination of seller experience as a moderating 
variable highlights the idea that other factors may heighten or at -
tenuate the relationships in our model. It is plausible that seller ex -
perience is highlighting that less experienced salespeople are simply 
more comfortable with social media or customer relationship man -
agement technologies and they have higher self-efficacy related to these tools. Related to that, organizational training and on-boarding have been shown to play a role in how well sales technologies achieve de
-
sired outcomes. Researchers are encouraged to examine other organi -
zational and individual factors (e.g., Macintosh & Krush, 2014
) that 
could enhance or diminish the effects of sales technology on salesperson information exchange behaviors and the resulting buyer responses.   
Appendix A 
A.1. Sample breakdown by industry   
Industries %  
Automobile 13.5 
Basic Materials 4.9 
Beauty and Cosmetics 1.8 
Engineering and Construction 2.4 
Financial 21.6 
Fast moving consumer goods 8.0 
Healthcare 10.5 
Hospitality 1.2 
Information Technology 2.4 
Marketing 3.7 
Pharmaceutical 21 
Others 9.0  
1We thank an anonymous reviewer for this insight. O.S. Itani, et al.   Industrial Marketing Management 90 (2020) 264–275
272A.2. Measures   
Construct and measures Loadings  
Seller customer relationship management technology utilization  
I am using CRM technology to its fullest potential for supporting my own work 0.68 
I am using capabilities of CRM technology in the best fashion to help me on the job  
I doubt that there are any better ways for me to use CRM technology to support my work 0.84 
My use of CRM technology on the job has been integrated and incorporated at the highest potential 0.93 
My use of CRM technology has been incorporated into my regular work schedule 0.94 
My use of CRM technology is pretty much integrated as part of my normal work routine 0.80 
My use of CRM technology is a normal part of my work   
Seller social media utilization 
I am using all capabilities of social media in the best fashion to help me on the job 0.89 
My use of social media is pretty much integrated as part of my normal work routine 0.90 
I am using social media to its fullest potential for supporting my own work 0.76  
Seller competitive information collection 
When I am in the field, I try to gather and transmit reliable information 0.90 
I always assign myself objectives to obtain information about competitors 0.95 
I ask customers about the competition's products and strategies 0.92  
Seller product information communicationa 
This salesperson frequently uses reprints to support his/her claims 0.81 
This salesperson acknowledges the strengths and weaknesses of his/her product offerings 0.87 
This salesperson uses company brochures to emphasize points 0.82 
This salesperson makes objective comparisons between product offerings 0.65  
Buyer information sharing intentionsa 
When talking to this salesperson I am willing to provide the market relevant information 0.75 
When talking to this salesperson I am willing to answer the queries related to the market updates 0.83 
When talking to this salesperson I feel comfortable in sharing market information 0.78  
Buyer perceived inducementsa 
This salesperson consistently remembers birthdays and anniversaries 0.70 
This salesperson will sometimes do-little things like give out holiday presents 0.81 
This salesperson remembers my spouse's and children's names and asks about them 0.61  
Seller polychronicity 
I like to juggle several activities at the same time 0.90 
I believe people do their best when they have many tasks to complete 0.95 
I believe it is the best for people to be given several tasks and assignments to perform 0.92 
Seller adaptability  
Each customer requires a unique approach 0.80 
When I feel that my sales approach is not working, I can easily change to another approach 0.81 
I vary my sales style from situation to situation 0.73 
Buyer satisfaction with sellera,b  
Overall, I am extremely satisfied with this salesperson.  
All factor loadings are significant at p  <  .01. A 7-point Likert agreement scale “Strongly disagree = 1, strongly agree = 7” was 
used. a buyer data, b single item. Items in italic were dropped for loadings.  
References 
Agnihotri, R., Dingus, R., Hu, M. Y., & Krush, M. T. (2016). Social media: Influencing 
customer satisfaction in B2B sales. Industrial Marketing Management, 53, 172–180. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2015.09.003. 
Agnihotri, R., & Rapp, A. (2011). Perspectives on competitive intelligence within busi -
ness: A tactical tool for sales-people to gain a competitive advantage. Marketing 
Review, 11
(4), 363–380. 
Agnihotri, R., Rapp, A., & Trainor, K. (2009). Understanding the role of information 
communication in the buyer-seller exchange process: Antecedents and outcomes. 
Journal of Business & Industrial Marketing, 24(7), 474–486. 
Agnihotri, R., Trainor, K. J., Itani, O. S., & Rodriguez, M. (2017). Examining the role of 
sales-based CRM technology and social media use on post-sale service behaviors in 
India. Journal of Business Research, 81, 144–154. 
Ahearne, M., Jelinek, R., & Jones, E. (2007). Examining the effect of salesperson service 
behavior in a competitive context. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 35(4), 
603–616. 
Allen, J. L., Long, K. M., O’Mara, J., & Judd, B. B. (2008). Students’ predispositions and 
orientations toward communication and perceptions of instructor reciprocity and 
learning. Communication Education, 57(1), 20–40. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
03634520701670908. 
Ancillai, C., Terho, H., Cardinali, S., & Pascucci, F. (2019). Advancing social media driven 
sales research: Establishing conceptual foundations for B-to-B social selling. Industrial 
Marketing Management.. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2019.01.002. 
Andzulis, J. M., Panagopoulos, N. G., & Rapp, A. (2012). A review of social media and 
implications for the sales process. Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management, 
32(3), 305–316. 
Avlonitis, G. J., & Panagopoulos, N. G. (2005). Antecedents and consequences of CRM technology acceptance in the sales force. Industrial Marketing Management, 34(4), 
355–368. 
Bagozzi, R. P. (2006). The role of social and self-conscious emotions in the regulation of 
business-to-business relationships in salesperson-customer interactions. Journal of 
Business & Industrial Marketing, 21(7), 453–457. https://doi.org/10.1108/ 
08858620610708948. 
Blau, P. M. (1964). Exchange and power in social life. NY: Wiley. 
Brodie, R. J., Hollebeek, L. D., Jurić, B., & Ilić, A. (2011). Customer engagement: 
Conceptual domain, fundamental propositions, and implications for research. Journal 
of Service Research, 14(3), 252–271. 
Cannon, J. P., & Homburg, C. (2001). Buyer-supplier relationships and customer firm 
costs. Journal of Marketing, 65(1), 29–43. 
Chin, W. W. (1998). The partial least squares approach to structural equation modeling. 
Modern Methods for Business Research, 295(2), 295–336. 
Chuang, S.-H., & Lin, H.-N. (2013). The roles of infrastructure capability and customer 
orientation in enhancing customer-information quality in CRM systems: Empirical 
evidence from Taiwan. International Journal of Information Management, 33(2), 
271–281. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2012.12.003. 
Constant, D., Kiesler, S., & Sproull, L. (1994). What’s mine is ours, or is it? A study of 
attitudes about information sharing. Information Systems Research, 5(4), 400–421. 
Conte, J. M., Rizzuto, T. E., & Steiner, D. D. (1999). A construct-oriented analysis of 
individual-level polychronicity. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 14(3/4), 269–288. 
Cook, K. S., Cheshire, C., Rice, E. R., & Nakagawa, S. (2013). Social exchange theory. 
Handbook of social psychology (pp. 61–88). Dordrecht: Springer. 
Cropanzano, R., & Mitchell, M. S. (2005). Social exchange theory: An interdisciplinary 
review. Journal of Management, 31(6), 874–900. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
0149206305279602. 
Crosby, L. A., Evans, K. R., & Cowles, D. (1990). Relationship quality in services selling: 
An interpersonal influence perspective. Journal of Marketing, 54(3), 68–81. https:// O.S. Itani, et al.   Industrial Marketing Management 90 (2020) 264–275
273doi.org/10.2307/1251817. 
Day, G. S. (1994). The capabilities of market-driven organizations. Journal of Marketing, 
58(4), 37–52. https://doi.org/10.2307/1251915. 
Dey, L., Haque, S. M., Khurdiya, A., & Shroff, G. (2011). Acquiring competitive in -
telligence from social media. Proceedings of the 2011 joint workshop on multilingual 
OCR and analytics for Noisy unstructured text data
. Vol. 3. Proceedings of the 2011 joint 
workshop on multilingual OCR and analytics for Noisy unstructured text data (pp. 1–3:9). 
. https://doi.org/10.1145/2034617.2034621. 
Dishaw, M. T., & Strong, D. M. (1999). Extending the technology acceptance model with 
task–technology fit constructs. Information & Management, 36(1), 9–21. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/S0378-7206(98)00101-3. 
Dobrzykowski, D. D., Callaway, S. K., & Vonderembse, M. A. (2015). Examining pathways 
from innovation orientation to patient satisfaction: A relational view of healthcare 
delivery. Decision Sciences, 46(5), 863–899. https://doi.org/10.1111/deci.12161. 
Doney, P. M., & Cannon, J. P. (1997). An examination of the nature of trust in buyer-seller 
relationships. Journal of Marketing, 61(2), 35–51. https://doi.org/10.2307/1251829. 
Doty, D. H., & Glick, W. H. (1998). Common methods bias: Does common methods var -
iance really bias results? Organizational Research Methods, 1
(4), 374–406. 
Dyer, J. H., & Chu, W. (2003). The role of trustworthiness in reducing transaction costs 
and improving performance: Empirical evidence from the United States, Japan, and Korea. Organization Science, 14(1), 57–68. 
Emerson, R. M. (1976). Social exchange theory. Annual Review of Sociology, 2(1), 
335–362. 
Foa, E. B., & Foa, U. G. (1980). Resource theory: As exchange. In K. Gergen, M. S. 
Greenberg, & R. Willis (Eds.). Social exchange: Advances in theory and research (pp. 77– 
94). New York: Plenum Press. 
Froehle, C. M. (2006). Service personnel, technology, and their interaction in influencing 
customer satisfaction. Decision Sciences, 37(1), 5–38. 
Gabler, C. B., Agnihotri, R., & Itani, O. S. (2017). Can salesperson guilt lead to more 
satisfied customers? Findings from India. Journal of Business & Industrial Marketing, 
32(7), 951–961. 
Garrido-Moreno, A., Lockett, N., & García-Morales, V. (2014). Paving the way for CRM 
success: The mediating role of knowledge management and organizational commit
-
ment. Information & Management, 51
(8), 1031–1042. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im. 
2014.06.006. 
Gefen, D., & Straub, D. (2005). A practical guide to factorial validity using PLS-graph: 
Tutorial and annotated example. Communications of the Association for Information 
Systems, 16(1), 91–109. 
Goodhue, D. L. (1995). Understanding user evaluations of information systems. 
Management Science, 41(12), 1827–1844. https://doi.org/10.1287/mnsc.41.12.1827. 
Goodhue, D. L. (1998). Development and measurement validity of a task-technology fit 
instrument for user evaluations of information system. Decision Sciences, 29(1), 
105–138. 
Goodhue, D. L., & Thompson, R. L. (1995). Task-technology fit and individual perfor -
mance. MIS Quarterly, 19
(2), 213–236. https://doi.org/10.2307/249689. 
Greenberg, P. (2009). Social CRM comes of age. White paper sponsored by Oracle. available 
at http://hosteddocs.ittoolbox.com/social-crm-comes-of-age_paul-greenberg.pdf. 
Griffith, D. A., Harvey, M. G., & Lusch, R. F. (2006). Social exchange in supply chain 
relationships: The resulting benefits of procedural and distributive justice. Journal of 
Operations Management, 24(2), 85–98. 
Guesalaga, R. (2016). The use of social media in sales: Individual and organizational 
antecedents, and the role of customer engagement in social media. Industrial 
Marketing Management, 54, 71–79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2015.12. 
002. 
Hair, J. F., Jr., Sarstedt, M., Ringle, C. M., & Gudergan, S. P. (2017). Advanced issues in 
partial least squares structural equation modeling. CA: Sage Publications. 
Hair, J. F., Sarstedt, M., Ringle, C. M., & Mena, J. A. (2012). An assessment of the use of 
partial least squares structural equation modeling in marketing research. Journal of 
the Academy of Marketing Science, 40(3), 414–433. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11747- 
011-0261-6. 
He, W., Shen, J., Tian, X., Li, Y., Akula, V., Yan, G., & Tao, R. (2015). Gaining competitive 
intelligence from social media data: Evidence from two largest retail chains in the 
world. Industrial Management & Data Systems, 115(9), 1622–1636. https://doi.org/10. 
1108/IMDS-03-2015-0098. 
He, W., Zha, S., & Li, L. (2013). Social media competitive analysis and text mining: A case 
study in the pizza industry. International Journal of Information Management, 33(3), 
464–472. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2013.01.001. 
Henseler, J., Ringle, C. M., & Sarstedt, M. (2015). A new criterion for assessing dis -
criminant validity in variance-based structural equation modeling. Journal of the 
Academy of Marketing Science, 43
(1), 115–135. 
Henseler, J., Ringle, C. M., & Sarstedt, M. (2016). Testing measurement invariance of 
composites using partial least squares. International Marketing Review, 33(3), 
405–431. https://doi.org/10.1108/IMR-09-2014-0304. 
Henseler, J., Ringle, C. M., & Sinkovics, R. R. (2009). The use of partial least squares path 
modeling in international marketing. In R. Sinkovics, & P. Ghauri (Eds.). New 
Challenges to International Marketing (Advances in International Marketing, 20) (pp. 
277–319). Bingley: Emerald Group Publishing Limited. https://doi.org/10.1108/ 
S1474-7979(2009)0000020014. 
Huang, J., Baptista, J., & Galliers, R. D. (2013). Reconceptualizing rhetorical practices in 
organizations: The impact of social media on internal communications. Information & 
Management, 50(2), 112–124. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2012.11.003. 
Hughes, D. E., Le Bon, J., & Rapp, A. (2013). Gaining and leveraging customer-based 
competitive intelligence: The pivotal role of social capital and salesperson adaptive selling skills. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 41(1), 91–110. 
Hunter, G. K., & Perreault, W. D., Jr. (2006). Sales technology orientation, information 
effectiveness, and sales performance. Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management, 26(2), 95–113. 
Hunter, G. K., & Perreault, W. D., Jr. (2007). Making sales technology effective. Journal of 
Marketing, 71(1), 16–34. 
Itani, O. S., Agnihotri, R., & Dingus, R. (2017). Social media use in B2b sales and its 
impact on competitive intelligence collection and adaptive selling: Examining the 
role of learning orientation as an enabler. Industrial Marketing Management, 66, 
64–79. 
Itani, O. S., Goad, E. A., & Jaramillo, F. (2019). Building customer relationships while 
achieving sales performance results: Is listening the holy grail of sales? Journal of 
Business Research, 102, 120–130. 
Itani, O. S., Jaramillo, F., & Paesbrugghe, B. (2020). Between a rock and a hard place: 
Seizing the opportunity of demanding customers by means of frontline service be
-
haviors. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 53
, Article 101978. 
Johnston, W. J., & Lewin, J. E. (1996). Organizational buying behavior: Toward an in -
tegrative framework. Journal of Business Research, 35
(1), 1–15. 
Jourard, S. M. (1971). Self-disclosure: An experimental analysis of the transparent self. 
Oxford: John Wiley. 
Ju, M., & Gao, G. Y. (2017). Relational governance and control mechanisms of export 
ventures: An examination across relationship length. Journal of International 
Marketing, 25(2), 72–87. 
Khodakarami, F., & Chan, Y. E. (2014). Exploring the role of customer relationship 
management (CRM) systems in customer knowledge creation. Information & 
Management, 51(1), 27–42. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2013.09.001. 
Kim, D., & Lee, R. P. (2010). Systems collaboration and strategic collaboration: Their 
impacts on supply chain responsiveness and market performance. Decision Sciences, 
41(4), 955–981. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-5915.2010.00289.x. 
King, S. F., & Burgess, T. F. (2008). Understanding success and failure in customer re -
lationship management. Industrial Marketing Management, 37
(4), 421–431. 
Ko, D.-G., & Dennis, A. R. (2004). Sales force automation and sales performance: Do 
experience and expertise matter? Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management, 
24(4), 311–322. https://doi.org/10.1080/08853134.2004.10749040. 
Kohli, A. K., & Jaworski, B. J. (1990). Market orientation: The construct, research pro -
positions, and managerial implications. The Journal of Marketing, 54
(2), 1–18. 
Krush, M. T., Agnihotri, R., Trainor, K. J., & Nowlin, E. L. (2013). Enhancing organiza -
tional sensemaking: An examination of the interactive effects of sales capabilities and 
marketing dashboards. Industrial Marketing Management, 42
(5), 824–835. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2013.02.017. 
Lacoste, S. (2016). Perspectives on social media ant its use by key account managers. 
Industrial Marketing Management, 54, 33–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman. 
2015.12.010. 
Laroche, M., Yang, Z., Kim, C., & Richard, M.-O. (2007). How culture matters in children’s 
purchase influence: A multi-level investigation. Journal of the Academy of Marketing 
Science, 35(1), 113–126. 
Le Bon, J., & Merunka, D. (2006). The impact of individual and managerial factors on 
salespeople’s contribution to marketing intelligence activities. International Journal of 
Research in Marketing, 23(4), 395–408. 
Li, L., & Mao, J.-Y. (2012). The effect of CRM use on internal sales management control: 
An alternative mechanism to realize CRM benefits. Information & Management, 49(6), 
269–277. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2012.09.005. 
Li, G., Zheng, H., Sethi, S. P., & Guan, X. (2018). Inducing downstream information 
sharing via manufacturer information acquisition and retailer subsidy. Decision 
Sciences. https://doi.org/10.1111/deci.12340. 
Limbu, Y. B., Jayachandran, C., & Babin, B. J. (2014). Does information and commu -
nication technology improve job satisfaction? The moderating role of sales tech -
nology orientation. Industrial Marketing Management, 43
(7), 1236–1245. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2014.06.013. 
Lussier, B., & Hall, Z. R. (2018). Cooperation in B2B relationships: Factors that influence 
customers’ perceptions of salesperson cooperation. Industrial Marketing Management, 
69, 209–220. 
Macintosh, G., & Krush, M. (2014). Examining the link between salesperson networking 
behaviors, job satisfaction, and organizational commitment: Does gender matter? 
Journal of Business Research, 67(12), 2628–2635. 
Mangus, S. M., Bock, D. E., Jones, E., & Folse, J. A. G. (2020). Examining the effects of 
mutual information sharing and relationship empathy: A social penetration theory 
perspective. Journal of Business Research, 109, 375–384. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jbusres.2019.12.019. 
Menguc, B., Auh, S., & Uslu, A. (2013). Customer knowledge creation capability and 
performance in sales teams. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 41(1), 19–39. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11747-012-0303-8. 
Menon, K., & Dubé, L. (2007). The effect of emotional provider support on angry versus 
anxious consumers. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 24(3), 268–275. 
Menon, A., & Varadarajan, P. R. (1992). A model of marketing knowledge use within 
firms. Journal of Marketing, 56(4), 53–71. 
Mithas, S., Krishnan, M. S., & Fornell, C. (2005). Why do customer relationship man -
agement applications affect customer satisfaction? Journal of Marketing, 69
(4), 
201–209. 
Moncrief, W. C., Marshall, G. W., & Rudd, J. M. (2015). Social media and related tech -
nology: Drivers of change in managing the contemporary sales force. Business 
Horizons, 58
(1), 45–55. 
Monczka, R. M., Petersen, K. J., Handfield, R. B., & Ragatz, G. L. (1998). Success factors in 
strategic supplier alliances: The buying company perspective. Decision Sciences, 29(3), 
553–577. 
Morgan, N. A., Zou, S., Vorhies, D. W., & Katsikeas, C. S. (2003). Experiential and in -
formational knowledge, architectural marketing capabilities, and the adaptive per -
formance of export ventures: A cross-vational study. Decision Sciences, 34
(2), 
287–321. https://doi.org/10.1111/1540-5915.02375. O.S. Itani, et al.   Industrial Marketing Management 90 (2020) 264–275
274Newell, W. J., Ellegaard, C., & Esbjerg, L. (2019). The effects of goodwill and competence 
trust on strategic information sharing in buyer–supplier relationships. Journal of 
Business & Industrial Marketing, 34(2), 389–400. 
Nowlin, E. L., Walker, D., & Anaza, N. A. (2018). How does salesperson connectedness 
impact performance? It depends upon the level of internal volatility. Industrial 
Marketing Management, 68, 106–113. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2017. 
10.007. 
Ogilvie, J., Agnihotri, R., Rapp, A., & Trainor, K. (2018). Social media technology use and 
salesperson performance: A two study examination of the role of salesperson beha -
viors, characteristics, and training. Industrial Marketing Management, 75
, 55–65. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2018.03.007. 
Palmatier, R. W. (2008). Relationship Marketing. Cambridge, MA: Marketing Science 
Institute. 
Palmatier, R. W., Dant, R. P., Grewal, D., & Evans, K. R. (2006). Factors influencing the 
effectiveness of relationship marketing: A meta-analysis. Journal of Marketing, 70(4), 
136–153. 
Pei, Z., & Yan, R. (2019). Cooperative behavior and information sharing in the e-com -
merce age. Industrial Marketing Management, 76
, 12–22. 
Pérez-González, D., Trigueros-Preciado, S., & Popa, S. (2017). Social media technologies’ 
use for the competitive information and knowledge sharing, and its effects on in -
dustrial SMEs’ innovation. Information Systems Management, 34
(3), 291–301. https:// 
doi.org/10.1080/10580530.2017.1330007. 
Phan, D. D., & Vogel, D. R. (2010). A model of customer relationship management and 
business intelligence systems for catalogue and online retailers. Information & 
Management, 47(2), 69–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2009.09.001. 
Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Lee, J.-Y., & Podsakoff, N. P. (2003). Common method 
biases in behavioral research: A critical review of the literature and recommended 
remedies. Journal of Applied Psychology, 88(5), 879–903. 
Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Paine, J. B., & Bachrach, D. G. (2000). Organizational 
citizenship behaviors: A critical review of the theoretical and empirical literature and 
suggestions for future research. Journal of Management, 26(3), 513–563. 
Posey, C., Lowry, P. B., Roberts, T. L., & Ellis, T. S. (2010). Proposing the online com -
munity self-disclosure model: The case of working professionals in France and the UK 
who use online communities. European Journal of Information Systems, 19
(2), 
181–195. 
Pulles, N. J., Schiele, H., Veldman, J., & Hüttinger, L. (2016). The impact of customer 
attractiveness and supplier satisfaction on becoming a preferred customer. Industrial 
Marketing Management, 54, 129–140. 
Purani, K., & Sahadev, S. (2008). The moderating role of industrial experience in the job 
satisfaction, intention to leave relationship: An empirical study among salesmen in India. Journal of Business & Industrial Marketing, 23(7), 475–485. 
Rapp, A., Agnihotri, R., & Baker, T. L. (2011). Conceptualizing salesperson competitive 
intelligence: An individual-level perspective. Journal of Personal Selling & Sales 
Management, 31(2), 141–155. 
Rapp, A., Agnihotri, R., & Baker, T. L. (2015). Competitive intelligence collection and use 
by sales and service representatives: How managers’ recognition and autonomy 
moderate individual performance. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 43(3), 
357–374. 
Rapp, A., Agnihotri, R., & Forbes, L. P. (2008). The sales force technology–performance 
chain: The role of adaptive selling and effort. Journal of Personal Selling & Sales 
Management, 28(4), 335–350. 
Rapp, A., Beitelspacher, L., Grewal, D., & Hughes, D. (2013). Understanding social media 
effects across seller, retailer, and consumer interactions. Journal of the Academy of 
Marketing Science, 41(5), 547–566. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11747-013-0326-9. 
Rapp, A., Trainor, K. J., & Agnihotri, R. (2010). Performance implications of customer- 
linking capabilities: Examining the complementary role of customer orientation and 
CRM technology. Journal of Business Research, 63(11), 1229–1236. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jbusres.2009.11.002. 
Rindfleisch, A., Malter, A. J., Ganesan, S., & Moorman, C. (2008). Cross-sectional versus 
longitudinal survey research: Concepts, findings, and guidelines. Journal of Marketing 
Research, 45(3), 261–279. 
Rodriguez, M., Ajjan, H., & Peterson, R. M. (2016). Social Media in Large Sales Forces: An 
empirical study of the impact of sales process capability and relationship perfor
-
mance. Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice, 24
(3), 365–379. https://doi.org/10. 
1080/10696679.2016.1170538. 
Rodriguez, M., Peterson, R. M., & Krishnan, V. (2012). Social media’s influence on 
business-to-business sales performance. Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management, 32(3), 365–378. 
Salo, J. (2017). Social media research in the industrial marketing field: Review of lit -
erature and future research directions. Industrial Marketing Management, 66
, 115–129. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2017.07.013. 
Sangtani, V., & Murshed, F. (2017). Product knowledge and salesperson performance: 
Rethinking the role of optimism. Marketing Intelligence & Planning. 35(6), 724–739. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/MIP-11-2016-0199. 
Sarstedt, M., Henseler, J., & Ringle, C. M. (2011). Multi-group analysis in partial least 
squares (PLS) path Modeling: Alternative methods and empirical results. Advances in 
International Marketing, 22, 195–218. 
Schultz, R. J., Schwepker, C. H., & Good, D. J. (2012). An exploratory study of social 
media in business-to-business selling: Salesperson characteristics, activities and per -
formance. Marketing Management Journal, 22
(2), 76–89. 
Scuotto, V., Del Giudice, M., & Carayannis, E. G. (2017). The effect of social networking 
sites and absorptive capacity on SMES’ innovation performance. The Journal of 
Technology Transfer, 42(2), 409–424. 
Shang, S. S. C., Wu, Y.-L., & Li, E. Y. (2017). Field effects of social media platforms on 
information-sharing continuance: Do reach and richness matter? Information & 
Management, 54(2), 241–255. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2016.06.008. 
Siamagka, N.-T., Christodoulides, G., Michaelidou, N., & Valvi, A. (2015). Determinants 
of social media adoption by B2B organizations. Industrial Marketing Management, 51, 
89–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2015.05.005. 
Soltani, Z., & Navimipour, N. J. (2016). Customer relationship management mechanisms: 
A systematic review of the state of the art literature and recommendations for future 
research. Computers in Human Behavior, 61, 667–688. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb. 
2016.03.008. 
Spiro, R. L., & Weitz, B. A. (1990). Adaptive selling: Conceptualization, measurement, and 
nomological validity. Journal of Marketing Research, 27(1), 61–69. 
Sundaram, S., Schwarz, A., Jones, E., & Chin, W. W. (2007). Technology use on the front 
line: How information technology enhances individual performance. Journal of the 
Academy of Marketing Science, 35(1), 101–112. 
Tajudeen, F. P., Jaafar, N. I., & Ainin, S. (2018). Understanding the impact of social media 
usage among organizations. Information & Management, 55(3), 308–321. 
Teigland, R., & Wasko, M. M. (2003). Integrating knowledge through information trading: 
Examining the relationship between boundary spanning communication and in -
dividual performance. Decision Sciences, 34
(2), 261–286. https://doi.org/10.1111/ 
1540-5915.02341. 
Trainor, K. J. (2012). Relating social media technologies to performance: A capabilities- 
based perspective. Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management, 32(3), 317–331. 
Trainor, K. J., Andzulis, J. M., Rapp, A., & Agnihotri, R. (2014). Social media technology 
usage and customer relationship performance: A capabilities-based examination of 
social CRM. Journal of Business Research, 67(6), 1201–1208. 
Vargo, S. L., & Lusch, R. F. (2008). Service-dominant logic: Continuing the evolution. 
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 36(1), 1–10. 
Verbeke, W., Dietz, B., & Verwaal, E. (2011). Drivers of sales performance: A con -
temporary meta-analysis. Have salespeople become knowledge brokers? Journal of 
the Academy of Marketing Science, 39
(3), 407–428. 
Voorhees, C. M., Brady, M. K., Calantone, R., & Ramirez, E. (2016). Discriminant validity 
testing in marketing: An analysis, causes for concern, and proposed remedies. Journal 
of the Academy of Marketing Science, 44(1), 119–134. 
Wang, E. T. G., Hu, H., & Hu, P. J.-H. (2013). Examining the role of information tech -
nology in cultivating firms’ dynamic marketing capabilities. Information & 
Management, 50
(6), 336–343. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2013.04.007. 
Wang, W. Y. C., Pauleen, D. J., & Zhang, T. (2016). How social media applications affect 
B2B communication and improve business performance in SMEs. Industrial Marketing 
Management, 54, 4–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2015.12.004. 
Ward, P., & Zhou, H. (2006). Impact of information technology integration and lean/just- 
in-time practices on lead-time performance. Decision Sciences, 37(2), 177–203. 
Wongsansukcharoen, J., Trimetsoontorn, J., & Fongsuwan, W. (2015). Social CRM, RMO 
and business strategies affecting banking performance effectiveness in B2B context. Journal of Business & Industrial Marketing, 30(6), 742–760. 
Zahay, D., & Griffin, A. (2004). Customer learning processes, strategy selection, and 
performance in business-to-business service firms. Decision Sciences, 35, 169–203. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.00117315.2004.02338.x. 
Zigurs, I., & Buckland, B. K. (1998). A theory of task/technology fit and group support 
systems effectiveness. MIS Quarterly; Minneapolis, 22(3), 313–334.  O.S. Itani, et al.   
Industrial Marketing Management 90 (2020) 264–275
275