New product development team intelligence: Antecedents and consequences
Ali E. Akgu¨ n a,*, Mumin Dayan b, Anthony Di Benedetto c
a Science and Technology Studies, Gebze Institute of Technology, Turkey
b School of Business Administration, University of Sharjah, United Arab Emirates
c School of Business Adminstration, Temple University, USA
1. Introduction
The importance of new product development (NPD) teams has
been emphasized in the last decade in the technology and
innovation management literature [19]. Many papers have pointed
out that most successful NPD projects were achieved through the
collective efforts of individuals on the teams [1] and have
suggested approaches for managers to form and manage NPD
teams; cross-functional integration [13], team learning [15],
knowledge management (KM), and collaborative technologies
[31] are some of the ways. One factor discussed recently has been
team intelligence [4]; it seemed important because it helped the
team to promote effective knowledge creation, fuel the learning
process, and develop an effective way to implement the product.
However, NPD team intelligence has been narrowly deﬁned and
has received limited empirical attention. The current conceptual
deﬁnition of NPD team intelligence was restricted to the cognitive
view
of
intelligence
omitting
its
behavioral
dimension.
In
organizational behavior literature, an entity demonstrates knowl-
edge when it responds to changing conditions, problems, etc. in a
goal-directed adaptive manner by modifying its behavior [11].
Intelligence involves adaptive behavior or responsiveness. Also
related to the conceptual issues, the NPD team intelligence
construct has been operationalized narrowly as the ability of
the team to acquire, disseminate and implement/use information.
However, team intelligence is a multi-dimensional construct
involving a variety of capabilities and should be operationalized
as
a
higher-order,
multifaceted
construct
embodying
both
information processing and responsiveness capabilities to capture
the complex nature of the process of product development. Akgu¨n
et al. [5] argued that, while information processing capabilities
highlighted the internal structures and processes, it put the
environment in a passive role. On the other hand, they noted that
responsiveness capabilities suggested a potential reaction and
sensitivity
to
the
external
environment
though
it
omitted
information processing capabilities. Thus, amalgamating the
information processing and responsiveness perspectives as a
higher-order construct could result in a more comprehensive view
of NPD team intelligence. Further, from a managerial point of view,
the antecedents and consequences of NPD team intelligence, such
as factors that impact NPD team intelligence and how this
inﬂuences the project outcomes, should be investigated empiri-
cally. Investigating the determinants of team intelligence could aid
project managers in understanding how to elevate the team’s
capabilities, and how to leverage those capabilities to result a
successful NPD project.
Thus our study elaborated on research on NPD team intelli-
gence and its antecedents and consequences to provide a KM view
Information & Management 45 (2008) 221–226
A R T I C L E
I N F O
Article history:
Received 20 January 2006
Received in revised form 29 November 2007
Accepted 22 February 2008
Available online 18 April 2008
Keywords:
Team intelligence
Knowledge management
Information processing
Responsiveness
Project management
New product development
A B S T R A C T
Our study investigated the effect of team knowledge on new product development (NPD). By
investigating 207 NPD projects, we found that the declarative and procedural knowledge of the team and
their use of IT had a positive inﬂuence on the team’s knowledge base; and that the higher the functional
diversity of the project team, the greater their overall knowledge. We also found that team knowledge
positively impacted new product creativity and success in the market place.
 2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
* Corresponding author. Fax: +90 262 605 1405.
E-mail address: aakgun@gyte.edu.tr (A.E. Akgu¨ n).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Information & Management
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/im
0378-7206/$ – see front matter  2008 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.im.2008.02.004

of
NPD
teams
and
project
management. In
particular, we
considered how cross-functional NPD project teams enhanced
their information processing and responsiveness capabilities and
the impact of them on NPD project outcomes.
2. Background
2.1. Team intelligence and NPD
The term intelligence is used in many areas and disciplines
such as, individual and experimental psychology [29], group
behavior [33], organizational theory, KM, organizational learn-
ing [3], and sociology [14]. Discussion of team intelligence has
considered it to be a subset or subprocess of KM. Nonaka and
Takeuchi [23] said that NPD teams demonstrate their intelli-
gence
by
acquiring,
interpreting,
disseminating
and
using
information and knowledge during the project. Chou et al. [9]
stated that information-processing capabilities were the cap-
tured organizational intelligence. Thus KM overlaps with the
team
intelligence.
However,
studies
on
team
intelligence
improved the concept of KM by highlighting the value of
information processing ability in a project. Speciﬁcally, NPD
team intelligence denoted a team’s capability to use information
processes through project related activities that achieved a
desired end or performed a particular function or value activity
during the project. In the context of a KM process in an NPD
project [22]; information acquisition ability was referred to the
team’s capability to collect primary or secondary information
from customers, competitors, and other third parties. Informa-
tion dissemination ability was the team’s capacity to diffuse and
transmit the information among relevant members of the team,
involving formal and informal information transmission via
interpersonal interactions, meetings, memos, etc. Information
utilization ability was referred to the project team’s ability to use
of the information indirectly in strategy-related actions and to
direct
applications
of
information
to
inﬂuence
marketing
strategy-related actions. Such actions included giving meaning to
data, interpreting and categorizing it, and applying the information/
knowledge to solve product related problems during the NPD
process. However, the information-processing capability/ability
view of intelligence, which ﬁts the cognitive scheme of the team
KM process, explained one side of the NPD team intelligence.
It was not sufﬁcient to address issues that only related to the
collective nature of work in project teams. In general, the
behavioral perspective of intelligence shows the responsiveness
of an entity. In an NPD project team, we contend that responsiveness
refers to the actions taken in response to information and
knowledge generated, transmitted, and utilized. Without respond-
ing to the environment, market information processes would
provide little or no help to teams in achieving their goals.
NPD team intelligence is imperative for the effective operation
and performance of the team. However, for a systematic under-
standing of NPD team intelligence, the antecedent factors should
also be investigated to understand how we can increase the team
intelligence. Consistent with the study by Moorman and Miner
[20], we focused on performance measures by selecting routinely
studied items: new product creativity (NPC) and new product
success (NPS); these are critical indicators for managers. In
addition, the knowledge base (declarative and procedural knowl-
edge), information technology usage, and cross-functional diver-
sity
have
been
identiﬁed
as
determinants
of
NPD
team
intelligence. Although these antecedents have been examined
in the KM and organizational intelligence literature, there has
been no empirical evidence to show how they inﬂuence NPD team
intelligence.
3. Hypothesis development
3.1. Antecedents
The knowledge base is the basis of organizational intelligence
[18]. In her study on organizational intelligence, Glynn [12] also
emphasized its importance. In a similar fashion, NPD studies have
emphasized its effect on the team’s information processing and
response ability. Madhavan and Grover [17] stated that ability to
create and use knowledge was a function of the degree of prior
knowledge. We believed that the interpretation role of declarative
knowledge and the guidance role of procedural knowledge [21]
impacted team intelligence during an NPD project. In an NPD team
setting, declarative knowledge denoted the teams’ prior knowledge
about a product category, experience, and familiarity with a product
while procedural knowledge indicated the teams’ prior knowledge
and experience about customer needs and how to satisfy them in
product design and its implementation [16]. Information on
customers, competitors, and other parties is retained as declarative
knowledge, which helps teams know what extra information is
required, and how and where to ﬁnd it to exploit new advances. In
particular, NPD team members who are experts on processes and
methods of product innovation are expected to generate, dissemi-
nate, utilize and respond to information in NPD processes. This is the
foundation of the ﬁrst set of hypotheses:
H1a. Team procedural knowledge is positively related to NPD
team intelligence in projects.
H1b. Team declarative knowledge is positively related to NPD
team intelligence in projects.
IT usage is another antecedent factor. From a KM context, Alavi
and Leidner [6] noted that IT usage can create an infrastructure and
environment that contributes to organizational KM by supporting,
augmenting, and reinforcing knowledge processes at a deeper level.
During the NPD process, teams use IT tools, such as the Internet,
Intranet, e-mails, teleconferencing, and FTP to communicate or
store information. As IT tools help teams acquire and diffuse the
information needed in the NPD process project teams can
transform knowledge into value to their customers, and optimize
the NPD process to ﬁt the context of the project [25]. Therefore:
H2. IT usage during the NPD process is positively related to NPD
team intelligence in projects.
In addition to knowledge base and IT effects, cross-functional
diversity acts as another antecedent of team intelligence. It refers
to the number of functional areas represented by people on the
team. A greater number of functional areas are likely to improve
input needed when making important product-related decisions.
The necessity of team diversity occurs because cross-functional
teams can generate and disseminate market and technology
information, and thus increase responsiveness [24]. However,
beyond some point, diversity can lead to increased decision
complexity and confusion due to alternatives [28]. Sethi [27]
suggests that teams simplify the heuristics or avoid in-depth
processing of alternatives. Accordingly, we hypothesize that:
H3. Cross-functional diversity of project team will have an
inverted-U relationship with NPD team intelligence in projects.
3.2. Consequences
Being creative or producing creative solutions is an essential
result of organizational intelligence. Like this, individual knowl-
edge has been stated to be important to individual creativity [30].
A.E. Akgu¨n et al. / Information & Management 45 (2008) 221–226
222

New Product Creativity is the degree to which a new product is
novel and its introduction changes market thinking and practice. It
denotes the extent to which the product generates ideas for other
products, encourages fresh thinking, and challenges existing ideas
for product category in the marketplace. We posit that team
intelligence fosters new products that are more creative in the
market place. Therefore:
H4. NPD team intelligence is positively related to NPC.
Finally, NPS was investigated as one of the consequences of
team intelligence. NPS measures the market performance of a new
product [7]. It is an important criterion for project managers and
top management. The goal of forming an NPD project team and
developing a new product is success of the product in the market
place. Teams must detect and correct product related problems
accurately and quickly, incorporate customer feedback and new
technology, as appropriate, and facilitate ﬂexible project struc-
tures. Then new products have more chance to become successful.
Therefore, it is hypothesized that:
H5. NPD team intelligence is positively related to NPS.
4. Research design
4.1. Measures and sampling
To measure variables, we used or modiﬁed scale items based on
the past research. Each construct was measured using multiple
items and a 1–7 Likert scale (1 = strongly disagree to 7 = strongly
agree). However, team size, which was selected as a control
variable and measured as the number of persons in the team, and
functional diversity questions were assessed with ratio scale, while
NPC was measured with an itemized rating scale (1 = low to
7 = high). The questionnaire items are shown in Appendix A.
The initial sample consisted of 1250 U.S. manufacturing
companies in the Project Management Institute (PMI). Product
and project managers were used as key informants. The managers
were chosen because, product/project managers,
 are likely to have a ‘‘big-picture view’’ of NPD projects,
 have a broader view of each member’s behavior, and
 were expected to provide more reliable and objective data.
Since our study focused on the NPD team as a unit of analysis,
product/project managers were likely to assess our variables more
accurately. Also, the sample of respondents was similar to samples
used in prior studies on innovation.
Each product/project manager in the PMI mailing list received
an invitation to participate in our study (including a cover letter,
the questionnaire, and stamped return envelope). Informants were
asked to focus on their most recent product development projects
(ones in the marketplace for a minimum of 12 months to ensure
accurate assessment of the product performance). We received 207
usable responses (an effective response rate of 16.5%) representing
a wide range of industries in the manufacturing sector, including:
pharmaceuticals (28.5%), automotive (17%), electrical/electronics
(17.9%), computers (13%), chemicals (8.7%), machinery/metal
manufacturing (7.2%), and others (7.2%).
4.2. Measure validity and reliability
After data collection, the measures were statistically analyzed
to assess their reliability, unidimensionality, discriminant validity,
nomological validity, and convergent validity. An exploratory
factor analysis was conducted, including 50 measured items of
nine variables, using a principle component with a varimax
rotation and an eigenvalue of one as the cut-off point (since team
diversity and team sized was assessed with one item, those
variables were not included in the analysis). A single factor was
extracted for each multiple-item reﬂective scale. After performing
this analysis, a subsequent conﬁrmatory analysis was conducted to
assess the scales.
A series of two-factor models was generated. In these, the factor
correlations, considered individually, were restricted to unity and
the ﬁt of the restricted models was compared with that of the
original model. The chi-square change (Dx2) in all models,
constrained
and
unconstrained,
were
signiﬁcant
( p < 0.05),
conﬁrming that the constructs demonstrated discriminant valid-
ity.
The measures were subjected to further CFA using EQS 5.7 [8].
This showed a good ﬁt with an incremental ﬁt index (IFI) of 0.97
and a comparative ﬁt index (CFI) of 0.95 (with x2
ð36Þ ¼ 54,
RMSEA = 0.009). Further, we evaluated the validity of the measures
used by linking eight constructs to new product success. During
this analysis, we used ‘‘all items’’ for constructs. The model
produced good ﬁt indices (x2
ð335Þ ¼ 405, CFI = 0.93, IFI = 0.94,
RMSEA = 0.09), and each construct factor loading was large and
signiﬁcant, providing an adequate model ﬁt.
NPD team intelligence was operationalized as a second-order
construct with four dimensions. A second-order conﬁrmatory
Table 1
Descriptive scales and construct correlations, and reliability estimates
Variables
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
1
Information acquisition ability
–
2
Information dissemination ability
0.15
–
3
Information utilization ability
0.48***
0.54***
–
4
Responsiveness
0.13
0.20**
0.19**
–
5
Information technology usage
0.29***
0.48***
0.46***
0.18**
–
6
Declarative knowledge
0.28***
0.31***
0.44***
0.15*
0.07
–
7
Procedural knowledge
0.15*
0.20**
0.26***
0.21**
0.09
0.24***
–
8
New product creativity
0.33***
0.20**
0.18**
0.45***
0.12
0.19**
0.21***
–
9
New product success
0.06
0.12
0.16*
0.33***
0.06
0.19**
0.20***
0.03
–
10
Functional diversity
0.13
0.08
0.04
0.11
0.09
0.16*
0.18*
0.19**
0.24***
–
11
Team size
0.07
0.03
0.10
0.05
0.11
0.17*
0.22***
0.24***
0.20***
0.47***
–
Mean
3.52
3.78
2.98
3.32
3.79
2.97
3.13
3.56
3.76
5.54
8.49
Standard deviation
1.87
1.78
1.33
1.52
2.02
1.92
1.34
1.41
1.72
2.34
2.87
Cronbach a
0.86
0.90
0.94
0.84
0.75
0.87
0.91
0.84
0.93
NA
NA
* p < 0.1.
** p < 0.05.
*** p < 0.01.
A.E. Akgu¨n et al. / Information & Management 45 (2008) 221–226
223

factor analysis of a model depicting information acquisition,
dissemination and utilization ability and responsiveness was
conducted. This model yielded acceptable ﬁt indices (x2
ð57Þ ¼ 73,
CFI = 0.94, IFI = 0.94, RMSEA = 0.06). In addition, all ﬁrst-order and
second-order factor loadings were signiﬁcant, thereby providing
evidence that NPD team intelligence was a multifaceted construct.
Hence, the second-order factor model demonstrated a composite
NPD team intelligence in our study.
The reliability of the multiple-item, reﬂective measures, and the
correlation among all 11 variables are reported in Table 1. The
relatively low to moderate correlations provided further evidence
of discriminant validity.
5. Analyses and results
Structural Equation Modeling (SEM) was performed using the
maximum likelihood method (ML) to test the hypotheses. This
assessed the integrity of the measures and evaluated the degree to
which the observed relations among variables ﬁtted the hypothe-
sized network of causal relationships. The model included one
second-order latent variable – team intelligence – consisting of
information processing capability, which in turn had three sub-
dimension, and responsiveness capability, which had one sub-
dimension, and eight observed variables, declarative and procedural
knowledge, functional diversity, functional diversity, IT usage, team
size, NPS, and NPC: see Fig. 1. The conceptual model adequately ﬁts
the data: the normed ﬁt index (NFI), and CFI exceeded 0.9. The
RMSEA was 0.09, which was close to threshold level of 0.08.
The results indicated that a team’s declarative (b = 0.49,
p < 0.05) and procedural (b = 0.67, p < 0.01) knowledge were
positively associated with the team intelligence, supporting H1a
and H1b. The results also showed that IT usage had a positive
association with
the team intelligence
(b = 0.81,
p < 0.01)—
supporting H2. Fig. 1 also shows that functional diversity was
positively related to the team intelligence. However, the quadratic
relationship between functional diversity with team intelligence
(b = 0.08, p > 0.1) was not signiﬁcant, therefore it did not support
H3. We found that team intelligence was positively associated with
NPC (b = 0.72, p < 0.05) and NPS (b = 0.38, p < 0.05), supporting H4
and H5.
Finally, Fig. 1 also showed that antecedent variables explained
the 36% of variance (R2 = 0.36) in team intelligence; team
intelligence and control variable also explained 23% of variance
(R2 = 0.23) in NPC, and 12% of variance (R2 = 0.12) in NPS.
6. Discussion
Our ﬁndings demonstrated that an efﬁciently managed NPD
team knowledge has a positive inﬂuence on the success of a
project. Our study also showed that team knowledge can be
leveraged during the project. Especially, when the team knows
about the product category; the competition, and the rules, and
standards for developing and commercializing a new product. The
knowledge base integrates team member’s knowledge over time
decreasing errors and duplication of effort. Also the knowledge
base helps the project team to recombine successful experience
leading to a superior solution quickly.
Interestingly, we did not ﬁnd a quadratic relation between
functional diversity and team knowledge. Rather we found that the
higher the number of functional areas represented on the team, the
higher the team’s ability to acquire, process, and utilize knowledge
and become ﬂexible to change in customer needs and wants, etc.
7. Managerial implications
Managers should enhance team intelligence to facilitate the
success of an NPD project in the manufacturing industry by
implementing
a
well-deﬁned
IT
system
for
effective
team
communication and information exchange and installing e-mail
systems, team messaging boards, electronic newsletters, Web
page, and verbal electronic communication tools for the enhance-
ment of the team’s knowledge base.
Management should form and organize the project team based
on the team members’ previous experiences and skills and bring
diversiﬁcation to the team with a variety of people from the
different functional departments.
Management should set up customer councils, panels, and
groups to facilitate interactions between project team members
and customers and create knowledge bases from previous projects
and studies to aid in re-examining past learning.
Fig. 1. Path coefﬁcient estimates of the model.
A.E. Akgu¨n et al. / Information & Management 45 (2008) 221–226
224

8. Limitations
There are some methodological limitations in our study. It was
prone to common method bias since the same respondents
answered the dependent variable and the independent variable in
a cross-sectional manner. We checked this potential problem with
a Harman one-factor test [26]. An unrotated factor analysis of nine
focal variables resulted in a nine-factor solution, as expected, this
accounted for 86.4% of the total variance; and factor 1 accounted
for 19.2% of the variance. Because a single factor did not emerge
and factor 1 did not explain most of the variance, common method
bias is unlikely to be of concern in our data.
Utilizing a cross-sectional design with questionnaires was
also a limitation of our study. A longitudinal research method
should probably been used to obtain more objective results
about the ﬂow of knowledge. Also, using objective measures,
such as archival data, have produced results that were more
objective.
Although the heterogeneity of the sample, including a myriad of
industries within the manufacturing category, was a condition for
external validity and generality, sector or industry level studies
may have been useful in validating the results. For instance the
model could have been tested in software industry. Since there are
differences between software development and NPD project
teams, the conclusions of the model may be different. Further,
the results could be different due to the maturity and competitive
dynamics of the various industries.
9. Conclusion
Literature on organizational and team intelligence demon-
strated that information processing and responsiveness capabil-
ities were important for the performance of organizations and
teams. However, there is still a lack of operationalization, and
empirical test of antecedents and consequences of intelligence in
NPD teams. Our study measured team intelligence with its
antecedents and consequences. We showed empirically that team
intelligence impacted NPC and NPS, and the team’s knowledge
base (declarative and procedural knowledge), functional diversi-
ﬁcation, and IT usage inﬂuenced the project team intelligence.
Appendix A. Measures
We used a Likert scale (0 = strongly disagree to 7 = strongly agree):
 Information acquisition ability (modiﬁed from Moorman [22])—
during this project, the team had the ability of continuously:
Collecting information from customers.
Collecting information about competitors’ activities.
Collecting information about relevant publics other than
customers and competitors.
Re-examining the value of information collected in previous
studies.
Collecting information from external experts, such as con-
sultants.
 Information
dissemination
ability
(modiﬁed
from
Moorman
[22])—during this project, the team was able to have:
Formal information links established among all parties
involved in the project.
Informal networks that ensured all team members generally
had the information they needed.
 During this project, the team members were able to:
Educate each other during the project.
Be trained in new tasks relating to this project.
 Information utilization ability (modiﬁed from Moorman [22])—
during this project, the team was able to:
Summarize information, reducing its complexity.
Organize information in meaningful ways.
Process information in meaningful ways.
Rely heavily upon information to make decisions relating
to the project.
Use information to solve speciﬁc problems encountered
in the project.
Provide information to effectively implement the project.
 Responsiveness (adapted from Akgu¨n et al. [4])—during this
project, the team had the ability to:
Transfer customer needs to product design specs.
Generate different market and technology scenarios.
Take corrective action immediately, when they found
out the changes in customer preferences, wants, and needs.
Respond to signiﬁcant changes in our business environ-
ment.
 Information technology usage (derived from Wakeﬁeld [32] and
Agius and Angelides [2])—during this project, the team relied on
the following tools to communicate with team members:
E-mail to fellow team members.
Team messaging boards or team discussion forums.
Shared electronic ﬁles.
Electronic newsletters that covered project information.
A web page dedicated to this project.
Teleconferencing.
Attaching audio/video ﬁles to electronic documents.
 Declarative Knowledge (adapted from Moorman and Miner
[21])—prior to the project, the team had a great deal of knowledge
about . . .
This product category.
Competitors and their products.
Procedures, rules, and standards on developing a new
product.
Procedures, rules, and standards on commercializing a new
product.
Procedural Knowledge (adapted from Moorman and Miner
[21])—prior to the project, the team had a great deal of . . .
Experience on how to develop a new product.
Skills on how to develop a new product.
Experience on how to commercialize a new product.
Skills on how to commercialize a new product.
 New Product Creativity (adapted from Moorman [22])—this
product:
challenged existing ideas for this category,
offered new ideas to the category,
was creative,
was interesting,
was very novel for this category,
spawned ideas for other products, and
encouraged fresh thinking.
 New Product Success (adapted from Cooper and Kleinschmidt
[10])—this product:
Met or exceeded volume expectations.
Met or exceeded sales dollar expectations.
Met or exceeded the ﬁrst year number expected to be
produced and commercialized.
Overall, met or exceeded sales expectations
Met or exceeded proﬁt expectations.
Met or exceeded return on investment (ROI) expectations.
Met or exceeded overall senior management’s expectations.
Met or exceeded market share expectations.
Met or exceeded customer expectations.
A.E. Akgu¨n et al. / Information & Management 45 (2008) 221–226
225

 Functional diversity (adapted from Sethi [27]):
The number of functional areas (departments) represented on the
team whose members were fully involved in the project rather than
being ad hoc specialists or consultants who were engaged only for a
limited time.
References
[1] E.M. Adams, G. Day, D. Dougherty, Enhancing new product development perfor-
mance: an organizational learning perspective, Journal of Product Innovation
Management 15 (1998) 403–422.
[2] H.W. Agius, M.C. Angelides, Desktop video conferencing in the organization,
Information & Management 31 (1997) 291–302.
[3] A.E. Akgu¨ n, G.S. Lynn, J. Byrne, Organizational learning: a socio-cognitive frame-
work, Human Relations 56 (2003) 839–868.
[4] A.E. Akgu¨n, G.S. Lynn, C. Yılmaz, Learning process in new product development
teams and effects on product success: a socio-cognitive perspective, Industrial
Marketing Management 35 (2006) 210–224.
[5] A.E. Akgu¨ n, J. Byrne, G. Lynn, H. Keskin, Organizational intelligence: a
structuration
view,
Journal
of
Organizational
Change
Management
20
(2007) 272–289.
[6] M. Alavi, D. Leidner, Knowledge management and knowledge management
Systems: conceptual foundations and research issues, MIS Quarterly 25 (2001)
107–136.
[7] D. Ayers, R. Dahlstrom, S.J. Skinner, An exploratory investigation of organizational
antecedents to new product success, Journal of Marketing Research 34 (1997)
107–116.
[8] P.M. Bentler, EQS Structural Equations Program Manual, BMDP Statistical Soft-
ware Inc., California, 1995.
[9] T.C. Chou, P.L. Chang, Y.P. Cheng, C.T. Tsai, A path model linking organizational
knowledge attributes, information processing capabilities, and perceived usabil-
ity, Information & Management 44 (2007) 408–417.
[10] R.G. Cooper, E.J. Kleinschmidt, New products: what separates winners from
losers? Journal of Product Innovation Management 4 (1987) 169–184.
[11] W. Doise, G. Mugny, The Social Development of the Intellect, Pergamon Press,
New York, 1984.
[12] M.A. Glynn, Innovative genius: a framework for relating individual and organiza-
tional intelligence to innovation, Academy of Management Review 21 (1996)
1081–1111.
[13] K. Kahn, Interdepartmental integration: a deﬁnition with implications for product
development performance, Journal of Product Innovation Management 13 (1996)
137–151.
[14] C. Kurzman, L. Owens, The sociology of intellectuals, Annual Review of Sociology
28 (2002) 63–90.
[15] G.S. Lynn, R. Reilly, A.E. Akgu¨n, Knowledge management in new product teams:
practices and outcomes, IEEE Transaction on Engineering Management 47 (2000)
221–231.
[16] G.S. Lynn, A.E. Akgu¨ n, A new product development learning model: antecedent
and consequences of declarative and procedural knowledge, International Journal
of Technology Management 20 (2000) 490–510.
[17] R. Madhavan, R. Grover, From embedded knowledge to embodied knowledge:
new product development as knowledge management, Journal of Marketing 62
(1998) 1–12.
[18] J. March, The Pursuit of Organizational Intelligence, Blackwell, 1999.
[19] P.W. Meyers, D. Wilemon, Learning in new technology development teams,
Journal of Product Innovation Management 6 (1989) 79–88.
[20] C. Moorman, A.S. Miner, The impact of organizational memory on new product
performance and creativity, Journal of Marketing Research 34 (1997) 91–106.
[21] C. Moorman, A.S. Miner, The convergence of planning and execution: improvisa-
tion in new product development, Journal of Marketing 62 (1998) 1–20.
[22] C. Moorman, Organizational market information processes: culture antecedents
and new product outcomes, Journal of Marketing Research 32 (1995) 318–335.
[23] I. Nonaka, H. Takeuchi, The Knowledge-Creating Company: How Japanese Com-
panies Create the Dynamics of Innovation, Oxford University Press, New York,
1995.
[24] D.B. Ottum, W.L. Moore, The role of market information in new product success/
failure, Journal of Product Innovation Management 14 (1997) 258–273.
[25] E. Oz, Information technology productivity: in search of a deﬁnite observation,
Information & Management 42 (2005) 789–798.
[26] P.M. Podsakoff, D. Organ, Reports in organizational research: problems and
prospects, Journal of Management 12 (1986) 531–545.
[27] R. Sethi, New product quality and product development teams, Journal of Market-
ing 64 (2000) 1–14.
[28] P. Souren, P. Seetharaman, I. Samarah, P. Mykytyn, Impact of heterogeneity and
collaborative conﬂict management style on the performance of synchronous
global virtual teams, Information & Management 41 (2004) 303–321.
[29] R.J. Sternberg, J. Kaufman, Human abilities, Annual Review of Psychology 49
(1998) 479–502.
[30] R.J. Sternberg, Implicit theories of intelligence, creativity, and wisdom, Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 49 (1985) 607–627.
[31] G.I. Susman, A. Majchrzak, Research issues in knowledge management and virtual
collaboration in new product development: an introductory essay, Journal of
Engineering and Technology Management 20 (2003) 1–5.
[32] R.L. Wakeﬁeld, Identifying knowledge agents in a KM strategy: the use of the
structural inﬂuence index, Information & Management 42 (2005) 935–945.
[33] W.M. Williams, R.J. Sternberg, Group intelligence: why some groups are better
than others, Intelligence 12 (1988) 351–377.
Ali E. Akgu¨n is an associate professor of science and technology studies in the
School of Business Administration at Gebze Institute of Technology, Turkey. He
received his PhD in technology management from Stevens Institute of Technology
and his MS in engineering management from Drexel University. His research has
been published in the Human Relations, Information & Management, Journal of
Engineering and Technology Management (JET-M), Journal of Product Innovation
Management, IEEE Transaction in Engineering Management, Industrial Marketing
Management, European Journal of Information Systems, Research Technology
Management among other journals. His research areas are new product/technology
development, organizational learning, and cognitive and social psychology.
Mumin Dayan is an assistant professor of marketing in the College of Business
Administration at University of Sharjah. He received his MBA degree in marketing
from Drexel University and PhD in marketing from the Fox School of Business,
Temple University. His research interests include innovation and knowledge
management in new product development teams and small businesses.
C. Anthony Di Benedetto is professor of marketing and senior washburn research
fellow at the Fox School of Business and Management, Temple University. He
received a BSc (chemistry), an MBA, and a PhD in marketing and management
science from McGill University. He serves as editor in chief of the Journal of Product
Innovation Management. His research interests include international marketing
strategy,
new
product
launch
decisions,
radical
innovation,
and
supplier-
manufacturer-distributor cooperation. His research articles have appeared in J.
of Product Innovation Management, Management Science, Strategic Management
Journal, J. of International Business Studies, and elsewhere.
A.E. Akgu¨n et al. / Information & Management 45 (2008) 221–226
226
