J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 14 (1997) 97-127 
Journal of 
ENGINEERING AND 
TECHNOLOGY 
MANAGEMENT 
JET-M 
Social identification effects in product and process 
development teams 
Susanne G. Scott * 
Unicersity of Colorado nt Colorado Springs. 1420 Austin Biujj? Parkway, Colorado Springs. CO 80933-7150, 
USA 
Abstract 
This study integrated theories of group effectiveness with social identity and social categoriza- 
tion theory to develop and test a model of team performance. The sample included 42 product and 
process development teams employed in three divisions of a Fortune 500 manufacturing firm. 
Performance data was collected at project midpoint and at project completion through both 
managers’ and team members’ assessments. The study found that team social identification was an 
important predictor of team performance, explaining variance beyond that explained by cohesive- 
ness and external communication. Team social identification was influenced by top management 
support and recognition, project leader organizational influence, the extent to which members’ 
time was dedicated to the team, and team functional diversity. Implications for scholars and 
professional managers are discussed. 0 1997 Elsevier Science B.V. 
Keyord.~: Projects: Teams: Social identification; Product development 
1. Introduction 
Today, task forces and project teams are recognized as important mechanisms for the 
effective management of nonroutine problems in organizations (Gersick, 1988). Project 
teams allow organizations to reconfigure their internal structures on an ‘as needed’ basis, 
mobilizing unique combinations of differentiated knowledge and expertise, and simulta- 
neously providing closer coupling of functional areas (Ancona, 1990). They provide 
flexibility, increased responsiveness to external conditions, and tighter control of 
resources through scheduling at the project level (Katz and Allen, 1985). 
Arguably, temporary teams are of the greatest benefit to organizations in the context 
* Corresponding author. Tel.: + 1-7 19-262-3579; fax: + 1-7 19-590- 1543; e-mail: sscott@rnail.uccs.edu. 
0923-4748/97/$15.00 0 1997 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved 
I’II SO923-4748(97)00007-6 98 S.G. Scott/J. Eng. Technol. Manage. I4 11997) 97-127 
of product and process development. Many researchers have suggested that new 
products and processes are critical to the long-term survival of organizations (e.g., Clark 
and Fujimoto, 1990, 1991; Ancona and Caldwell, 1987), and teams have recently been 
called ‘the heart of efficient product development’ (Brown and Eisenhardt, 1995, p. 
369). Development teams are task forces assembled to bring a new product or process 
from conception through design, prototype or pilot, and into production. Because of their 
promise and prevalence, development teams have received substantial research attention 
to date. Studies of product development projects have found team effectiveness related 
to the frequency and content of external communications (Ancona and Caldwell, 1992a; 
Katz and Tushman, 1979; Allen, 1971, 1977), internal cohesiveness and communica- 
tions (Dougherty, 1990, 1992; Keller, 1986), team tenure (Katz, 1982), powerful project 
leaders (Clark and Fujimoto, 1991; Katz and Allen, 1985), and top management political 
and resource support (e.g., Cooper and Kleinschmidt, 1987; Katz and Allen, 1985). 
While these findings have enhanced our understanding of both context and process 
influences on team performance, numerous aspects of team functioning remain to be 
explored. 
The current study is concerned with the issue of team identity and explores the 
significance of members’ social identification to the effectiveness of project develop- 
ment teams. The concept of group identity is an old one and underpins much of the 
theoretical literature on group effectiveness. Team development practitioners, as well as 
most group theorists have long posited that having a strong group identity is a necessary 
condition of group effectiveness (e.g., Alderfer, 1987; Hackman, 1987; McGrath, 1984). 
They argue that when group boundaries lack clarity and become overly permeable, the 
group looses its identity and, subsequently, its ability to integrate and work as a group. 
However, up until quite recently, issues of identity have been of little concern in the 
laboratory studies that have dominated much of small group research (Sundstrom and 
Altman, 1989). 
Further, even in more recent field studies, the degree to which members socially 
identify with teams has seldom been empirically examined (Campion et al., 1996). This 
is perhaps due to the fact that most group effectiveness research has been conducted 
with stable, long-standing work teams engaged in repetitive tasks (cf. Hackman, 1987). 
Such teams have shared histories with well-developed cultures, members whose time is 
allocated 100% to the group. and readily understood and publicly acknowledged 
purposes and status within the organization. As importantly, ongoing work groups are 
embedded in static bureaucratic structures with fixed boundaries that clearly distinguish 
them from other groups in the organizational setting. In the current paper, I argue that 
identity issues are particularly problematic for project teams due to the diversity of their 
membership and the deterrninacy of their existence (Emmanuelides, 1993). 
Development teams are typically cross-functional: members are representatives of 
various organizational subunits who have been ‘loaned’ to a project due to specific 
expertise. Functional diversity (a) brings a variety of perspectives and differing knowl- 
edge to bear on design issues, (b) helps to forestall downstream manufacturing and 
marketing problems (e.g., Clark and Fujimoto, 199 I ; Nonaka, 1990), and (c) encourages 
external communication (Ancona and Caldwell, 1992b) which, research suggests, is 
critical for team success (Ancona and Caldwell, 1992a; Katz and Tushman, 1979, 1981; S.G. Scott/J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 14 (19971 97-127 99 
Allen, 1971, 1977). Yet, functional diversity has been found to relate negatively to the 
technical quality of development projects (Ancona and Caldwell, 1992b), perhaps 
because the different ‘thought worlds’ of members from different functions make the 
integration of members’ ideas and perspectives difficult (Dougherty, 1992). Further, the 
primary social identity and allegiance of members from different functions usually 
resides with their home subunit rather than with the project team (Alderfer, 1987), 
particularly when members are aware that they will return to the home unit at the end of 
the project. Recent case studies have demonstrated that team membership, identity, and 
loyalty are problematic in project teams (Donnellon, 1993; Gersick and Davis-Sacks, 
1990). 
Identification has most often been conceptualized in organizational studies as value 
congruence between members and their group, or internalization of a group’s values by 
members (e.g., Chatman, 1991; O’Reilly et al., 1991; Hall and Schneider, 1972). In 
contrast, the social identity (Tajfel and Turner, 1985; Turner, 1982) and social catego- 
rization perspectives (Turner, 1982, 1987) define identification as the cognitive link 
between individuals and groups arising from the images or mental representations that 
members have of the group. A growing theoretical literature suggests that the members’ 
cognitive identification with a group has a profound influence on their behavior and, 
subsequently, on group outcomes (Dutton et al., 1994; Ashforth and Mael, 1989). For 
example, when members are socially identified with a group, they tend to adopt the 
group’s central problems as their own and cooperate in their resolution, regardless of 
their feelings toward other group members (Brewer and Gardner. 1996). Given its 
potency to explain group behavior, it is important to investigate antecedents of social 
identification in project teams. 
2. A theoretical model of team performance 
In this study, I proposed a model of team performance that integrates theory and 
research from social identity and social categorization theory with the existing research 
literature on internal and external group processes. The theoretical model (Fig. 1) is 
presented here to make it easier to follow the discussion pertaining to each of the 
hypotheses contained within it. The model specifies that team members’ social identifi- 
cation, team cohesiveness, and the amount of external communication jointly influence 
project team performance. Team social identification is posited to result from the joint 
influences of functional diversity, members’ time dedication to the project, project 
leaders’ organizational influence, and top managers’ support and recognition of the 
project. The theory and hypotheses relative to cohesiveness and external communication 
have been tested previously in the context of development teams. By testing a model 
that predicts their joint effects with team members’ social identification, I investigated 
the extent to which social identification adds to our current understanding and explana- 
tion of team performance. 
Prior to stating the hypotheses, it is important to note that team performance itself is 
multidimensional and is most often in the eye of the beholder (Tsui, 1984). For example, 
performance criteria in studies of production teams have included measures of produc- 100 S.G. Scott/J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 14 (19971 97-127 
Project Leader 
IllfheIlCe 
Support and 
Hll (f) 
HlO(-) 
~5 (+) 
’ I Cohesiveness ( 
Fig. 1. Hypothesized model of project performance. 
tivity, absenteeism, or turnover. In other types of teams, different measures might be 
more appropriate both to the research setting under study and to the nature of the 
research question. Hackman (1987) argued that performance criteria in the study of 
groups should include three criteria: (t) client satisfaction; (2) goal attainment: and (3) 
team member satisfaction, and most research studies of group performance now use 
multiple performance criteria. For example, in the R&D setting, recent studies of team 
performance have used criteria developed through collaboration with R&D managers 
including adherence to budgets and schedules, and project technical quality (Ancona and 
Caldwell, 1992a,b; Keller, 1986). Further, prior empirical work has demonstrated that 
team member assessments of performance are seldom congruent with manager ratings 
(Ancona and Caldwell, 1992a; Keller, 1986) or with objective measures (Gladstein, 
1984). Consistent with prior studies in R&D, this study used both managers’ and team 
members’ assessments of team performance. 
2.1. Team performance and team process 
Early theory and research on group functioning was largely the province of social 
psychologists who tended to focus on internal group processes (Gladstein, 1984). This 
research tradition provided fine-grained analyses of dynamics occurring within a group’s 
boundaries and, particularly, of interpersonal relations within the group. Others have 
noted that integration of members within a group is not so much a function of role 
requirements as it is of affective factors, such as interpersonal attraction and satisfaction 
with other group members (Katz and Kahn, 1978). Turner (1982) labeled research in this 
tradition ‘the Social Cohesion model’ as its underlying premise is that team members 
must form a cohesive unit to perform adequately. Cohesiveness reflects interpersonal 
interactions and attraction among team members, is primarily affective in nature, and S.G. Scott/J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 14 (19971 97-127 101 
develops vis a vis the relationships among team members (e.g., O’Reilly et al., 1991; 
Shaw, 1971; Lott and Lott, 1965). Empirical support for the positive effects of 
cohesiveness on R&D team performance has been reported in several studies (Keller, 
1986; Pelz and Andrews, 1976; O’Keefe et al., 1975). Thus, I proposed the following 
hypothesis: 
Hypothesis 1. There is a positive relationship between project team performance and 
cohesiveness 
With increasing emphasis on open system models (Katz and Kahn, 1978) group 
theorists and researchers began to turn their attention to the context in which groups 
operate. For example, research from the socio-technical systems school focused on the 
interrelationships of group process and context (Cummings, 1978). Work on boundary 
spanning investigated how groups regulate the flow of information across their borders 
(e.g., Tushman, 1979). Most boundary spanning studies have been conducted in R&D 
settings with product development groups. The need for information exchange between 
development groups and other groups within the organization has been identified by 
numerous authors (Ancona and Caldwell, 1987; Burgelman, 1983; Quinn and Mueller, 
1963). Development teams must interact with top management to gamer continued 
support for the project, coordinate with other subunits in the organization, and scan the 
environment for relevant technical information (Ancona and Caldwell, 1992a). It is also 
not unusual for such teams to have significant communication with customers and 
suppliers outside of the organization. Numerous studies in R&D settings report that the 
amount of information exchange or communication among a team and other groups 
external to the team is positively related to development team performance (e.g., Ebadi 
and Utterbach, 1984). In fact, a number of recent studies found that the amount of 
external communication was more important to manager-rated team performance than 
were internal task processes (Ancona and Caldwell, 19921-3; Gladstein, 1984). Thus, from 
prior theory and research, I posited that: 
Hypothesis 2. Team performance is positively related to the amount of external 
communication 
The relationship between group internal processes and external communication has 
also received some discussion in the literature on groups. Janis (1982) noted that, under 
conditions of extreme cohesiveness, groups establish gatekeeping roles to close off their 
boundary to outside communication. Others have noted that when groups import 
information on differing goals, perspectives, and attitudes, intragroup conflict is likely to 
ensue (Shaw, 1971; Schmidt and Kochran, 1972). Recently, Ancona and Caldwell 
(1992a) found that cohesiveness was negatively correlated with frequency of external 
communication in a study of development groups. Thus, I proposed: 
Hypothesis 3. Cohesiveness is negatively related to the amount of external communi- 
cation 
2.2. Team identity and members’ social identification 
Numerous researchers have argued that systems with boundaries that are too perme- 
able lose their sense of identity and their ability to perform as a group (e.g., Alderfer, 
1987; Friedlander, 1987) Many boundaries in the workplace are physical (e.g., white 102 S.G. Scott/J. Eng. Technal. Manage. 14 (1997) 97-127 
lines painted on a shop floor to indicate the private domain or territory of the assembly 
department). But, in a broader sense, boundaries may be anything that makes salient to 
members and outsiders characteristics differentiating a group from other groups within 
the social environment (Sundstrom and Altman, 1989). Differentiation is critical to 
identity formation whether at the individual or group level. 
Tajfel (1978) in studies of intergroup conflict, argued that group identities were 
constructed of perceived prototypical characteristics of members of a group. Altema- 
tively, other researchers note that group identity also includes aspects of a group that are 
independent of individual members such as group goals, mission, practices, values, and 
actions (Ashforth and Mael, 1989; Albert and Whetten, 198.5). For example, organiza- 
tional identity has been defined as a cognitive representation held by organizational 
members of that which is central, distinctive, and enduring about an organization 
(Dutton et al., 1994; Albert and Whetten, 1985). Similarly, a team identity is formed 
from central and distinctive aspects of the project team, which may include the project 
mission or purpose, goals, actions and prototypical aspects of team members themselves. 
Team identity is a valuable concept, inasmuch as it helps explain social identification of 
individual group members. While perceptions of identity vary across team members, as 
they interpret what is distinctive about a group based on their individual needs and 
unique prior experiences, social identification processes operate independently of iden- 
tity content (Tajfel, 1982). 
Social identity theory has proven particularly useful for understanding member 
identification in large social groups and identity groups (e.g., racial groups, gender 
groups) where interaction is generally constrained to a small subset of members or does 
not occur at all (Tajfel, 1978, 1982; Turner, 1985, 1987). To date, there has been 
research in organizational settings focused on peoples’ social identification with their 
employing organization (Dutton et al., 1994) their alma mater (Mae], 1988) and their 
occupational group (Van Maanen and Barley, 1984). Perhaps because of the relatively 
less enduring, more ephemeral nature of project teams and other ad hoc groups, there 
has been little empirical attention thus far given to performance effects of social 
identification among members. Thus, the usefulness of social identity theory for 
explaining performance in smaller face-to-face work teams has not yet been fully 
explored. 
Social identity is best understood as one aspect of the self-concept that, along with 
the more idiosyncratic personal identity, provides people with an answer to the question 
‘Who am I?’ Where the personal aspect of identity might be thought of as a composite 
image of past experiences and personal history, a person’s social identity is constructed 
with reference to membership in different social categories. These social categories can 
be ascribed (e.g., females, Americans, etc.), self-selected (e.g., professors, accountants), 
or the result of organizational categorization processes (e.g., member of the New 
Generation Project team>. Social identity suggests to an individual where he or she ‘fits’ 
in the social milieu. Social identification is the internalization of a social identity and 
involves the perception that one is ‘ . . psychologically intertwined with the fate of the 
group . . . personally experiencing the successes and failures of the group’ (p. 21) and 
defining oneself in terms of the group (Ashforth and Mae], 1989). In short, identification 
represents the psychological acceptance of group membership. S.G. Scott/J. Eng. Technol. Mwzage. 14 (1997) 97-127 103 
It is important to note that, from the social identity perspective, identification does 
not originate from interpersonal relationships among group members (Turner, 1985) a 
basic premise of the social cohesion model presented earlier. People are often socially 
identified with groups whose specific members have little contact with them (Turner, 
1982). The social connections inherent in social identity theory are not personalized 
bonds of attachment to others, but ‘ impersonal bonds derived from common 
identification with some symbolic group or social category’ (Brewer and Gardner, 1996, 
p. 83). Thus, social identity theory draws our attention away from interpersonal 
relationships among team members to cognitive representations of a group based on 
other criteria (Hogg, 1992). 
Social identification is also distinct from commitment to a group. While organiza- 
tional commitment has been defined as the strength of an individual’s identification with 
an organization, it is composed of a belief in and acceptance of an organization’s values, 
willingness to assert effort on behalf of an organization, and a desire to maintain 
membership (Mowday et al., 1979). Mae1 and Ashforth (1995) argue that ‘this view 
includes internalization of values, behavioral intentions, and positive affect, but not 
identification’ . the cognitive perception of oneness with an organization’ (p. 312). 
Mae1 and Tetrick (1992) using confirmatory factor analysis, found that social identifica- 
tion was empirically distinct from organizational commitment, and that social identifica- 
tion had lesser conceptual overlap with other measures of effect (e.g., job satisfaction). 
However, as a social identity becomes more salient, attention to individual goals and 
interests gives way to group goals and interests (Kramer and Brewer, 1984) indicating 
that social identification positively influences commitment. Further, interaction pro- 
cesses in socially identified groups improve as members adopt a cooperative orientation 
toward resolution of group problems. This is not the result of liking among the group 
members. Rather, it reflects the members’ heightened interest in the welfare of the 
symbolic group with which they are identified. As Turner (1982) noted, people do not so 
much identify with those they like, as they begin to like those with whom they identify. 
Research on social identity theory has shown that social identification is positively 
related to preferential treatment (Tajfel and Turner, 1985) greater cooperation and 
interaction (Dutton et al., 1994; Ashforth and Mael, 1989) more positive attitudes 
(Turner, 1982) and more helpful behaviors (Dutton et al., 1994; Ashforth and Mael, 
1989; Turner, 1982) among in-group members relative to out-group members. Further, 
once socially identified with a group, individuals accentuate the similarities among 
‘in-group’ members while simultaneously accentuating the differences between the 
‘in-group’ and the ‘out-group’ (Hogg and Abrams, 1985). Thus, as identification 
increases among team members, we expect to see more intrateam cooperation contribut- 
ing to increased cohesiveness among members. 
Hypothesis 4. Cohesiveness is positively related to team members’ social identifca- 
tion. 
2.3. Team structure and context 
The previous sections discussed the expected interrelationships among social identifi- 
cation, cohesiveness, and external communication and their joint effects on team 104 S.G. Scott/J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 14 (1997) 97-127 
performance. This section elaborates on several structural and contextual aspects of team 
functioning that are posited to influence each of the process variables and, subsequently, 
team performance. 
Within organizations, people have multiple organizationally defined identities. They 
are members of functional areas (e.g., the production function, the R&D function), of 
professions or occupational groups, (e.g., lawyers, scientists, technicians), of intact work 
groups (e.g., the applied research unit, the chemistry laboratory subunit), as well as of 
temporary project groups. Each of these identities may be more or less salient depending 
on situational as well as temporal cues (Kramer, 1991). Several theorists (Ashforth and 
Mael. 1989; Kramer, 1991) have argued that identification at the level of the primary 
work group (e.g., department or subunit) is the most salient because member similarity, 
task interdependence, and interpersonal proximity are all greater with respect to the 
primary work group. Each of these aspects of primary groups, along with their enduring 
nature, tend to solidify their identity within an organization. As importantly and often 
overlooked, primary group identities are made public knowledge and reinforced through 
formal communication processes, the use of which are ubiquitous in most organizations 
(e.g., organizational charts). However, in today’s fluid, team-based organizations, the 
primacy of the functional department in identity formation is questionable as people 
spend greater amounts of time in various task groups. To the extent that task teams 
develop distinguishable identities, social identification processes are expected to occur 
among team members. 
As previously mentioned, particular characteristics of temporary project teams make 
establishing an identity challenging. Members are typically chosen for the express 
purpose of bringing multiple divergent perspectives to bear on unstructured problems of 
organizational significance. Thus, they are likely to have strong ties to their functional 
departments. In addition, members are typically on loan to such teams with expectations 
of returning to their ‘home’ group on completion of the task. The psychological start-up 
costs involved in accepting a new social identity may be perceived of by team members 
as simply too high given the limited life expectancy of the team. Establishing a team 
identity might be viewed, therefore, as one of the largest challenges a new team faces, 
and it is ironic that so little attention is paid to this process in the literature (Kramer, 
1991). 
There is substantial evidence from laboratory studies that the mere act of categoriza- 
tion induces people to internalize a group membership no matter what the effect on their 
self-perception (Tajfel and Turner, 1985). Individuals may try to rationalize their 
assignment to specific groups by assuming that they possess prototypical characteristics 
of the group or category to which they have self-selected or been assigned (Kramer, 
1991). This has been called self-stereotyping (Turner, 1982) and self-categorization 
(Ashforth and Mael, 1989). However, Schlenker (1985) and Turner (1982) argued that 
social identification is not deterministic, as individuals, to some degree, choose and 
negotiate social identities (Swann, 1987) and cognitively shift among identities to meet 
their individual needs at any given time (Hogg and Abrams, 1985). 
The social identity literature suggests several factors that are likely to increase an 
individual’s identification with a group. The first is the distinctiveness of a group’s 
values and practices (Ashforth and Mael, 1989; Mae1 and Ashforth, 1992; Tajfel and S.G. Scott/J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 14 (1997) 97-127 105 
Turner, 1985). Individuals seek to enhance their sense of self-importance by affiliating 
and identifying with groups that provide them with social identities that accentuate their 
own distinctiveness (Dutton et al., 1994). To an even greater extent, individuals identify 
more with social identities that enhance their self-esteem than to others that might be 
available (Dutton et al., 1994; Ashforth and Mae], 1989; Mae], 1988). 
Individual self-esteem results from self-evaluation processes against a set of internal 
criteria or standards. However, the criteria against which people judge their own 
adequacy are themselves internalized from the embedding culture (Erez and Earley, 
1993; Bandura, 1986), suggesting that self-evaluations largely reflect social information. 
Thus, social identification is likely to increase with perceptions of the valence an 
embedding culture places on a specific social identity. To the extent that valence is 
represented by a group’s prestige, social identification is posited to vary with the 
prestige of the group (Ashforth and Mae], 1989), and empirical support has been 
reported for this relationship (Mae], 1988). In the context studied here, team members 
should identify more with prestigious projects that have publicly acknowledged value 
within the organization. Team members infer the value placed on a particular project 
from several cues, three of which were investigated here. These included (1) top 
management support to and recognition of a project; (2) the influence or power of the 
project leader; and (3) the extent to which team members’ time is dedicated to the 
project. 
At any given time within an organization, multiple development projects exist 
simultaneously, each with a claim on limited organizational resources. The allocation of 
resources and recognition is the province of top management, and it serves symbolic as 
well as instrumental functions. Both resource-based support and public recognition of a 
team’s efforts convey the importance attributed by top managers to a project, and, 
subsequently, through identification, the importance and significance members ascribe to 
the team. Further. to the degree that the level of top management support and 
recognition are recognized by other organizational participants, the prestige of a project 
and the project team increase throughout the organization. 
Prestige is also likely to be attributed to teams that have influential project leaders. 
Project leaders have the responsibility for integrating the work of project members from 
different functions and technical specialties. Katz and Allen (1985) noted that leaders of 
highly effective projects have strong organizational influence outside of the project, and 
numerous studies support this relationship (e.g., Katz and Allen, 1985; Clark and 
Fujimoto, 1991). Katz and Tushman (1981) found that team members’ motivation and 
behaviors are affected both by leadership within the team and by organizational 
influence outside the team. The assignment of organizationally influential project leaders 
(self-selected or chosen by management) causes team members and outsiders to infer 
that the project is important and prestigious and, subsequently, enhances the self-esteem 
of team members. 
Further, it is not unusual in product development settings for team members to be 
simultaneously serving on multiple projects or simultaneously engaged in functional 
duties (Donnellon, 1993; Dougherty, 1992). Multiple memberships can serve to blur the 
boundaries of a team, thereby reducing its distinctiveness (Ashforth and Mae], 1989). As 
importantly, when members’ time is dedicated to a project, it signals the relative value 106 S.G. Scott/J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 14 (1997) 97-127 
or prestige of the project to both team members and other organizational participants. In 
addition, the more team members’ time is allocated to a project, the greater is the 
opportunity for team members to interact with each other. As previously mentioned, 
individuals tend to accentuate differences between groups with which they identify and 
out-groups (Hogg and Turner, 1988) dividing the world into ‘we’ and ‘them’ and 
assuming that others are representative of their group. Increased interaction tends to 
weaken the perception of other members as representatives of their own functional 
group and strengthen the perception of them as one of ‘us’. To the extent that members’ 
time is dedicated to a project, members will become more aware of their shared common 
fate and less aware of their differences. 
To summarize, to the extent that contested organizational resources-such as top 
management support and recognition, powerful project leaders, and member time-are 
allocated to a project, individuals tend to attribute greater prestige to the project team. 
Since individuals identify more with prestigious groups in the interest of enhancing their 
own self-esteem, I proposed: 
Hypothesis 5. Team members’ social ident@xtion is positkely related to top 
management support and recognition. 
Hypothesis 6. Team members’ social identification is positively related to the 
organizational influence of the project leader. 
Hypothesis 7. Team members’ social identijkation is positively related to the degree 
to which their time is dedicated to a project. 
Finally, cross-functional development teams vary in their degree of functional 
heterogeneity. Some teams may be composed predominantly of members from one 
subunit such as R&D, with only one or two members from manufacturing or marketing. 
Other teams may be composed of members, each of whom is from a different subunit. 
As discussed earlier, team members on loan from functional subunits may be strongly 
identified with the ‘home’ unit to which they will return on the completion of the 
project. Functional unit identity is strengthened by member similarity in education, 
training, and goal orientation, task interdependence, and interpersonal proximity (Byrne, 
1971; Kramer, 1991). Thus, to the extent functional diversity exists in a team, team 
social identification is likely to be reduced. 
Hypothesis 8. Team members’ social identification is negatkely related to functional 
diuersity. 
Functional diversity is also posited to have an indirect effect on team performance 
through external communication. At the very least, team members from disparate 
functions will have previously established relationships with individuals from their home 
unit with whom they continue communicating. This is, in fact, the means through which 
the promised closer coupling of functional areas occurs. In addition, similarity encour- 
ages communication and interaction (Byrne, 1971), and to the extent that individuals are 
similar in goals, orientations, education, and training to people in their home unit, we 
expect to see increasing communication with the home unit. Zenger and Lawrence 
(1989) found that similarity of tenure was related to the amount of communication 
between team members and non-members. Others have also reported a positive relation- 
ship between functional diversity and external communications (Ancona and Caldwell, 
1992b). S.G. Scott/J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 14 (I 997197-127 107 
Hypothesis 9. The amount of external communication is positively related to fine- 
tional diversity. 
A number of the structural and context variables contained in the model are also 
expected to have direct effects on team performance independent of the members’ social 
identification. Specifically, top management support provides additional resources for a 
project that have been shown by others to be related to group outcomes (e.g., Gladstein, 
1984), and recognition is likely to predispose other organizational units to cooperate 
with a team. Similarly, organizationally influential project leaders help secure ‘essential 
resources, mediate intergroup conflicts, and . . . protect the developmental effort from 
outside sources of interference’ (Katz and Allen, 1985, p. 72). Thus, the benefits to a 
project team of support and recognition and a powerful project leader are instrumental, 
as well as symbolic. In contrast, although members’ time is an equally valued resource, I 
expected that social identification is a necessary condition for members to exert effort 
toward the group goal. Thus, I expected no direct influence from dedication of 
members’ time to performance. 
Hypothesis 10. Team performance is positively related to top management support 
and recognition. 
Hypothesis 1 1. Team pelformance is positively related to the organizational in.u- 
ence of the project leader. 
3. Additional influences on project team performance 
There are numerous other characteristics of the team and the task that have been 
shown to influence project performance in the literature. While it was not possible to 
include all these variables in the current study, I did control for three variables that prior 
research suggests may be important to group effectiveness. These included team tenure, 
newness of the product or process technology to the organization, and team size. Team 
tenure has been reported to have a curvilinear relationship with project performance in 
prior studies in R&D settings (Katz, 1982; Smith, 1970). Group size has been shown in 
numerous studies to influence performance through its effects on communications and 
group process (Katz, 1982). Finally, increasing uncertainty related to technology creates 
different requirements for external communication in project teams, and subsequently 
has implications for team performance (Brown and Utterback, 1985). 
4. Research design and measures 
4.1. Procedure and sample 
I studied product and process development projects from three large manufacturing 
divisions of one Fortune 500 company. Assessments of the study variables were 
obtained via questionnaires administered to project team members. At the time the 108 S.G. Scott/f. Eng. Technol. Manuge. 14 (19971 97-127 
questionnaires were first administered, all of the projects chosen for study were at about 
the midpoint of their originally scheduled time frames. Fifty-two project teams were 
originally chosen for study from company records, Thirty of the teams were engaged in 
product development, and the remaining 22 teams were engaged in process development 
activities. For all project groups, the focus of their work activity was the use of existing 
knowledge (although not necessarily at the firm) to create new products and processes. 
Each of the 52 project team leaders was sent a letter from the president of their 
respective divisions explaining the nature of the study. I contacted each project leader by 
telephone to verify the membership of his or her team. Questionnaires were sent to each 
team member with a letter encouraging them to voluntarily complete the questionnaire 
on normally scheduled work time and asking that they return it via mail directly to the 
study investigator in an enclosed self-addressed envelope. Participants were also assured 
complete confidentiality related to their individual responses. Each questionnaire was 
identified with a specific project number and name, and participants were asked to 
complete the questions in relation to that project. A total of 296 questionnaires were sent 
out, and 263 (88.9%) were returned. 
Since the unit of interest was the project, projects were only included if at least 75% 
of team members assigned to it responded to the questionnaire. This reduced the number 
of teams to 48 but missing data in the questionnaires further reduced the total teams 
used in the study to 42 with a combined membership of 236 individuals. The teams 
ranged in size from 3 to 7 members with an average size of about 5 members. Team 
tenure varied from 6 months to 13 months. The individuals on the teams had an average 
organizational tenure of 14.5 years, an average age of 42.3 years, and were 96% male. 
In addition, about 83% had at least a four-year college degree, and approximately 25% 
had graduate degrees. 
At the same time a questionnaire was sent to project team members, a separate 
questionnaire to assess team performance data was sent to functional managers, a 
division vice-president, and division directors. Further, managerial ratings of team 
performance were also collected via questionnaire one year after the initial data 
collection. At the time of the second data collection. 36 of the projects were officially 
completed, and the remaining six were in the final months of completion. 
4.2. Measures 
Whenever possible, previously existin g measurement instruments with adequate 
psychometric properties were chosen for use in this study. However, several scales were 
developed for use here. Since the unit of analysis in this study was the group, items were 
specifically constructed to refer to the team or to the team’s work. Unless otherwise 
noted, all measures used 5-point Likert response scales ranging from (1) highly disagree 
to (5) highly agree. 
The individual responses were aggregated to the project group level by computing the 
mean across project members. To justify this aggregation, one-way analyses of variance 
were conducted to determine if there was greater variability between projects than 
within projects (Wirier, 1971). In all cases, the variance between projects was greater 
than the variance within, suggesting that aggregation was appropriate. We also calcu- 
lated an interrater reliability coefficient using the method recommended by James et al. S.G. Scott/J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 14 (1997) 97-127 109 
(1984a) to examine the intragroup reliability of responses. In all cases, the interrater 
reliability score revealed homogeneity among the team members in their responses to 
the items in the scales. Results of the F-tests from the analysis of variance and the 
interrater reliability scores are reported below. In addition, homogeneity of variance was 
tested using Bartlett-Box F. All of the variables passed this test. 
4.2. I. Members’ time dedication 
Each team member and the project leader was asked to indicate on the questionnaire 
the percentage of their total work time that was allocated to a focal project. In addition, 
as a validity check on this assessment, each project leader was asked to indicate the 
percentage of each member’s total work time that was spent on a project. Interrater 
reliability between the two assessments was 0.76. Since it seemed more reasonable for 
team members to have greater knowledge of their time allocation across projects, I used 
the team members’ assessments for this variable. The higher the score on this measure, 
the greater the extent to which members of the team were dedicated to the focal project. 
4.2.2. Top management support and recognition 
A 4-item scale was constructed for use in this study. Team members and the project 
leader were asked to indicate the extent to which they believed top management: (1) 
recognized the importance of the project to the organization; (2) valued the contribution 
of the team to the project; (3) allocated adequate resources to accomplish the project; 
and (4) publicly ‘talked up’ the project to others in the organization. Higher scores 
indicated greater top management support and recognition. Cronbach’s CY in this sample 
was 0.78. One-way analysis of variance found aggregation to the group level appropriate 
(F = 3.79; p < 0.001). Finally, the average intragroup reliability for this scale was 0.92. 
4.2.3. Leader organizational influence 
A 3-item scale was constructed for use in this study. Team members were asked to 
indicate the degree to which they thought their project leader (1) was generally respected 
in the organization for his/her expertise and competence, (2) had substantial influence 
with functional managers in the organization, and (3) had substantial influence with top 
management in the organization. The project leader was also asked to rate himself or 
herself on each of the items, and the average rating across the team members and project 
leader were used. Higher scores indicated greater organizational influence. Cronbach’s 
(Y in this sample was 0.88. One-way analysis of variance found aggregation to the group 
level appropriate (F = 4.02; p < 0.001). Finally, the average intragroup reliability for 
this scale was 0.94. 
4.2.4. Functional diversity 
This variable was assessed using heterogeneity index of Blau, 1977: (1 - Ci2), where 
i is the proportion of the group in the ith category. Team members’ and the project 
leader’s functional affiliations were acquired from company records and verified with 
project leaders. A high score on this index indicates variability in the functional 
affiliations of team members or greater functional heterogeneity. 110 S.G. Scott/J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 14 (1997) 97-127 
4.2.5. Members’ social identification 
A 7-item scale was used to assess this variable. Four of the items were adapted from 
Mae1 and Tetrick (1992) organizational identification scale and 3 additional items were 
written specifically for this study. The questionnaire indicated, “In this section, we are 
specifically interested in team members’ feelings about being on the project team”. 
Team members and the project leader were asked to indicate the extent to which: (1) 
team members view criticism of the XXX project team as a personal insult; (2) team 
members are interested in what others think about the XXX project team; (3) team 
members consider the success of the XXX project team their success; (4) team members 
take praise of the XXX project team as a personal compliment; (5) working on the XXX 
project team defines ‘who team members are’ at the company; (6) for team members in 
general, to think of themselves as employees of the company is to think of themselves as 
members of the XXX project team; and (7) for team members in general, their 
self-worth at work is related to the performance of the XXX project team. Cronbach’s CY 
in this sample was 0.92. Higher scores indicated greater identification with the project. 
4.2.6. ColzesiEeness 
A 4-item scale developed by Seashore (1954) was used in this study. The question- 
naire indicated, “In this section, we are interested in the relationships among the project 
team members”. Then, team members and the project leader were asked to rate the 
extent to which team members: (I) are likely to defend each other from criticism by 
outsiders; (2) help each other while working on the project; (3) get along well with each 
other; and (4) stick together. The response format was a 4-point scale ranging from ‘not 
very good’ to ‘great, couldn’t be better’: higher scores indicated greater group cohesive- 
ness. Cronbach’s (Y in this sample was 0.87. This (Y is consistent with previously 
reported research (e.g., Keller, 1986; O’Reilly et al., 1989). One-way analysis of 
variance found aggregation to the group level appropriate (F = 3.52; p < 0.01). Finally, 
the average intragroup reliability for this scale was 0.87. 
An exploratory factor analysis, shown in Appendix A, was used to establish the 
discriminant validity among the conceptual domains represented by cohesiveness and 
social identification. To demonstrate independence, the individual-level scores for each 
of these variables were submitted to a principal-components factor analysis. With a 
two-factor constraint, the rotated factor matrix showed all items loading on the appropri- 
ate factor and minimal overlap of items between factors. I concluded from this analysis 
that team members conceptually distinguished among these constructs. 
4.2.7. External communication 
This variable was assessed using a single item measure consistent with prior research 
(Ancona and Caldwell, 1992b). Team members and the project leader were asked to 
indicate how often on average they communicated regarding the project with nonteam 
members in marketing, manufacturing, engineering, product or division management, 
outside vendors, or outside customers. The mean across these 6 categories was taken for 
each team member, and then team members’ scores were averaged to develop a team 
score. S.G. Scott/J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 14 (1997) 97-127 Ill 
4.2.8. Team pe$ormance 
This variable was measured using a Sitem scale developed by Ancona and Caldwell 
(1992a). Team members and the project leader assessed performance at Time 1 (the 
midpoint of the project) by rating efficiency, quality of technical innovations, adherence 
to schedules, adherence to budgets, and ability to resolve conflicts. A principal compo- 
nents factor analysis with varimax rotation was conducted on the data, and all items 
loaded on one factor. This factor was named member-rated performance. Cronbach’s (Y 
in this study was 0.89. One-way analysis of variance found aggregation to the group 
level appropriate (F = 4.89; p < 0.001). Finally, the average intragroup reliability for 
this scale was 0.85. 
Assessments of project performance were also collected from divisional vice-presi- 
dents, directors, and functional managers at the same time as team members’ ratings. In 
all cases, at least two and as many as five managers assessed performance on the same 
criteria as team members. Principal components factor analysis with varimax rotation 
was conducted on the data, and both the Kaiser criteria and the scree plot suggested that 
two factors be maintained. One factor was defined by the items relating to adherence to 
budgets and adherence to schedules and was labeled budgets and schedules (a = 0.77). 
The second factor was defined by the quality of technical innovations and efficiency and 
was labeled technical quality ( cx = 0.83). The ability to resolve conflicts loaded by itself 
on a third factor that had an eigenvalue less than 1. As a consequence, it was dropped 
from subsequent analysis. The results of this analysis were compatible with those 
reported by Ancona and Caldwell (1992a) except for the conflict item, which loaded on 
the same factor as quality and efficiency in their study. The average interrater reliability 
among managers for budgets and schedules was 0.82 and for technical quality was 0.79. 
One-way analysis of variance found aggregation to the group level appropriate for 
budgets and schedules (F = 4.73; p < 0.001) and for technical quality (F = 3.83; 
p < 0.001). 
Finally, managers’ ratings of budgets and schedules and technical quality were 
collected a second time approximately one year after the initial questionnaire administra- 
tion. Cronbach’s (Y for budgets and schedules and technical quality from the time 2 
ratings were 0.87 and 0.83, respectively. The average interrater reliability among 
managers for budgets and schedules was 0.89 and for technical quality was 0.91. 
One-way analysis of variance found aggregation to the group level appropriate for 
budgets and schedules (F = 4.65; p < 0.001) and for technical quality (F = 4.23; 
p < 0.001). 
4.2.9. Team tenure 
This was the length of time that the project had been underway, and was acquired 
from the company records. The measure was then verified with project leaders. 
4.2.10. Team size 
This was acquired from project documents and verified with the project leader. 
4.2.11. Technology newness 
This information was acquired from company records. Prior to the inception of a 
project, the intended project leader was responsible for assessing the extent to which the 112 S.G. Scott/J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 14 (19971 97-127 
project involved technology that was new to the organization on a 3-point scale. This 
assessment was used during the formal justification process for the project, and the 
directors indicated that the assessment actually represented a consensus arrived at 
between the project leader and themselves. A rating of 1 indicated that the organization 
had little or no familiarity with the technology, and a rating of 3 indicated that the 
organization was very familiar with the technology. 
4.3. Analyses 
Descriptive statistics and intercorrelations among the variables were computed. 
Multivariate analysis of variance (MANOVA) was conducted using managers’ ratings of 
budgets and schedules, and technical quality at Time 1 as the dependent variable. This 
was followed by a second MANOVA in which managers’ ratings from Time 2 were 
used as the dependent variable. MANOVA simultaneously tests the effects of the 
independent variables on the set of dependent variables while controlling for the type 1 
error rate and incorporating the correlations among the independent variables in the test 
statistic. Following this, path analysis of the model’s structural equations was conducted 
with ordinary least squares estimation of the model’s parameters, as the causal ordering 
of the hypotheses was of interest. Path analysis (James et al., 1984b) was used as it 
provides the opportunity to test a model with intervening or mediating variables. I did 
not use LISREL, as variable scores used in this study were aggregated from the 
individual level to the group level and LISREL cannot deal with two different levels of 
analysis in one simultaneous step. In addition, the sample size to parameter estimate was 
less than 5. and the results of LISREL analysis under this condition are unreliable 
(Breckler, 1990; Bentler, 1985). 
For the path analyses, each endogenous-dependent variable was tested with all 
variables causally proceeding it entered into the regression equation. More specifically, 
five separate multiple regressions were conducted to determine the direct effects on each 
of the dependent variables (i.e., Time 1 and Time 2 managers’ ratings of budgets and 
schedules, Time 1 and Time 2 managers’ ratings of technical quality. and Time 1 team 
members’ ratings of performance). In each multiple regression, one of the dependent 
variables was regressed on team size, the exogenous variables (i.e., member time 
dedication, support and recognition, leader influence, and functional diversity), and 
external communications and cohesiveness. Then, members’ social identification was 
entered and the incremental change in R2 was computed. To explore the indirect effects 
of the independent variables on the dependent variables, three additional multiple 
regressions were conducted. In the first regression equation, cohesiveness was regressed 
on team size, the four exogenous variables, and the remaining two process variables. In 
the second regression equation, external communication was regressed on team size and 
the four exogenous variables. In the third regression equation, team social identification 
was regressed on team size and the four exogenous variables. 
All three control variables were not tested in the regression equations simultaneously 
because the small sample size resulted in a loss of statistical power. Rather, the analyses 
outlined above were repeated two more times substituting technology newness and team 
tenure for team size. S.G. Scott/J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 14 (19971 97-127 !I3 
5. Results 
The descriptive statistics and intercorrelations among the study variables are shown in 
Table I. Leader influence and social identification significantly correlated with all four 
of the performance criteria. In addition, support and recognition significantly correlated 
with three of the four performance criteria. While cohesiveness was not significantly 
correlated with the managers’ ratings of performance in Time I or Time 2, it was 
significantly correlated with the team members’ rating of team performance. In contrast, 
while external communication was not significantly correlated with the team members’ 
ratings of team performance, it was significantly correlated with the managers’ ratings in 
Time 1 and Time 2. Consistent with prior research, the managers’ ratings and the team 
members’ ratings were only moderately correlated with each other. Consistent with the 
hypotheses, (i) leader influence, support and recognition, time dedication, and functional 
diversity were each significantly correlated in the expected direction with social 
identification, (ii) functional diversity was significantly correlated with external commu- 
nications, and (iii) social identification was significantly correlated with cohesiveness. 
Contrary to hypothesis, external communication was not significantly correlated with 
cohesiveness. 
The scatter diagrams for team tenure, team size, and cohesiveness with each of the 
four performance criteria were examined to check for any curvilinear relationships. 
None were in evidence. Further, I added a quadratic term for each of these variables to 
the respective regression equation and tested for the significance of the incremental 
change in R2 (Cohen and Cohen, 1983). Nonsignificant F-tests resulted for all four of 
the performance criteria suggesting that team tenure, team size, and cohesiveness were 
linearly related to each of the performance criteria. 
The MANOVA result for the Time 1 managers’ ratings was significant (F = 5.058, 
p < O.OOl>, as was the result for the Time 2 managers’ ratings (F = 6.322, p < 0.001). 
Consequently, I proceeded with the path analysis. Table 2 reports the results of 
regressing each of the four performance criteria on the independent and intervening 
variables. As shown, the standardized regression coefficient associated with members’ 
social identification was significant in all four regression equations. Further, when social 
identification was entered into each of the equations after controlling for all the other 
variables, the incremental change in R* was significant, indicating that social identifica- 
tion explained unique variance in each of the performance criteria. In addition, external 
communications was positively related to both the Time 1 and Time 2 managers’ ratings 
of technical quality and budgets and schedules, but was not significantly rated to the 
members’ ratings of performance. The pattern of findings was reversed for cohesiveness. 
Cohesiveness was positively related to the members’ ratings, but was not significantly 
related to the Time 1 or Time 2 managers’ ratings of quality or budgets and schedules. 
Table 3 reports the beta weights resulting from the regression of the three intervening 
variables on each of the variables causally proceeding them in the theoretical model. 
This information was used to find the indirect effects of each independent variable on 
the dependent variables. Fig. 2 shows the empirical model predicting Time 2 budgets 
and schedules, and Fig. 3 shows the empirical model predicting Time 2 technical 
quality. Contrary to hypothesis 1, the paths from cohesiveness to technical quality, and 114 S.G. Scott/J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 14 (19971 97-127 S.G. Scott/J. Eng. Technol. Manage. I4 (1997) 97-127 115 
Table 2 
Results of regression analyses” 
Independent variables Dependent variablesb 
Manager Manager Team Manager Manager 
ratings 
technical 
quality 
(Time 1) 
ratings 
budgets and 
schedules 
(Time 1) 
rating of 
performance 
ratings 
technical 
quality 
(Time 2) 
ratings 
budgets and 
schedules 
(Time 2) 
1. Team size 0.08 
2. Leader influence 0.19 
3. Member time dedication 0.25 
4. Support and recognition 0.26 
5. Functional diversity - 0.28 
6. External communication 0.35 * 
7. Cohesiveness 0.19 
Adjusted R2 
F-Value 
0.33 
3.01) 
8. Team social identification 0.39 * 
Adjusted R2 
F-Value 
Change in R2 
F-Value of change 
0.38 
4.83 * * 
0.06 
4.33 * 
0.07 0.08 0.06 0.03 
0.48 * * 0.18 0.16 0.18 
0.21 0.3 I* 0.17 0.07 
0.46 * * 0.15 0.35 * 0.31’ 
- 0.23 -0.07 
0.38 * 0.19 
0.11 0.34 4 
- 0.26 -0.15 
0.35 * 0.38 * 
0.06 0.06 
0.47 0.38 
7.65 * * - 4.63 * 
0.42 * 0.48 * * 
0.53 0.45 
7.98 * * * 7.18” * - 
0.06 0.07 
4.53 * 4.68 * 
0.39 0.50 
4.05 * 8.06 * * * 
0.39 * * 0.33 * 
0.44 0.55 
5.68 * * 5.58 * * * 
0.05 0.05 
4.05 * 4.32 * 
=n = 42. 
bNumbers in columns are beta weights 
= p < 0.05. 
* ‘p<O.Ol. 
* * ‘p < 0.001. 
from cohesiveness to budgets and schedules (as rated by managers) were not significant. 
Hypothesis 2 posited a positive relationship between external communications and the 
performance criteria. The path analysis supported the hypothesis. The path coefficient 
from external communications to budgets and schedules was significant (p = 0.38, 
p < 0.05), as was the path from external communications to technical quality (p = 0.35, 
p < 0.05). 
Hypothesis 3 expected a negative relationship between cohesiveness and external 
communications, and hypothesis 4 expected a positive relationship between cohesive- 
ness and social identification. While cohesiveness was negatively related to external 
communications, it did not quite reach significance. Thus, hypothesis 3 was not 
supported. However, cohesiveness was positively related to social identification (p = 
0.38, p < O.Ol), consistent with hypothesis 4. 
Hypotheses 5, 6, and 7 posited that leader influence, top management support and 
recognition, and members’ time dedication would each be positively related to social 
identification. The path coefficients’ were positive and significant between social 
identification and support and recognition (p = 0.39 * * , p < 0.011, leader influence 116 S.G. Scott/J. Eng. Technol. Mmage. 14 (19971 97-127 
Table 3 
Results of regression analyses” 
Dependent variablesb 
Team social External Cohesiveness 
identification Communication 
1. Team size 
2. Leader influence 
3. Member time dedication 
4. Support and recognition 
5. Functional diversity 
6. Social identification 
7. External communications 
Adjusted R’ 
F-Value 
0.13 0.07 -0.16 
0.36" = 0.20 -0.07 
0.32 I 0.03 0.12 
0.39 * L -0.12 0.21 
-0.29 * 0.37 * -0.09 
- - 0.38' * 
- - -0.26 
0.35 0.08 0.29 
6.59" * - 2.89 3.78" * 
"n=42. 
hNumbers in columns are beta weights. 
*p < 0.05. 
* *p < 0.01. 
* * ~p<O.OOl. 
(p = 0.36 * , p < O.OS), and members’ time dedication ( p = 0.32, p < O.OS>, indicating 
support for hypotheses 5, 6, and 7. Further, the path from functional diversity to social 
identification was negative and significant supporting hypothesis 8 ( p = 0.29, p < 0.05). 
Hypothesis 9 anticipated that functional diversity would be positively related to 
external communications. The positive significant path coefficient from functional 
Support and .31* 
Recognition 
I 
I I Proiect Leader’s .lSIlS I 
I I Influence L . . . :: ,.,............,.. . . . . . . . . . . . .._........ 
: I 
( .39** \+ 
.33* 
Members’ Time ,321 Members’ Social - - - - 
Dedication --) Identification 
Diversity ) External 
Communication 
Fig. 2. Path coefficients predicting managers’ time 2 ratings of budgets and schedules. S.G. Scott/J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 14 (19971 97-127 117 
Support and 
_ Recognitmn 
,351 
Project Leader’s 
Iniluence 
Members’ Tone 
Dedication 
.16ns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
7 7 .39** 
Technical Members’ Social - - - - - - - -) 
QUdi@ 
Functional 
Diversity Communication 
Fig. 3. Path coefficients predicting managers’ time 2 ratings of technical quality. 
diversity to external communication ( p = 0.37, p < 0.05) offers support for hypothesis 
9. Hypothesis 10 was supported by the positive significant path from top management 
support and recognition to both budgets and schedules ( p = 0.3 1, p < 0.05) and 
technical quality (p = 0.35, p < 0.05). Contrary to hypothesis 11, the path between 
leader influence and each of the performance criteria was nonsignificant. 
To test the overall fit of the model to the data, I calculated a Q statistic comparing 
the product of all squared residual paths subtracted from one in a fully recursive model 
to the product of all squared residuals subtracted from one in the over-identified model 
(Pedhazur, 1982). The Q statistic for the model tested here was 0.91, suggesting a good 
fit to the data. I also computed the direct and indirect effects of each variable on the 
endogenous variables in the model. If the paths were properly specified in the model, the 
analysis should reproduce the correlation matrix with small errors of magnitude (James 
et al., 1984b). As shown in the last column of Table 4 (column G), the error terms were 
quite small in magnitude for all paths in the model. 
One linkage that was not hypothesized was found empirically significant in both 
empirical models shown in Figs. 2 and 3. This was the path from members’ social 
identification to budgets and schedules (p = 0.33, p < 0.05) and technical quality 
( p = 0.39, p < 0.01). While I had anticipated that members’ social identification would 
be entirely mediated by cohesiveness, it was directly related to budgets and schedules 
and technical quality regardless of its relationship with cohesiveness. 
To conserve space, the path coefficients for the empirical models are only illustrated 
here for the managers’ ratings in Time 2. However, the pattern of results is very similar 
to that found using the Time 1 managers’ ratings. For both budgets and schedules, team 
social identification was directly related to the performance criteria, as was external 
communications. In contrast to the Time 2 rating, leader influence had a direct effect on Table 4 
Decomoosition of association between variables for time 2 managers’ ratings 
Causal effects 
Indirect effects 
Bivariate Total Direct Via social Via external Via Total effects Spurious 
relationships covariance A effects B identification C communications D cohesiveness E F = B + C + D + E G = A - F 
Leader influence with budgets 0.387 0.181 0.123 0.067 -0.015 0.356 0.03 1 
Support and recognition with budgets 0.485 0.356 0.133 - 0.043 0.005 0.45 1 0.034 
Time dedication with budgets 0.212 0.073 0.116 0.015 -0.016 0.188 0.024 
Functional diversity with budgets -0.143 -0.155 - 0.093 0.113 O.041 0.148 - 0.005 
Social identification with budgets 0.399 0.334 - - 0.02 I 0.345 0.045 
External communications with budgets 0.390 0.384 ~ - -0.011 0.379 0.011 
Cohesiveness with budgets 0.072 0.041 - - - 0.043 0.03 I 
Leader influence with technical quality 0.324 0.164 0.143 0.053 -0.012 0.348 - 0.024 
Support and recognition with technical quality 0.426 0.312 0.156 - 0.034 0.009 0.443 - 0.017 
Time dedication with technical quality 0.27 1 0.178 0.127 0.015 - 0.012 0.308 - 0.037 
Functional diversity with technical quality - 0.288 - 0.263 -0.117 0.145 - 0.053 - 0.286 - 0.002 
Social identification with technical quality 0.459 0.397 - - 0.016 0.413 0.046 
External communication with technical quality 0.363 0.354 - - -0.021 0.334 0.029 
Cohesiveness with technical quality 0.092 0.063 - - - 0.063 0.029 S.G. Scott/J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 14 (1997) 97-127 119 
Time 1 budgets and schedules (p = 0.48, p < O.Ol), as well as the indirect effect 
through social identification. Further, the direct effect from support and recognition to 
social identification found with the Time 2 managers’ ratings was not found with the 
Time 1 data. 
The pattern of findings for the team members’ rating was quite different than that 
found for the managers’ ratings in both Time 1 and Time 2. The path from cohesiveness 
to member-rated performance was significant ( p = 0.34, p < 0.05). While social identi- 
fication had a positive direct effect on member rated performance (p = 0.48, p < O.Ol), 
it also had an indirect effect through cohesiveness. The paths to member-rated perfor- 
mance from external communications, support and recognition, and from leader influ- 
ence, were not significant. Finally, member time dedication had a direct effect on 
member-rated performance ( p = 0.3 1, p < 0.05), as well as the indirect effect through 
social identification. 
In each of the analyses reported above, the tests of the hypotheses were conducted 
after partialling the effects of team size from the regression equation. The other control 
variables-technology newness and team tenure-were not included in the model 
simultaneously with team size to maintain adequate power to test the model given the 
small sample size (n = 42) (Cohen and Cohen, 1983). As seen in Table 1, neither of 
these variables showed a strong pattern of correlation with the other study variables. 
When the analyses were repeated using each of the alternative control variables in place 
of size, the results were entirely consistent with those reported here. 
Two additional exploratory analyses were conducted. As presented above, I found an 
unanticipated positive direct effect of social identification on each of the performance 
variables. Given that social identification often results in a partitioning of the social 
world into an ‘in-group’ and ‘out-group’, it seemed possible that highly socially 
identified teams might have poor intergroup relations that could negatively affect their 
performance. To test this possibility, I repeated the analyses adding a quadratic term in 
each of the regression equations and testing for the significance of the incremental 
change in R2 (Cohen and Cohen, 1983). Nonsignificant F-tests resulted for all four of 
the performance criteria, indicating that member social identification was linearly related 
to each of the performance criteria studied here. 
Finally, the sample consisted of both product and process development teams. I had 
no reason to propose that any of the relationships specified in the model would be 
moderated by the type of project, but I tested for interaction effects in the interest of 
completeness. I repeated the analyses introducing a dummy-coded variable representing 
project type into the regression equations. Again, to maintain statistical power, I 
substituted the dummy-coded variable for team size. The test of the overall regression 
equation remained significant (F = 6.15, p < O.OOl), and the regression coefficient 
associated with the dummy variable was not significant. I could not simultaneously 
assess the interaction of each of the independent and intervening variables with the 
dummy variable due to the loss of statistical power, so I examined each independently 
through hierarchical regression. I first entered the independent variable and the dummy 
variable into the regression equation followed by the interaction term (composed of the 
product of the independent and dummy variable). I then computed the incremental 
change in R’ generated by the inclusion of the interaction term. The results of all tests 120 S.G. Scott/J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 14 (1997) 97-127 
were not significant, indicating that none of the hypothesized relationships differed 
between the two types of development projects. 
6. Discussion 
Empirical research on group effectiveness has not often investigated group members’ 
social identification-the extent to which members are psychologically identified with a 
group. In the current study, I suggested that characteristics of project teams might make 
identity issues of particular concern. These include their functional diversity, limited 
temporal scope, and the nonroutine nature of their tasks. Drawing from social identity 
theory and group effectiveness research, this study presented a model of team effective- 
ness in which members’ social identification, cohesiveness, and the amount of external 
communications were posited to jointly affect team performance. This model was tested 
in a sample of 42 development teams, and the results suggest that members’ social 
identification is, in fact, a critical influence on team performance, at least in the R&D 
setting studied here. 
Team members clearly differentiated between social identification and cohesiveness. 
While the two variables were positively related to each other, the correlation between 
them was modest in size, and they were differentially related to the other variables in 
this study. Further, the path between social identification and cohesiveness was positive 
and significant. While the current study is cross-sectional in design and cannot address 
causation, the results of the path analysis are consistent with the theoretical propositions 
of social identity theory. That is. cohesiveness appeared to result from social identifica- 
tion rather than the other way around. 
At the midpoint of the development projects, team members’ social identification was 
positively related to member-rated performance. Social identification had both direct 
effects on member-rated performance, as well as indirect effects through cohesiveness. 
Consistent with prior studies with sales groups (Gladstein, 1984) and development teams 
(Ancona and Caldwell, 1992b), members tended to rate team performance higher under 
conditions of internal team cohesiveness. In contrast, the relationship between cohesive- 
ness and managers’ ratings of performance at both project midpoint and project 
completion was not significant. The nonsignificant path between cohesiveness and the 
managers’ performance ratings is consistent with some prior studies in development 
teams (e.g., Ancona and Caldwell, 1992a,b) while being at odds with other studies (e.g., 
Keller, 1986). Goodman et al. (1987), reviewing the literature on group effectiveness, 
argued that there is no evidence for a link between cohesiveness and performance. If the 
criterion of effectiveness is restricted to the managers’ ratings of performance, the 
results here support this view. 
While I had anticipated that the link between social identification and performance 
would be entirely mediated by cohesiveness, the results showed a positive direct path 
between social identification and manager-rated team performance regardless of the 
level of cohesiveness. Social identification did result in higher cohesiveness, yet this was 
not the mechanism through which it influenced manager-rated performance. Why simply S.G. Scott/J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 14 (1997) 97-127 121 
identifying with the team yielded higher performance results remains an interesting 
question. 
One explanation may lie in the motivational aspects of social identification. Turner 
(1982) speculated that even as group members strive to positively differentiate their 
group from other groups, they also seek to positively differentiate themselves from other 
group members by striving to enact the positive attributes to a greater degree than do 
other group members. In other words, group members compete with each other ‘to be 
the first among equals’ in enactment of prototypical group characteristics. McGrath 
(1996) noted th a projects consist of multiple tasks, subsets of activities that cumula- t 
tively contribute to project completion. Within a project, an individual group member 
undertakes tasks or activities that are frequently only loosely coupled to the activities of 
other group members. Loose coupling means that members have some degrees of 
freedom in their actions, as not all activity needs to be temporally coordinated with other 
members. Perhaps social identification increases group performance through heightened 
effort of individual members on independent tasks or activities. Unfortunately, the group 
literature has tended to concentrate on group tasks rather than group projects per se 
(McGrath, 1996), so we know relatively little as yet about how teams combine separate 
activities of members over time. 
Another possibility for the positive direct relationship between members’ social 
identification and performance criteria is that it is a statistical artifact resulting from a 
missing intervening variable. Research on social dilemmas has shown that socially 
identified members engage in behaviors that benefit the collective rather than their own 
self-interest (Brewer and Kramer, 1986; Kramer and Brewer, 1984). Rather than 
operating through cohesiveness or improved interpersonal relations among the team 
members, social identification may positively influence internal task processes such as 
the setting of common goals, and the determination of task priorities. Unfortunately, the 
data were not available to test this. 
Consistent with prior research, external communications was positively related to 
manager-rated performance. Functional diversity contributed to increasing external 
communications, but also had a negative indirect effect on manager-rated performance 
through members’ social identification. Ancona and Caldwell (1992b) speculated that 
their findings of a direct negative effect of functional diversity on development team 
performance may have been the result of a missing intervening variable in their 
theoretical model. The findings here suggest that social identification intervenes between 
functional diversity and manager-rated performance. 
Top management support and recognition had a direct positive effect on manager-rated 
performance, as well as indirect positive effects through social identification. The effect 
of leader influence on manager-rated performance at project completion was entirely 
indirect through social identification. Further, I found that members’ social identification 
increased as the proportion of team members’ time allocated to the project increased. 
The effects of this variable on manager-rated team performance were entirely mediated 
by the members’ social identification. 
Prior studies have shown top management support and recognition and project leader 
influence related to development team performance (e.g., Clark and Fujimoto, 1991; 
Katz and Allen, 1985) but they have not investigated the mechanism through which 122 SC. Scott/J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 14 (1997) 97-127 
these variables operate. The results reported here suggest that top management support 
and recognition is of both instrumental and symbolic value to project teams. Further, in 
the case of leader influence and team members’ time dedication, the lack of direct 
effects indicates that these variables operate on performance primarily by influencing 
team members’ social identification. I speculate that each of these enhances the 
attractiveness of team membership by serving to distinguish the project as an important 
or prestigious enterprise within the organization. 
The overall model explained significant variance (i.e., from 38 to 55%) in the 
performance of the development teams studied here. The inclusion of social identifica- 
tion in the model added significant explanatory power over and above that provided by 
variables that had been investigated previously in the literature. 
7. Implications, limitations, and directions for future research 
7.1. Theoretical and practical implications 
The theoretical value of this study is that it establishes the relevance of social identity 
theory in the context of small project groups. In the small face-to-face teams studied 
here, the basis of group identification did not appear to be personalized bonds of 
attachment among team members but impersonal bonds derived from the common 
identity of ‘project team member’. While researchers have discussed the effects of 
categorization on identity formation processes previously (e.g., Kramer, 1991), the focus 
of much of this work has been on intergroup conflict rather than on intragroup 
effectiveness. Theory on group dynamics has stressed boundary management as impor- 
tant to identity formation (e.g., Alderfer, 1987; Friedlander, 1987), but group effective- 
ness research has seldom empirically examined the determinants and outcomes of 
members’ social identification on group effectiveness in organizational settings. Most 
significantly, the study tends to focus attention on the social identification effects of 
symbolic aspects of team functioning, which have not been given much attention in the 
group effectiveness literature. At the organizational level, we have long realized that 
management action is as much symbolic in its effects as it is substantive (Pfeffer, 19811, 
but we have been relatively slow to investigate these symbolic effects at the subgroup 
level. 
From the perspective of managers, the current study findings suggest that simply 
calling a collection of people ‘a project team’ is inviting poor performance unless steps 
are taken to give the categorization a meaning in the eyes of the participants. Project 
managers and top management need to understand the potential self-enhancement effects 
of categorizations on team members, and attend carefully to aspects of team structure 
and context for projects where high member social identification is desired. This appears 
to be particularly important when teams are constituted of members from different 
functional areas. Others have noted the negative effects of cross-functional diversity on a 
teams’ ability to develop a shared perspective or a shared view of reality (Dougherty, S.G. Scott/J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 14 (1997197-127 123 
1992) and this is likely to be exacerbated when cross-functional members fail to 
psychologically integrate project team membership in the construal of their individual 
identities. The findings here show that powerful project leaders, top management 
support and recognition, and allocating members full-time to the team are useful 
mechanisms to affect the members’ social identification with the team. 
7.2. Limitations 
The findings of the current study should be interpreted with caution. All of the teams 
studied here were development teams. Despite the fact that the hypotheses were 
theoretically derived from social identity theory, generality of the results to other types 
of small face-to-face groups remains in question. Further, common method variance is a 
potential problem in the findings reported for member-rated performance. Also, the 
relatively small sample size limited my ability to include other sources of variation in 
development team effectiveness that have been considered in the literature. Even with 
the small subset of control variables considered here, I could not test all effects 
simultaneously. 
Although I took care to assure that aggregation of individual responses to the group 
level was appropriate, aggregation biases and statistical artifacts could still influence the 
results. In addition, the study design uses cross-sectional data to test the hypotheses 
limiting the ability to infer causation. Finally, a note of caution is in order relative to the 
path analysis. The results shown here test only one theoretical path model. Any number 
of models may have fit the data (Pedhazur, 1982). 
7.3. Directions for future research 
This study underscores the importance of team identification to ad hoc project teams, 
at least in the product and process development context studied here. While the results 
are interesting and useful, additional research is needed to strengthen confidence in the 
theoretical model presented here. There is also significant opportunity to identify 
additional influences on the social identification of team members. Longitudinal studies 
would be very useful to determine the casual relationships in the model. Finally, the 
current study was strictly concerned with the benefits of intrateam social identification 
on team effectiveness. However, top managers must consider the projects within the 
larger organizational context, and be concerned about the effects intrateam social 
identification might have on intergroup relations (cf., Kramer, 1991). There is consider- 
able opportunity to investigate these intra- and intergroup processes simultaneously. 
In summary, the findings reported here provide a more comprehensive understanding 
of project team effectiveness and suggest that the study of organizational teams should 
consider the effects of the members’ social identification on team performance. I hope 
future researchers will continue to explore additional aspects of team context and 
structure that might influence social identification to provide more useful prescriptions 
for practising managers as they seek to develop high-performing project groups. 124 S.G. Scott/J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 14 (1997) 97-127 
Appendix A. Rotated factor matrix of social identification and cohesiveness items 
(2-Factor Constraint) 
Question no. 
6 
2 
1 
3 
5 
4 
24 
22 
21 
23 
Social identification Cohesiveness 
0.78476 0.10791 
0.76582 0.17600 
0.72115 0.0959 1 
0.7202 1 0.11913 
0.67543 0.19235 
0.62944 0.10437 
0.59453 0.198 18 
0.06458 0.743 11 
0.1 1983 0.7007 1 
0.07629 0.6764 1 
0.23688 0.53169 
References 
Albert, S.. Whetten, D.A., 1985. Organizational identity. In: Cummings, L.L., Staw, B.M. (Eds.), Research in 
Organizational Behavior, Vol. 7. JAI Press. Greenwich, CT, 263-295. 
Alderfer, C.P., 1987. An intergroup perspective on group dynamics. In: Lorsch. J. (Ed.), Handbook of 
Organizational Behavior. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 190-222. 
Allen, T.J., 1971. Communications, technology transfer, and the role of the technical gatekeeper. R and D 
Management 1, 14-2 I. 
Allen, T.J.. 1977. Managing the Flow of Technology: Technology Transfer and the Dissemination of 
Technoiogical Information within the R and D Organization. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Ancona, D.G.. 1990. Outward bound: strategies for team survival in the organization. Academy of Manage- 
ment J. 33, 334-365. 
Ancona, D.G., Caldwell, D.F., 1987. Management issues facing new-product teams in high-technology 
companies. Advances in Industrial and Labor Relations, Vol. 4. JAI Press, Greenwich, CT. pp. 199-221, 
Ancona, D.G., Caldwell, D.F., 1992a. Bridging the boundary: external activity and performance in organiza- 
tional teams. Administrative Sci. Q. 37, 634-665. 
Ancona, D.G., Caldwell, D.F., 1992b. Demography and design: predictors of new product team performance. 
Organization Sci. 3, 32 I-34 I. 
Ashforth, B.E., Mae], F., 1989. Social identity theory and the organization. Acad. Management Rev. 14, 
20-39. 
Bandura, A., 1986. Social Foundations of Thoughts and Action: A Social Cognitive Theory. Prentice-Hall. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ. 
Bentler, P.. 1985. Theory and Implementation of EQS: a :,tructural equations program. BMDP Statistical 
Software, Los Angeles, CA. 
Blau. P.M., 1977. Inequality and Heterogeneity: A Primitive Theory of Social Structure. Free Press, New 
York, NY. 
Breckler, S.J., 1990. Applications of covariance structure modeling in psychology: cause for concern?. 
Psychological Bull. 83, 985-1003. 
Brewer, M.B., Gardner, W., 1996. Who is this ‘we’? Collective identity and self-representations. J. Personality 
and Social Psychology 71, 83-93. 
Brewer, M.B., Kramer, R.M., 1986. Choice behavior in social dilemmas: Effects of social identity, group size 
and decision framing. J. of Personality and Social Psychology 50, 543-549. S.G. Scott/J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 14 (19971 97-127 I25 
Brown, S.L., Eisenhardt, K.M., 1995. Product development: past research, present findings, and future 
directions. Acad. Management Rev. 20, 342-378. 
Brown, J., Utterback, J., 1985. Uncertainty and technical communication patterns. Management Sci. 31, 
301-311. 
Burgelman, R., 1983. A process model of internal corporate venturing in the diversified major firm. 
Administrative Sci. Q. 28, 223-244. 
Byrne, D., 1971. The Attraction Paradigm. Academic Press, New York, 
Campion, M.A., Papper, E.M.. Medsaker, G.J.. 1996. Relations between work team characteristics and 
effectiveness: a replication and extension. Personnel Psychology 49, 429-452. 
Chatman, J.A., 1991. Matching people and organizations: selection and socialization in public accounting 
firms. Administrative Sci. Q. 36, 459-484. 
Clark, K.B., Fujimoto, T., 1990. The power of product integrity. Harvard Business Rev. 68, 107-I 18. 
Clark, K.B., Fujimoto, T., 1991. Product Dev. Performance. Harvard Business School Press, Boston. MA, 
Cohen, J., Cohen, P., 1983. Applied Multiple Regression/Correlation Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences. 
2nd edn. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ. 
Cooper, R.G., Kleinschmidt. E.J., 1987. New products: what separates winners from losers?. J. Product 
Innovation Management 4, I69- 184. 
Cummings, T.G., 1978. Self-regulating work groups: a socio-technical synthesis. Acad. Management Rev. 3, 
624-634. 
Donnellon. A., 1993. Crossfunctional teams in product development: accommodating the structure to the 
process. J. Product Innovation Management IO, 377-392. 
Dougherty, D., 1990. Understanding new markets for new products. Strategic Management J. I I, 59-78. 
Dougherty, D., 1992. Interpretive barriers to successful product innovation in large firms. Organizational Sci. 
3, 179-202. 
Dutton, J.E., Dukerich, J.M., Harquail, C.V., 1994. Organizational images and member identification, 
Administrative Sci. Q. 39, 239-263. 
Ebadi, Y., Utterbach, J., 1984. The effects of communication on technological innovation, Management Sci. 
30, 572-585. 
Emmanuelides. P.A., 1993. Toward an integrative framework of performance in product development projects. 
J. Eng. Technol. Management 10, 363-392. 
Erez, M., Earley, P.C.. 1993. Culture, Self-Identity and Work. Oxford Univ. Press, New York, NY. 
Friedlander, F., 1987. The ecology of work groups. In: Lorsch, J. (Ed.), Handbook of Organizational Behavior. 
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs. NJ. pp. 301-3 14. 
Gersick, C.J., 1988. Time and transition in work teams: toward a new model of team development. Acad. 
Management J. 3 I, 9- 14. 
Gersick, C.J.G.. Davis-Sacks, M.L., 1990. Summary: task forces. The bankers. In: Hackman, J.R. (Ed.), 
Groups That Work. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA, pp. 146-153. 
Gladstein, D.L., 1984. Groups in context: a model of task group effectiveness. Administrative Sci. Q. 29, 
499-5 17. 
Goodman. P.S., Ravlin, E., Schminke, M., 1987. Understanding groups in organizations. In: Cummings. L.L., 
Staw, B.M. (Eds.), Research in Organizational Behavior, Vol. 9. JAI Press, Greenwich, CT, pp. l-71. 
Hackman. J.R., 1987. The design of work teams. In: Lorsch, J. (Ed.), Handbook of Organizational Behavior. 
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, pp. 315-342. 
Hall, D.T., Schneider, B., 1972. Correlations of organizational identification as a function of career pattern and 
organization type. Administrative Sci. Q. 17, 340-350. 
Hogg, M.A., 1992. The Social Psychology of Group Cohesiveness: From Attraction to Social Identity. 
Harvester Wheatsheaf, London, England. 
Hogg, M.A., Abram& D., 1985. Social Identification. Chapman & Hall, New York, NY. 
Hogg, M.A., Turner, J.C., 1988. Social Identification: A Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations and GTOUP 
Process. Rutledge, London, England. 
James, L.R., Demaree, R.G., Wolf, G., 1984a. Estimating within-group interrater reliability with and without 
response bias. J. Appl. Psychology 69, 85-98. 
James, L.R., Muliak, S.A., Brett, J.M.. 1984. Causal Analysis. Sage Publications, Beverly Hills, CA. 
Janis, I.L., 1982. Groupthink. Houghton Mifflin, Boston, MA. 126 S.G. Scott/X Eng. Technol. Manage. 14 (1997) 97-127 
Katz. R., 1982. The effects of group longevity on project communication and performance. Administrative Sci. 
Q. 27, 81-104. 
Katz, R., Allen, T.J., 1985. Project performance and the locus of influence in the R and D matrix. Acad. 
Management J. 28, 67-87. 
Katz, D., Kahn, R., 1978. The Social Psychology of Organizing. Wiley, New York, NY. 
Katz, R., Tushman, M.R., 1979. Communication patterns, project performance, and task characteristics: An 
empirical evaluation and integration in an R and D setting, Organization Behavior and Human Performance 
23, 139-162. 
Katz, R., Tushman, M.L., 198 1. An investigation into the managerial roles and career paths of gatekeepers and 
project supervisors in a major R and D facility. R and D Management 11, 103-l 10. 
Keller, R.T.. 1986. Predictors of the performance of project groups in R and D organizations. Acad. 
Management J. 29, 7 15-726. 
Kramer, R.M., 199 1. Intergroup relations and organizational dilemmas: the role of categorization processes. In: 
Cummings, L.L., Staw, B.M. (Eds.). Research in Organizational Behavior, Vol. 13. JAI Press, Greenwich, 
CT, pp. 191-228. 
Kramer, R.M.. Brewer, M.B., 1984. Effects of group identity on resource utilization in a simulated commons 
dilemma. I. Personality and Social Psychology 46. 1044-1057. 
Lott, A.J., Lott, B.E., 1965. Group cohesiveness and interpersonal attraction: a review of relationships with 
antecedent and consequent variables. Psychological Bull. 64. 259-302. 
Mael, F.A., 1988. Organizational identification: Construct redefinition and a field application with organiza- 
tional alumni. Doctoral dissertation (unpublished). Wayne State Univ., Detroit. 
Mael, F.A., Ashforth, B.E., 1992. Alumni and their alma mater: a partial test of the reformulated model of 
organizational identification. J. Organizational Behavior 13, 103-123. 
Mae], F.A., Ashforth, B.E., 1995. Loyal from day one: biodata, organizational identification, and turnover 
among newcomers. Personnel Psychology 48, 309-333. 
Mae], F.A., Tetrick, L.E., 1992. Identifying organizational identification. Education and Psychological 
Measurement 52, 8 13-824. 
McGrath. J.E.. 1984. Groups: Interaction and Performance. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ. 
McGrath. J.E., 1996. Time matters in groups. In: Galegher, .I., Kraut, R.E., Egido. C. (Eds.), Intellectual 
Teamwork: Social and Technological Foundations of Cooperative Work. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ, pp. 
23-62. 
Mowday, R.T., Steers. R.M., Porter, L.W., 1979. The measurement of organizational commitment. J. 
Vocational Behavior 4. 224-247. 
Nonaka, I., 1990. Redundant, overlapping organization. A Japanese approach to managing the innovation 
process. California Management Rev. 32, 27-38. 
O’Keefe, R.D., Kemaghan, J.A., Rubenstein, A.H., 1975. Group cohesiveness: a factor in the adoption of 
innovations among scientific workgroups. Small Group Behavior 6. 282-292. 
O’Reilly, CA., Caldwell, D.F., Bamett, W.P., 1989. Work group demography, social integration, and 
turnover. Administrative Sci. Q. 34, 21-37. 
O’Reilly, C.A., Chatman, J., Caldwell, D.F., 1991. People and organizational culture: a profile comparison 
approach to assessing personorganization fit. Acad. Management J. 34, 487-516. 
Pedhazur, E., 1982. Multiple Regression in Behavioral Research. CBS College Publishing, New York, NY. 
Pelz, D.C., Andrews, F.M., 1976. Scientists in Organizations, revised edn. Inst. for Social Research, Ann 
Arbor, MI. 
Pfeffer, J., 1981. Management as symbolic action: the creation and maintenance of organizational paradigms. 
In: Cummings, L.L., Staw, B.M. (Ed%), Res. in Organizational Behavior, Vol. 13. JAI Press, Greenwich, 
CT, pp. l-52. 
Quinn, J.B.. Mueller, J.A., 1963. Transferring research results to operations. Harvard Business Rev. 41, 
44-87. 
Schlenker, B.M.. 1985. Identity and self-identification. In: Schlenker, B.M. (Ed.), The Self and Social Life. 
McGraw-Hill, New York, NY, pp. 65-69. 
Schmidt, SM., Kochran. T., 1972. The concept of conflict: toward conceptual clarity. Administrative Sci. Q. 
17, 359-370. 
Seashore, S.. 1954. Group Cohesiveness in the Industrial Work Group. Inst. for Social Research, Ann Arbor, 
MI SC. Scott/J. Eng. Technol. Manage. 14 (1997) 97-127 127 
Shaw, M., 1971. Group Dynamics: The Psychology of Small Groups. McGraw-Hill, New York, NY, 
Smith. C.G., 1970. Age of R and D groups: a reconsideration. Human Relations 23. 81-96. 
Sundstrom, E., Altman, I., 1989. Physical environments and work-group experiences. In: Cummings, L.L., 
Staw, B.M. (Eds.), Research in Organizational Behavior, Vol. 11. JAI Press, Greenwich, CT, pp. 175-209. 
Swarm, W.B., 1987. Identity negotiation: where two roads meet. J. Personality and Social Psychology 53, 
1038-1051. 
Tajfel, H., 1978. Social categorization, social identity, and social comparison. In: Tajfel, H. (Ed.), Differentia- 
tion Between Social Groups. Academic Press, New York, NY, pp. 61-76. 
Tajfel, H., 1982. Social Identity and Intergroup Relations. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, England. 
Tajfel, H., Turner, J.C., 1985. The social identity theory of intergroup behavior. In: Worchel, S., Austin, W.G. 
(Eds.1, Psychology of Inter-Group Relations, 2nd edn. Nelson-Hall, Chicago, IL, pp. 7-24. 
Tsui, AS.. 1984. A role set analysis of managerial reputation, Organizational Behavior and Human 
Performance 34, 64-96. 
Turner, J.C., 1982. Toward a cognitive redefinition of the social group. In: Tajfel, H. (Ed.), Social Identity and 
Intergroup Relations. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, England, pp. 15-40. 
Turner, J.C.. 1985. Social categorization and the self concept: A social cognitive theory of group behavior. In: 
Lawler, E.J. (Ed.), Advances in Group Processes, Vol. 2. JAI Press, Greenwich, CT, pp. 77-123. 
Turner, J.C., 1987. Rediscovering the Social Group: A Self-Categorization Theory. Blackwell, Oxford, 
England. 
Tushman, M.L., 1979. Impacts of perceived environmental variability on patterns of work-related communica- 
tion. Acad. Management J. 23, 482-500. 
Van Maanen, J., Barley, S.R., 1984. Occupational Communities: Culture and Control in Organizations. In: 
Staw. B.M., Cummings, L.L. (Ed%), Research in Organizational Behavior. JAI Press, Greenwich, CT, pp. 
201-264. 
Winer, B.J., 1971. Statistical Principles in Experimental Design, 2nd edn. McGraw-Hill, New York, NY. 
Zenger, T.R., Lawrence, B.S., 1989. Organizational demography: the differential effects of age and tenure 
distributions on technical communication. Acad. Management J. 32, 353-376. 