Perceived Environmental Uncertainty, Organization
Structure and Boundary Spanning Behavior
Richard P. Leifer, University of Massachusetts at Amherst
George P. Huber, University of Wisconsin at Madison
ABSTRACT
Boundary spanning activity Is conceived of as an
intervening variable between organization structure
and perceived environmental uncertainty. This is
because boundary spanners operate at the skin of
the organization and hence their functions are to
interpret environmental conditions and relay that
information to organization decision makers. Three
hypotheses examining relationships between per-
ceived environmental uncertainty, organization
structure, and boundary spanning activity were in-
vestigated. In a field study comprising 12 work
units (182 people) working in a health and welfare
organization, positive relationships were found
between all three variables. Partial relationships
indicated that PEtJ does not influence the boundary
spanning-structure relationship, but structure re-
duces the PEtJ-boundary spanning relationship to
zero, and boundary spanning reduces the structure-
PEU relationship to zero. Thus, not only is the
boundary spanning as an intervening variable sup-
ported, but results suggest that causality in the
Btructure-PEU relationship may be in the direction
of structure to PEU rather than current contingency
notions of PEU effecting structure.
INTRODUCTION
This paper reports the results of a field study
aimed at delineating the relationships among per-
ceived environmental uncertainty, organization
structure, and boundary spanning behavior. Although
a number of scholars have addressed the relationship
between an organization's environment and its struc-
ture (Downey and Slocum (8), Darran, Miles, and Snow
(6), Thompson (25)), there have apparently been few
studies of the possibility that these variables or
this relationship might be related to the nature of
the boundary spanning behavior of the organization's
members.
This void in the empirical literature is unfortunate
since, although the circumscribing or limiting na-
ture of an organization's boundary is important (cf.
Child (5), Evan (11), Levine and White(17), and
Utterback (25)), so also Is the role of boundaries
as regulators of the flow of information between
the organization and its environment (cf. Miller
(21), Miller and Rice (20), Organ (22), and Thompson
(25)). In view of the potential Importance of this
boundary-crossing information flow to a more com-
plete theory of organizations and their environment,
this study was designed to determine whether the
frequency of boundary spanning activity was related
to either perceived environmental uncertainty or
organization structure.The feature of the environment dealt with in the
study was its uncertainty. In particular, the
study was concerned with perceived environmental
uncertainty, the uncertainty in the environment
that is perceived by the organizational member.
The conclusion of Miles, Snow, and Pfeffer (19) in
particular suggests the appropriateness of using
this variable in empirical studies of open systems
or contingency theory. These researchers found
that, within the same objective environment, there
were organizations (college textbook publishers)
whose top managers perceived little or no change
and uncertainty in the environment as well as or-
ganizations whose top managers perceived continuous
change and uncertainty in the environment. They
then noted (p. 262) that these two types of percep-
tions, and hence the organizational structures that
were associated with them, can survive and even
flourish, at least in the short run. This reason-
ing, the review and conceptual work of Downey,and
Slocum (8), and Weick's (27) notion of an "enacted
environment" all suggest that the organizational
design actions an organization takes in responding
to its environment may well be more consistent with
perceptions of the environment than with more ob-
jective indicators of environmental conditions. In
this study, the concept of organizational environ-
ment was operationalized as perceived environment
uncertainty (PEU).
In particular, the study was directed at two related
issues. The first of these concerns the possibility
that since contingency theory as the term is cur-
rently used in discussions of the organization-en-
vironment interface (cf. 26 and 13) includes the
concept of information passing from the environment
to organizational designers, is it not reasonable
to include in the theory a measure of the intensity
of information gathering activity at the boundary of
the organization? The second issue concerns the
nature of whatever linkages might exist between or-
ganizational structure and PEU. Is it possible,
for example, that reported correlations between
structure and PEU might be largely a consequence of
(1) a correlation between internal structure and
boundary spanning activity and (2) a correlation
between boundary spanning activity and PEU? These
two issues were addressed in this study.
HYPOTHESES
Three hypotheses were tested in this study, each
one describing the relationship between two of the
three variables studied. As will be seen, each
hypothesis was tested using both first and second
order analyses.
233
The first hypothesis concerns the relationship be-
tween perceived environmental uncertainty and the
nature of the organizational structure. Contin-
gency theory suggests that PEU affects organiza-
tional structure, that administrators design orga-
nizational structures such that the organization
will be able to more effectively respond to envi-
ronmental demands and that they do this in accord
with their perceptions of the environment. In
general, it is argued that the more uncertainty
that is perceived, the more will be the looseness
of flexibility or "organicness"(Burns and Stalker.
4) of the organizational structure, i.e., that a
positive relationship exists between these vari-
ables. For example, on the basis of a number of
field studies Osborn and Hunt (22) concluded that
either perceived or objective environmental un-
certainty is a determinant of organizational struc-
ture. In particular they stated that "The work of
Burns and Stalker (1961), Chandler (1962), Emery
and Trist (1965), Lawrence and Lorsch (1967), and
Neghandi and Reiman (1973), among others, has indi-
cated that as [the task environment] becomes more
dynamic, the organization must become not only more
receptive to change, but alter its internal struc-
ture and operations to maintain and/or establish a
high survival potential" (p. 232). The field
studies of Duncan (9) and Khandwalla (15) seem to
support this PEU-influences-structure argument,
and McWhinney (18) used it in proposing various
decision making modalities appropriate to the types
of environments described by Emery and Trist (10).
On the other hand, if organizational structures
have as a function the processing of information'
for reducing uncertainty, then structure would
certainly affect PEU. A recent experimental study
by Huber, O'Connell and Cummings (13) supports this
structure-influences-PEU argument. On the basis of
either or both of these arguments, we hypothesized
the following. HYPOTHESIS 1: ORGANICNESS OF STRUG-
TURE WILL BE POSITIVELY ASSOCIATED WITH PERCEIVED
ENVIRONMENTAL UNCERTAINTY.
The second hypothesis concerns the relationship
between the nature of the boundary spanning activ-
ity (as defined below) and the nature of the orga-
nizational structure. This relationship is rela-
tively unstudied, except for the work of Aiken and
Hage (2) and Brown (3). The former hypothesized
and found that "... the greater the degree of or-
ganizational permeability, i.e., the greater the
extensity of boundary spanning roles and the greater
the number of interorganizational linkages, the
greater the internal structure of the focal organi-
zation will tend toward the organic (Burn and
Stalker, (4)) or dynamic (Aiken and Hage, (1)) or-
ganizational style" (p. 5). Brown's reasoning
was of a similar nature, and had to do with the
function of boundaries and organizational level.
Our own reasoning extends these arguments. We feel
that in uncertain environments, organizations will
have a high need to: (1) obtain information, e.g.
to have a high frequency of boundary spanning ac-
tivity; and (2) process it in a way that will maxi-
mize the number of points of view to which it is
exposed, e.g. to create an organic structure, and
that in more certain environments, organizations
will have a lower need to do either. If these
arguments hold, then it is clear that boundary
spanning and organicness would be associated with
one another. As a consequence, then, of this rea-soning and the admittedly sparse literature on the
subject, we hypothesized the following. HYPOTHESIS
2: ORGANICNESS WILL BE POSITIVELY ASSOCIATED WITH
FREQUENCY OP BOUNDARY SPANNING ACTIVITY.
The third hypothesis concerns the relationship be-
tween perceived environmental uncertainty and boun-
dary spanning activity. Because the relationships
of the first two hypotheses were predicted to be
positive, it follows that we must hypothesize a
positive relationship between these two variables.
It is important to note, however, that a positive
relationship may be reasonable to posit in any case.
That is, if organizational members attempt to re-
duce perceived environmental uncertainty by obtain-
ing more information, it follows that those perceiv-
ing a high degree of environmental uncertainty
would engage in more boundary spanning activity in
order to bring the uncertainty down to some manage-
able level. Similarly, in environments that are
not perceived as uncertain, where the perceived un-
certainty is already at some quite manageable level,
we would expect to find low perceived uncertainty
and also less boundary spanning activity. The pau-
city of empirical work with which to bolster these
arguments was. of course, a motivating force to
conduct the study reported here. Combining a
reliance on these arguments with the logical neces-
sity of expecting a positive association between
two variables that are each assumed to be positively
associated with a third, we hypothesized the follow-
ing. HYPOTHESIS 3: FREQUENCY OF BOUNDARY SPANNING
ACTIVITY WILL BE POSITIVELY ASSOCIATED WITH PER-
CEIVED ENVIRONMENTAL UNCERTAINTY.
METHODOLOGY
Research Setting and Data Collection Procedures
This cross sectional field study utilized a health
and welfare organization (H&W), concerned with
family problems, adoption, social work, etc., in a
midwestern state government. The subjects were
220 professional and clerical employees in twelve
work groups. All members of the sampled work
groups were tested. Each questionnaire was coded
to provide anonymity of respondents. A member of
H&W assigned a number to each name. Completed
questionnaires were given directly to the research
team. Thus the agency did not see individual re-
sults; the researcher did not see the names. The
questionnaire was administered to groups of no more
than 15. The organization assigned personnel to
testing sessions and kept track of absences. Fol-
low-up testing of non-respondents consisted of giv-
ing each non-respondent a questionnaire to be re-
turned by mail. One hundred and eighty-two usable
questionnaires were obtained for a response rate of
83%.
These personnel work in the lowest two echelons of
a tall hierarchy which means these results may
generalize only to lowest levels of organizations.
However, as Brown (3) suggests, the technical level
(22), involving the acquisition and utilization of
technical knowledge, involves important boundary
spanning functions. This operational information
is primarily obtained for use with organizational
control functions (3, p. 325) and as such has an
impact on decision making activities of those in
234
higher echelons, as well as technical level deci-
sion making.
Measures of the Variables
Three composite variables were used in the field
study: organicness, frequency of boundary span-
ning activity, and perceived environmental uncer-
tainty.
Six measures were included in the organicness vari-
able. Five of these, (1) participation in work
decisions, (2) formalization (reverse scored), (3)
hierarchy of authority (reverse scored), (4) im-
personality (reverse scored) and (5) division of
labor measures were taken from Duncan (8). The
sixth measure was a questionnaire item directed at
ascertaining the extent of the subject's partici-
pation in strategic decisions. A factor analysis
indicated that each of the six variables loaded on
the first factor with a loading of from .54 to
.86 which accounted for twice the variance of the
second factor which was a participation—authority
vs. formalization—division of labor factor. Mean
scores for each unit were calculated by finding the
mean of the individual responses on each measure
and then these six unweighted scores were then
added together and their mean used as the organic-
ness score for the respective unit. Leifer (16)
presents a rationale for labeling this index "or-
ganicness."
Seven questionnaire items were used in a composite
measure of perceived environmental uncertainty.
An example item is "How often do you believe that
the information you have about factors outside the
Division of Family Services is sufficient for deci-
sion making?" The responses were collected on a
0-100 scale anchored at five points, never, seldom,
sometimes, often, always. These seven items are
discussed in detail in Leifer (16). A factor analy-
sis indicated that each question loaded on the first
factor with a loading of from .37 to .74. A second
factor distinguished overall perceptions of the
environment from informational uncertainty with
respect to decision making. The seven unweighted
scores were added together and their mean used as
the perceived environmental uncertainty score for
the respective individual.
Eight questions concerning the subject's frequency
of boundary spanning activity were asked (see
Appendix)—one question applicable to each of the
eight cells shown in Table 1. A factor analysis
indicated that each of the eight questions loaded
on the first factor (which accounted for twice
the variance of the second) with a loading of from
.44 to .83. The second factor distinguished verbal
and written activities. Test-retest reliability
was .76. These eight unweighted scores were added
together and their mean used as the boundary span-
ning activity score for the respective individual.
It should be noted that this composite measure of
boundary spanning activity, based as it is on behav-
ior, is quite far removed from the effects of organi-
zational structure as operationalized in this study.
Inspection of the eight activity measures and the
six organicness measures does not suggest that the
frequency of the eight boundary spanning behaviors
would be determined by the overall structural at-tributes of the organization of which the individ-
ual was a member. In addition, whatever linkage
might exist between individual perceptions of or-
ganicness and individual boundary spanning behaviors
would have had little impact in this study, since
the organicness score used was the mean of the
scores obtained from all members of the individual's
work unit while the boundary spanning score was
strictly a function of the individual's personal
activity level.
OutiUr t
Urr.cr liHtl
Kntlrrtv
Data Analysis
The unit of analysis was the individual subject.
The 182 scores were organized in three contingency
tables with approximately equal numbers of subjects
in the marginals, as shown in Tables 2, 3, and 4.
The data were first analyzed using the Goodman-
Kruskal Gamma (Y).(10) a nonparametric measure of
association yielding values of -lfYf+1. This mea-
sure has an interpretation similar to that of a
correlation coefficient, but is applicable to ordi-
nal scale and contingency table analysis. We felt
that interval scale interpretation of these percep-
tual measures was not appropriate an*! hence the non-
parametric statistic. The data were then analyzed
using a partial gamma as in Davis (5).
Low
Hlfh
T - .21 U < .Oil
(P»™»»blln>) er.i Org.nicn*n« Acdvlcr
loundaiy S^lnnfnt Activity
io-:8 ZS-M
Ol(4ntcn
Uu
y - .63 (p < .01}
235
p
(r*nuibtllty) t>ti[c«lv>d Esvlr
•aundary Spanning
10 and laai
10-18
18-6119
11
6
79
11
12
1112 t
10 l;
11 11
1* IS
T - .18 (p < .01)
RESULTS
The data for testing the three hypotheses are
shown in Tables 2,3, and 4. The three first-order
Y values associated with the three pairings of
variables are shown in parentheses in Figure 1.
Since all three values indicate positive associa-
tions between the respective variables (after ad-
justing for the reverse scoring on two of the
variables), it is possible that the sign and mag-
nitude of any one value could be simply the conse-
quence of the sign and magnitude of the other two.
In order to determine whether this were true, or
if there really were underlying associations be-
tween the variables of each pairing, the second
order were calculated and are shown within the
square brackets of Figure 1.
FICUU 1
MUtlcnmhlpi Irlwecn loimility Sfamlne. Ti'Tcelvad
Hypothesis 1 states that there will be a positive
relationship between organicness and PEU. From
Table 2 and Figure 1 we see that the observed re-
lationship [Y".21] was positive and marginally
significant (p<.05), but did not exist [Y=.O5] after
the variance due to boundary spanning activity was
removed. When only those individuals scoring in the
upper quartile on the boundary spanning measures
were included, the PEU-organicness relationship was
Y".36 (p<.01). whereas when only those scoring in
the lower three quartiles were included, y was non-
significant. These facts suggest that, at least at
the boundary of the organization, the strong asso-
ciation between organic structure and high PEU
occurs primarily if not solely under the condition
of high information processing activity.Thus the hypothesis was supported subject to the
strong qualification that the positive relation-
ship appears to be a consequence of the relation-
ships that exist between the two variables of the
hypothesis and the level of boundary spanning be-
havior. This finding lends support to the notion
that boundary spanning may impact the relationship
between PEU and structure and should be made a more
explicit and studied component of contingency
theory.
Hypothesis 2 states that there will be a positive
relationship between organicness and boundary span-
ning activity. From Table 3 and Figure 1 we see
that the hypothesis was supported. The observed
relationship (Y=.63) was positive and highly sig-
nificant (p<.01) and existed (Y=.51) even after
the variance due to perceived environmental uncer-
tainty was removed. Thus the hypothesis was sup-
ported without qualification.
Hypothesis 3 states that there will be a positive
relationship between boundary spanning activity
and perceived environmental uncertainty. From
Table 4 and Figure 1 we see that the observed rela-
tionship (v=.28) was positive and highly signifi-
cant (p<.01), but did not exist [•f=.OO] after the
variance due to organicness was removed. Thus this
hypothesis was supported subject to Che strong
qualification that the positive relationship appears
to be a consequence of the relationships tbat exist
between the two variables of the hypothesis and the
organicness of the organization of which the indi-
vidual is a member.
SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION
One of the issues of interest in this study was the
possibility that boundary spanning activity might
be usefully included as a component variable in an
expanded form of contingency theory. The results
reported here suggest that this is, in fact, the
case. In particular, the test of Hypothesis 1 sug-
gests that the frequency of boundary spanning ac-
tivity may mediate the association between PEtJ and
structure.
The second issue addressed was the nature of the
linkages among PEU, organicness, and frequency of
boundary spanning activity. Of considerable inter-
est is the finding that organicness and the fre-
quency of boundary spanning activity were quite
strongly associated. Recall that this is not an
association between specific role definitions (a
measure of structure) and adherence to them (a mea-
sure of behavior), an association that we would
expect, in general, to be quite strong. Rather we
are seeing the relationship between an organiza-
tional attribute, organicness, and an individual
behavior, communication frequency with external
agents, a behavior that might be influenced by many
factors, including PEU. Our reasoning, in fact,
was that the association between these two variables
was a consequence of PEU, that both would increase
as PEU increased. The research results do not sup-
port this reasoning, as partialling out the effect
of PEU reduced the association very little.
The analysis performed here suggests that, even
236
though PEU does not determine the association be- APPENDIX
tween organicness and boundary spanning activity and
even though the measures used to operationalize KE,*SU«S OF i-EKcnvKn raviKONMENhu m-ERTAiKTV
these variables do not necessarily imply an associa- " _
tion, a strong relationship exists. Certainly more h,« ciu. « m ti>e """ """ »'""•>-""
research on this matter is in order. ' .peioi, e.onmiic, or p.;iiii..ii con-
which dlrectlT Bflri.l your Hoikr
Pursuing further the issue of the nature and direc-
tion of the linkages among these three variables, '• tng''w.^ri°'!"irjrotn.!or;b«t
we note that the findings reported here suggest that U\;::\rth:t; "b'^'H^"".^" o S w 60 SS loo
boundary spanning activity intervenes between and ,„ th.t. change, m .uch id... re-
mediates the relationship between perceived envi- iarti"s y^f «"'''
ronmental uncertainty and organization structure. 8. BOK Mm. do you beiuv. ihat ih.
Inasmuch as most studies in the literature relating i;;!t5^'Jh!; o^IiSton'f^Ulr/"" 5 5 ^ ^ ,5 loo
structure to perceived environmental uncertainty ^ki^T ''' •""'"""' '" '"^^*^''"
utilize zero order correlations, it has been logical "
for researchers to posit the PEU-inf luences-struc- '• J^:;^","'^Jl'Lr.td*"!,!"wuJc;
ture (or outside in) reasoning that drives from an of p«iiy servi^.. to aoi«e a pr=i.- 0 20 *o 60 eo 100
open systems theory of organizations.
10. How otMn do you ltd ymi art unable
CO predict the outcoora of your ^ = rg gj gg ^^^
Findings from this study suggest an alternative to decuion.:
this position. The relationship between PEU and ,, ...do ,0.. kno-wi.st « «prct m yo«
organicness disappeared when the frequency of boun- de.iinR* wuh Qth« people 01 oriani-5 » io *o u 100
dary spanning was partialled out (hypothesis 1).
From a test of Hypothesis 3, we saw that when or- *^' ;;'^nVh«'^r»«"«'""it^i'be«"o" 0 """a *o -"1—so 100
ganicness was partialled out of the relationship t.ik coi
between PEU and boundary spanning activity, the re-
lationship again disappeared. When PEU was par-
tialled out of the structure-boundary spanning ac- H^;,lswM D»-B>.i,Nn.vRv SI-.VNMIN,. ACTIVITIKS
tivity relationship, the relationship was not ap- i, ri.^i. •^>-w-.,^i fi-,. to .ir^^v"" ••'••''» •!-•'^••''•'•'-^^'"|"" >''|i'"^'*»j|-»
preciably reduced. It appears Chat, on the basis duoel'sv "•Vr"-"nrc^;"oVlUuv'by u°ir^^^^^^^^^
of these results, structure influences boundary r^.T-T-'J'^\ll"rol-"rjl!"nrr'^iJ>'r.irri>^
spanning activity to a greater degree than PEU.. In qu'c,i^'.""
addition, it appears that boundary spanning mediates ^ cx<:i,..i.nn ,.tof,vi!H«...i o. o.-cu|.jiir,r,ai .E:.pci..ii.-n«. in ^^ jwrr^ii^
the relationship between structure and PEU. That is, «^k in IKP ppr(ar*..ncp of yom jnh.
boundary spanning activity may determine the amount u. luv-•ony knum d.i you .ti.;i,rf ^^rjiii(-.•un.is, icomni«i. pijnn:Afi.
of perceived environmental uncertainty (see results =te.i in not 4prii"i>i.. cho« IJ^K 1.
of hypothesis 2) as a function of and not a cause «. ouiaidp your vcrk proiipbul «lh,n r^ilv Scri-lKi[incl..Jo. rr^mn.,
of the information processing capabilities of struc- 0 , ^ 3 4 s * 7 0 9 :o 11 u u » is 1. » u _»o- «ny ^»
ture. This implies that inasmuch as structure is an b. tmiaidc ot FanUc sirncci tuoneiher (inciudi-'cii«n-.s)
administratively controlled variable, the amount of . 1 , . 4 « . , 0 , 10 11 12 u » iwr. 17 i« _»« -ny «r.
PEU admitted at the boundary of the organization is ib. ha-"..ny hours *. you ™nfo. cuout yo»r^«ri(^in^l5lorn^^foc?-
also administratively controllable. These results s.'"«L''2£n".nim'a^°" Th.= «(«= to infi"r.^..i .rd verbal eon-
are still complementary to previously found corre- t h1relationships between structure and PEU a. outddo your vorU troup but -itMn F«"ilv S«rvi«.(ineliid*> reilonal gfti
only an inside out or structure-influences-PEU rea-
soning for the relationship is suggested. *•• ^""jtVrj'a no'n\J^n''n''iw'6"n"u'''''te-'«ny «.g
This reasoning suggest that an interaction between '*"" r•^."d^™ni«t•on/^.^^o Jo^'oJ Jr^^li ^H^'ttoa ^^lo
internal organization factors and external environ- in othtr or^amrjtJonB. ptcatM mciu^o i^jmhiy ot airuiariy
mental factors produces both PEU and organization t^J^''_^r"" " "" '"'™"" '" "" *"""""•' =*"'"
structure. Since the variables are both perception, ^ ^^^^^^ ^^^ ^^_^ ^^^^^^^^ ^^^^^^ ^^^^^ <;ervic«(i«iudc. rc.ion.. of..
it is still not clear at what point perceptions are 0 1 a i 4 5 t 7 B » lo 11 u u i< M 16 u la HO« ««r.y «»
tracking actual external events or internally held ^ ^^^^^^ ^^ P^^,^, ;;„„,„, .,,o,,eiher (inci«de. uicn.ti
individual biases. 0 1 a a 4 s e 7 0 9 10 u la u i* is is n IB ik* nany mrc
y y
It should be noted that the results of this study i"tth^'Qr''iL'tiionMn''^ro;d'^r^o
pertain only to the lowest levels of the fairly chocn ncrc ).
hierarchical and large institution studied. Cer- ,, outside yo«wort p.tn.,(, i.ut-uhin
tainly further research on the interrelationships 0 1 i i < s 0 7 B 9 10 11 u n H
among these variables for middle and executive b, outudo ot F""''/service-aitoKrtii
officers or organizations is needed. Nevertheless, o 1 » 1 4 s s i B » 10 n u n H
the research results reported here suggests that a
theory purporting to explain the relationship be-
tween organizational structure and environment
will be more successful in achieving its purpose
if it includes as a component variable the frequency
of boundary spanning activity.
237
REFERENCES
1. Aiken, M. and Hage, J., "The Organic Organiza-
tion and Innovation," Sociology, Vol. 5 (1971)
63-82.
2. Aiken, M. and Hage, J., "Organizational Per-
meability, Boundary Spanners and Organizational
Structure," unpublished paper, Dept. of Sociol-
ogy, University of Wisconsin, 1972.
3. Brown, W.B., "Systems, Boundaries, and Infor-
mation Flow," Academy of Management Journal,
Vol. 9 (1966) 318-327.
4. Burns, T. and Stalker, G.M., The Management of
Innovation. London: Tavistock Publications,
(1966) 2nd edition.
5. Child, J., "Organizational Structure, the Envi-
ronment and Performance: The Role of Strategic
Choice," Sociology. Vol. 6 (1972) 1-22.
6. Darran, D.; Miles, R.; and Snow, C.. Organiza-
tional Adjustment to the Environment: A Review.
paper presented at AIDS 7th Annual Meeting.
Cincinati, OH, November, 1975.
7. Davis, J.A., "A Partial Coefficient for Goodman
and Kruskal's Gamma," Journal of the American
Statistical Association. Vol. 67 (1967) 189-
193.
8. Downey, K. and Slocum, J. "Uncertainty: Mea-
sures, Research, and Sources of Variation,"
Academy of Management Journal. Vol. 18 (1975)
562-573.
9. Duncan, R.B., "Multiple Decision Making Struc-
tures in Adapting to Environmental Uncertainty:
The Impact on Organizational Effectiveness,"
Working Paper #54-71, Graduate School of
ManagemenC, Northwestern University, 1971.
10. Emery, F.E. and Trist,E.L.. "The Causal Texture
of Organizational Environments," Human Relations,
Vol. 18 (1965) 21-32.
11. Evan, W.M., The Organization Set: Toward A
Theory of Interorganizational Relations, in
Thompson, J.D. (ed.) Approaches to Organiza-
tional Design. University of Pittsburg Press.
1966, 173-192.
12. Goodman, L. and Kruskal, W., "Measures of
Association for Gross Classifications,"
Journal of the American Statistical Associa-
tion, Vol. 49 (1954) 732-764.
13. Huber, George P.; O'Connell, M.J.; and Cummings,
L.L., "Perceived Environmental Uncertainty:
Effects of Information and Structure." Academy
of Management Journal. Vol. 18 (December, 1975)
725-740.
14. Kast, F. and Rosenzwerg, J.F., Organization
and Management: A Systems Approach. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1970.
15. Khandwalla, P.N., "Uncertainty and the 'Optimal'
Design of Organizations," paper presented at
TIMS XIX meeting, Houston, Texas.
16. Leifer, R.P.. An Analysis of the Characteristics
and Functioning of Boundary Spanning Personnel,
Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, 1975.
17. Levine, S. and White, P.E., "Exchange as a
Conceptual Framework for the study of Inter-
organizational Relationships," Administrative
Science Quarterly. Vol. 5 (1961) 583-601.
18. McWhinney, W.J., "Organizational Form, Decision
Modalities and the Environment," Human Rela-
tions, Vol. 21 (1968) 269-282.19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26,
27,Miles, R.E.; Snow. C.C.; and Pfeffer, J.,
Organization-Environment Concepts and Issues,
Industrial Relations. Vol. 13 (1974) 244-262.
Miller, E.J. and Rice, A.K.. Systems of Orga-
tions, London: Tavistock Publications, 1967.
Miller, J.G., "Living Systems: The Organi-
tion." Behavioral Science. Vol. 17 (1972)
2-182.
Organ, D.W., "Linking Pins Between Organi-
zations and Environment," Business Horizons,
Vol. XIV (1971) 73-80.
Osborn, R.N. and Hunt, J., "Environment and
Organizational Effectiveness," Administration
Science Quarterly, Vol. 19 (1974) 231-246.
Parsons, T., Structure and Process in Modern
Societies. New York: The Free Press, 1960.
Thompson, J.D., Organizations in Action, New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1967.
Utterback, J.M.. "The Process of Technological
Innovation Within the Firm," Academy of Manaf^e-
ment Journal. Vol. 14 (1971) 75-88.
Weick, K.E.. The Social Psychology of Organiz-
ing, Reading, MA: Addison Wesley Publishing
Co., 1969.
236
