Total Quality Management
ISSN: 1478-3363 (Print) 1478-3371 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/ctqm20
The Source of Innovation: Boundary Spanner
Sheng-Hsun Hsu, Yu-Che Wang & Shiou-Fen Tzeng
To cite this article: Sheng-Hsun Hsu, Yu-Che Wang & Shiou-Fen Tzeng (2007) The Source
of Innovation: Boundary Spanner, Total Quality Management, 18:10, 1133-1145, DOI:
10.1080/14783360701596274
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/14783360701596274
Published online: 04 Jan 2008.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 926
View related articles 
Citing articles: 3 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ctqm20
The Source of Innovation: Boundary
Spanner
SHENG-HSUN HSU, YU-CHE WANG & SHIOU-FEN TZENG
Department of Business Administration, Chung-Hua University, HsinChu, Taiwan;  Department of
Business Administration, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
ABSTRACT
There appears to be a consensus that organizational integration across functional and
disciplinary specialties drives superior ﬁrm capabilities. The basic assumption is that new practices
and concepts emerge from the interaction of individuals engaged in different functional departments.
However, communication across functional boundaries is often difﬁcult. As such, Tushman &
Scanlan suggested that functional boundaries can be spanned effectively only by boundary
spanners who understand the coding schemes that are attuned to the contextual information on
both sides of the boundary. The study of boundary spanners has signiﬁcant performance
implications to ﬁrms. Compared to its importance, theoretical development and empirical
inquiries into this phenomenon are relatively scant. Thus, this study explores the factors that
determine who becomes a boundary spanner and examines boundary spanners’ performance
implications. A Taiwanese company provided the context for our study. Partial Least Squares
(PLS) was used to test the theoretical model. The results imply that a company needs to have an
appropriate mixture of boundary spanners and non-boundary spanners, because boundary
spanners have higher innovative performance.
KEY WORDS:
Boundary spanners, PLS, social network analysis
Introduction
Scholars have long been concerned about the search for the various characteristics that
affect organizational performance. The research has ranged from the industrial organiz-
ation view (Porter, 1985) developed in the 1980s to the resource-based view (RBV) of
the ﬁrm developed in the 1990s (Barney, 1991; Wernerfelt, 1984). However, sophisticated
customer demands, shorter product lifecycles and new market opportunities are forcing
organizations and academics to search for the dynamic capabilities rather than focusing
on a static industry structure or resource endowments. Because ﬁrms compete on
dynamic capabilities, it has become very important to understand the nature and origins
of these dynamic capabilities. There appears to be a consensus that organizational
Total Quality Management
Vol. 18, No. 10, 1133–1145, December 2007
Correspondence Address: Yu-Che Wang, Department of Business Administration, Chung-Hua University, No.
707, Sec. 2, WuFu Road, HsinChu, Taiwan, Republic of China, 30067. Email: jerrywang@chu.edu.tw
1478-3363 Print/1478-3371 Online/07/101133–13 # 2007 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/147833607015956274
integration across functional and disciplinary specialties drives superior ﬁrm capabilities.
Studies of product development also conclude that differences in ﬁrms’ performance can
be attributed largely to the degree of cross-boundary knowledge integration in their devel-
opment process (Bond et al., 2004; Grifﬁn & Hauser, 1996; Sherman et al., 2000; Song
et al., 1997). Flatter hierarchies and cross-functional teams aim at improving communi-
cation among different departments. The basic assumption is that new practices and con-
cepts emerge from the interaction of different functional departments. That is, the
interaction of individuals engaged in different functional departments is one of the
sources of dynamic capabilities.
However, communication across functional departments is often difﬁcult and prone to
bias, because each department has its own specialized semantics. A loss of information is
almost inevitable because it is necessary to recode at the boundaries between departments.
With each recoding, the richness in the meaning of words (e.g. rules or conventions) in one
context is lost when translating them into another context. Accordingly, Tushman and
Scanlan (1981a) suggested that functional departments can be spanned effectively only
by boundary spanners who understand the coding schemes that are attuned to the contex-
tual information on both sides of the boundary. This enables boundary spanners to search
out relevant information on one side and disseminate it on the other. Because the study of
boundary spanners has signiﬁcant performance implications to ﬁrms, insights into the
factors that determine who becomes a boundary spanner are very important.
Compared to its importance, theoretical development and empirical inquiries into this
phenomenon are relatively scant. To ﬁll this void, this study explores the factors that deter-
mine who becomes a boundary spanner and examines boundary spanners’ performance
implications. A Taiwanese company provided the context for our study. The results
imply that a company needs to have an appropriate mixture of boundary spanners and
non-boundary spanners, because boundary spanners would have normal job performance
(they would not be the best employee, just a ‘good enough’ employee) but may have
higher innovative performance.
The organization of this study is as follows. In the next section, we propose the theor-
etical model. In the third section, how samples are derived and the deﬁnitions of measures
are given. In the fourth section, we analyze the results. Finally, we conclude with a discus-
sion and future research directions.
Theory and Hypotheses
When ﬁrms are facing a radically changing environment, they must respond to uncertain
conditions by ﬁnding non-routine ways to mobilize diverse skills, to coordinate activities,
and to allow for different opinions to increase organizational ﬂexibility and innovation
capabilities. Given the opportunity to access resources across formal boundary lines,
boundary spanners can help blur the boundaries of formal function units and stimulate
communication between departments so that they can easily reconﬁgure and mobilize
various resources in response to emerging threats or opportunities (Galbraith, 1973;
Gittel, 2002; Tushman & Nadler, 1978). With an understanding of how one department
would affect other departments, boundary spanners could further explore the root
causes of problems, challenge assumptions and then develop novel solutions. As a
result, this research implies that a company needs to have an appropriate number of bound-
ary spanners. Figure 1 encapsulates our theoretical model.
1134
S.-H. Hsu et al.
Performance Consequences of Boundary Spanner
As organizations evolve, specialized units are created to deal with relatively homogeneous
tasks. Employees are trained and socialized to attend to the units’ particular work require-
ments (Brown & Duguid, 2001). For example, R&D professionals are hired to maintain
and develop technology; marketing specialists are hired to sell the product, talk to custo-
mers and communicate product beneﬁts. Over time these groups grow apart, each expert at
their own function, but less aware of the other’s contribution (Grifﬁn & Hauser, 1996).
Functional boundaries are therefore developed, separating specialized units from each
other. This specialization is a double-edged sword, for it facilitates transmission of tacit
knowledge (Cross et al., 2001), simpliﬁes coordination (Ancona & Caldwell, 1992),
increases learning rates (Levinthal & March, 1993) and avoids potential conﬂicts
(Pelled et al., 1999). However, such specialization simultaneously creates obstacles to
information processing between the specialized unit and external areas (Grifﬁn &
Hauser, 1996; Tushman & Scanlan, 1981a). The specialization of organization
members turns organizations into distributed knowledge systems in which the range of
knowledge required for innovation is dispersed over organizations (Tsouksa, 1996).
In this context, a boundary spanner’s ties provide a channel to access diverse infor-
mation, knowledge or resources across formal boundary lines. Early access to different
perspectives and information is important in providing a basis for innovative ideas. In
the product innovation literature, the general view is that project effectiveness can be
attributed largely to the timely integration of knowledge across functional boundaries
(Bond et al., 2004; Grifﬁn & Hauser, 1996; Sherman et al., 2000; Song et al., 1997). More-
over, researchers have claimed that innovative ideas often spring up at the boundaries of
specialties by bringing together disparate knowledge (Brailsford, 2001; Granovetter,
1973; Kanter, 1988; Leonard-Barton, 1995; Nahapiet & Ghoshal, 1998). In fact, what
seems a misunderstanding for one discipline may be a new twist for another discipline
and the active resolution of this misunderstanding may lead to a new jointly created
Figure 1. Theoretical model
The Source of Innovation: Boundary Spanner
1135
knowledge – creative ideas. The key to creative thought appears to be the combination and
reorganization of different thinking and concepts to advance new understandings.
These accumulating evidences suggest that individuals with ties across different depart-
ments gain non-redundant information concerning opportunities and resources sooner than
those without such ties. Their ties serve as channels for knowledge or information
exchanges, enabling them to have more chances to come up with creative ideas. Previous
research suggested that knowledge within one clique might be largely redundant, provid-
ing little additional information over what an individual might already know (Granovetter,
1973, 1985). Thus, actors whose ties are limited to one department are less likely to
receive diverse information (impeding their ability to develop new ideas) than those
whose ties span multiple departments. Thus, we hypothesize:
Hypothesis 1a: A boundary spanner is more innovative than those who are not
boundary spanners.
We suggest that a boundary spanner is likely to have a lower level of job-related per-
formance. The beneﬁts of external relationships may be offset by the costs involved in
maintaining such relationships. Because maintaining external linkages are very time con-
suming, boundary spanners might run short of the time and resources necessary for their
department’s speciﬁc work tasks. Thus, boundary spanners may have difﬁculties in com-
pleting their tasks on time and not achieving the highest performance ratings in their
department. Since they spend less time in their unit’s particular work, their expertise
might be lower than those who are not boundary spanners. Thus, we hypothesize:
Hypothesis 1b: A boundary spanner achieves a lower level of job-related perform-
ance than those who are not boundary spanners.
Antecedents for Boundary Spanner
Competence.
To understand the idiosyncratic norms and languages of different
departments, boundary spanners require a range of intellectual capabilities from the
various departments with which they connect (Cross & Prusak, 2002). Their intellectual
capabilities help them appreciate what seems a conﬂict between departments, but in
reality is an opportunity for both. Accordingly, one of the possible reasons that few mar-
keting managers can become boundary spanners between marketing and R&D is that they
lack the technological background to appreciate the opportunities identiﬁed by R&D.
Research therefore suggested that perceived work-related competence is a primary deter-
minant for boundary spanners (Tushman & Scanlan, 1981b). Employees who are per-
ceived by their colleagues as technically competent are more likely to become
boundary spanners. Moreover, as boundary spanners take time to consult with and
advise individuals from different departments, they evolve to understand the idiosyncra-
sies between different departments (e.g. non-verbal signs, values or languages), which
in turn increases their perceived competence. Thus, we hypothesize:
Hypothesis 2: An employee’s work-related competence is positively associated with
his or her odds of becoming a boundary spanner.
1136
S.-H. Hsu et al.
Trustworthiness.
Trust has often been seen as an informal self-enforcing agreement
alternative to formal governance mechanisms (Dyer & Singh, 1998; Yli-renko et al.,
2001). It reduces the probability for opportunism and the need for costly monitoring mech-
anisms, encouraging cooperative behavior and knowledge exchange. As a result, trust pro-
motes the exchange of a range of speciﬁc assets, such as knowledge, information and
supports that are difﬁcult to put a price on (Kale et al., 2000; McEvily et al., 2003;
Uzzi, 1997).
As an employee gains a reputation of being dependable and trustworthy, other actors
begin to treat this reputation as an important signal that will inﬂuence their preferences
in selecting partners. Accordingly, people in different departments are more likely to
approach an employee whom they perceive as trustworthy when they have problems or
opportunities. This provides the trustworthy employees with more chances to become
boundary spanners. Moreover, those who are helped by the trustworthy employee might
feel obligated to give him a privileged ‘favor’, such as providing critical information or
offering necessary support even with rush jobs. This further increases his chances to estab-
lish new relationships, access new opportunities and gain timely support from different
departments. Accordingly, we hypothesize:
Hypothesis 3: An employee’s trustworthiness is positively associated with his or her
odds of becoming a boundary spanner.
Status (Formal Rank).
Several researchers have found that differences in formal rank are
likely to the inﬂuence patterns of interaction in organizations (Cohen & Zhou, 1991;
Saunder et al., 1994). High-status individuals are likely to be valued as important by
others and are treated more tolerantly. Conversely, those low in status can sometimes
be ignored even if their input is intelligent and creative. Moreover, higher-status individ-
uals, by virtue of their control over resources and their decision-making authority, may be
better positioned to emerge as boundary spanners (Tushman & Scanlan, 1981a) because
people are more willing to communicate with them regarding their work opportunities
or problems. As a result, high-status individuals are more likely to become boundary
spanners. We hypothesize:
Hypothesis 4: An employee with high level of status is positively associated with his
or her odds of becoming a boundary spanner.
Methods
Research Site and Data Collection
This research was undertaken at CL (a pseudonym) company. Founded in 1995, CL Corp.
is a world leader and pioneer in bringing advanced digital video and audio software to the
market. CL also delivers solutions that include video editing and recording, online training
and distance learning solutions, digital media presentation and delivery, and unique
talking-head design tools for the web, using advanced MPEG-4 technologies. With
rapid growth and consistent proﬁtability, CL enjoyed a record-breaking IPO in October
of 2000 on the Taiwan Over The Counter Exchange. To keep up with market demands,
The Source of Innovation: Boundary Spanner
1137
CL has operations in North America, Europe and the Asia Paciﬁc region including Japan.
The company founder emphasized the importance of innovation and creativity as the keys
to survival in this competitive marketplace. The CL organizational structure was deliber-
ately kept ﬂat, with only four levels of hierarchy. It has 12 functional units: R&D, market-
ing, human resource, administration, ﬁnance, information management, legal, product
commercialization, product planning, quality assurance, sales and customer support.
Because of the potential opportunities for knowledge to be fertilized across different
departments, we chose CL as the sample company.
In April 2004, the survey instrument was sent to each of the CL employees, asking them
to complete the questionnaire. At the time, the CL employed 200 people in Taiwan alone.
The questionnaire was designed to collect both relational and non-relational data. We
obtained relational data by asking the respondents to specify their relations with other
employees. Non-relational data were gathered mostly through questions using Likert-
type scales. The performance-rating data were collected using a separate questionnaire
sent to all 21 supervisors.
Because social network research is one of the most intrusive types of organization
research, there is undoubtedly a general mistrust of any attempt to gain data about how
one interacts with others and their job performance. As we relied on supervisors to rate
employee performance, this created more concerns in both supervisors and the
company. Firms are unwilling to divulge such information without strong assurances
that the information provided will in no way harm them, yet this same information
could provide insight in how to improve their organization.
After a personal visit to the company to explain the purpose of the research, we gained
full support from the CEO of CL. Due to the potential damage to the ﬁrm that could occur
if these data are leaked, we reached an agreement that all employee names would be trans-
formed into code numbers (e.g. 0408) before the data were released to us. This code
number was performed by only one person, designated by the company. Throughout
the data collection process, individuals – including supervisors – were assured that
their responses would be kept conﬁdential and that all results would be presented only
on an aggregate level. The response rate was 62% for the questionnaire to all employees
and 59% for the questionnaire sent only to supervisors.
Measures
Boundary spanner. To assess the network relations, we follow the work of Sparrowe
(2001) by asking the respondents one question: ‘Who do you go to for help or advice
on work-related matters?’ Respondents were free to nominate as many as ﬁve contacts.
After coding the data into the socio-matrices measuring social interaction, we calculated
the in-degree centrality for each individual concerning to intra- and inter-department con-
tacts. The in-degree centrality of an actor (individual i) was the number of individuals that
ask individual i work-related matters in their answers to the above question. Consistent
with Tushman & Scanlan (1981b), internal communication stars were deﬁned as those
individuals in the top third of the intra-department communication and external communi-
cation stars were deﬁned as those who are in the top third of an external communication
distribution. And boundary spanners are those who are both internal and external com-
munication stars (Tushman & Scanlan, 1981b).
1138
S.-H. Hsu et al.
Trust.
We developed two questions to examine the inter-personal trusting relationships
in the company: (1) ‘Please indicate whom you can rely on without any fear that they will
take advantage of you’ and (2) ‘In general, who will always keep the promises they make
to you?’ To measure an actor’s trustworthiness, we calculated the in-degree centrality for
each individual to measure the level of trustworthiness in his answers to the above
question.
Competence.
Following the work of Tushman & Scanlan (1981a), we used one question
to assess the level of intellectual capability of individuals. The item was: ‘Please indicate
who are the most competent persons in the company.’ To create a single-item measure of
competence, we calculated the in-degree centrality for each individual in their answers to
the above question.
Status.
There are four levels of hierarchy in the company. From company records, we
coded rank as 0 for non-supervisors, 1 for supervisors and 2 for senior supervisors who
manage some supervisors.
Performance measures.
In the absence of objective performance measures of employees
within the company, we relied on supervisory ratings. That is, the job performance
measured here emphasizes the extent to which individuals succeed (in the eyes of manage-
ment) in contributing to organizational ends. Using a six-item scale arranged in ﬁve-point
Likert format, supervisors rated the performance of those subordinates who reported
directly to them. We informed supervisors that performance ratings would be conﬁdential
and used only for research purposes. Following prior research (Mehra et al., 2001), super-
visors related subordinates’ innovativeness on three items: (1) the degree to which the sub-
ordinate generated creative work-related ideas; (2) the degree to which the subordinate
promoted and championed work-related ideas to others; and (3) the degree to which the
subordinate sought new technologies, processes, techniques and/or product related
ideas. Supervisors related subordinates’ performance on three items: (1) the overall job
performance of the individual; (2) the likelihood that the subordinate would achieve
future career-related success (such as promotions, awards, bonuses, and involvement in
high-proﬁle projects); and (3) the likelihood you would pick the subordinate to succeed
you in your job.
Control variables.
Tenure was included as control variables because prior work has
suggested that the length of time a person has been with the company is likely to affect
his or her work performance.
Results
Performance Implications of Boundary Spanners
The research model was tested using PLS, a structural modeling technique that is
well suited for highly complex predictive models (Wold, 1985). PLS has several
strengths that made it appropriate for this study, including its ability to measure
theoretical models during the early stage of development where the theoretical
model and its measures are not well formed, and its ability to measure small sample
The Source of Innovation: Boundary Spanner
1139
size requirements1 (Barclay et al., 1995). Since all the constructs have reﬂective indi-
cators in the theoretical model, the minimum sample size is determined by the largest
number of antecedent constructs leading on to endogenous constructs. The sample
size is 124, exceeding the recommended minimum of 40. In PLS, item reliability is
assessed by examining loadings (see Table 1). All loadings exceeded the recommended
threshold of 0.7 (Carmines & Zeller, 1979).
To assess the convergent validity of constructs, researchers using PLS report the
internal consistency measure developed by Fornell & Larcker (1981), which is similar
to Cronbach’s alpha. Fornell & Larcker argued that their measure is more appropriate
to Cronbach’s alpha since it uses the item loadings obtained with the causal model.
Table 1 lists the internal consistency of each construct. Nunnally (1978) suggested that
0.7 as a benchmark for mode reliability was applicable in the early stages of research.
The internal consistency of all constructs was larger than 0.7, except for the construct
of innovativeness.
To assess discriminant validity, Fornell & Larcker (1981) suggested the use of Average
Variance Extracted (AVE), which should be greater than the variances shared between the
construct. The comparison can be made in the correlation matrix (see Table 2), including
the correlations between different constructs in the off-diagonal elements of the matrix,
and the square roots of the AVE for each of the constructs along the diagonal. For adequate
discriminant validity, the diagonal elements should be greater than the off-diagonal
elements in the corresponding rows and columns. Table 2 indicates that all constructs
had adequate discriminant validity.
Table 1. Survey items
Competence (Internal consistency ¼ 1)
Loading
Please indicate who are the most competent persons in the company (in-degree
centrality)
1.00
Trustworthiness (Internal consistency ¼ 0.80)
Please indicate whom you can rely on without any fear that they will take advantage
of you (in-degree centrality)
0.88
In general, who will always keep the promises they make to you? (in-degree
centrality)
0.91
Boundary spanner (Internal consistency ¼ 1)
Who do you go for help or advice on work-related matters? (in-degree centrality)
1.00
Innovativeness (Internal consistency ¼ 0.65)
The degree to which the subordinate generated creative work-related ideas
0.89
The degree to which the subordinate promoted and championed work-related ideas
to other
0.71
The degree to which the subordinate searched out new technologies, processes,
techniques and/or product related ideas
0.80
Job performance (Internal consistency ¼ 0.77)
The overall job performance of the individual
0.91
The likelihood that the subordinate would achieve future career related success
0.93
The likelihood you would pick the subordinate to succeed you in your job
0.79
1140
S.-H. Hsu et al.
Structural Model
Having established conﬁdence in our measurement model, we examined the main effects.
The test of the structural equation model includes estimation of the path coefﬁcients and
R 2 values. The path coefﬁcients indicate the strengths of the relationships between the
dependent and independent variables and R 2 values represent the amount of variance
explained by the independent variables. Using LVPLS version 1.8 (Lohmoller, 1981),
we determine path coefﬁcients. To further test the path signiﬁcance, we employed the
Jack-knife methods.
Table 3 reports the results of hypothesis testing, the amounts of explained variance in
the constructs of the boundary spanner, innovativeness and job performance. Three of
the ﬁve hypotheses were supported. A boundary spanner was more innovative than
someone who was not a boundary spanner (b ¼ 0.31, p , 0.001). Therefore, Hypothesis
1a was supported. A boundary spanner did not achieve a lower level of job-related per-
formance than those who were not boundary spanners (b ¼ 0.05, p n.s.). Therefore,
Hypothesis 1b was not supported. An individual’s work-related competence had a signiﬁ-
cant positive effect on his odds for becoming a boundary spanner (b ¼ 0.25, p , 0.01).
Table 2. Correlations and discriminant validity
Latent variables
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
1. Competence
1.00
2. Trustworthiness
0.24
0.94
3. Status
0.40
0.24
1.00
4. Boundary spanner
0.30
0.21
0.39
1.00
5. Innovativeness
0.15
0.12
0.21
0.31
0.92
6. Performance
0.11
0.11
0.13
0.07
0.66
0.95
7. Tenure
0.06
0.26
0.14
0.14
0.04
0.14
1.00
Table 3. Path estimates and variance explained
Hypothesis
Path
Path estimate
H1a
Boundary spanner (BS) ! Innovativeness
0.31
H1b
BS ! Job performance
0.05
H2
Competence ! BS
0.25
H3
Trustworthiness ! BS
0.08
H4
Status ! BS
0.30
Control
Tenure ! Innovativeness
0.01
Control
Tenure ! Job performance
0.13
Control
Tenure ! BS
0.07
Control
Tenure ! Competence
0.06
Control
Tenure ! Trustworthiness
0.26
Control
Tenure ! Status
0.13 þ
Construct
R 2 value
Innovativeness
0.19
Job performance
0.12
BS
0.29
þ p , 0.10; p , 0.05; p , 0.01; p , 0.001
The Source of Innovation: Boundary Spanner
1141
Thus, Hypothesis 2 was supported. On the other hand, an individual’s trustworthiness had
no signiﬁcant effect on his chances for becoming a boundary spanner (b ¼ 0.08, p n.s.);
although the coefﬁcient for trustworthiness was positive, as predicted. Therefore, Hypoth-
esis 3 was not supported. An individual’s status was found to be positively associated with
his odds for becoming a boundary spanner (b ¼ 0.30, p , 0.01). Hypothesis 4 was there-
fore conﬁrmed.
The R 2 value represents the percentage of variance in an endogenous construct
explained by other constructs connected to it directly. To evaluate the model, the R 2
value was reported in Table 3. Interpreted like multiple regression results, the R 2 value
indicates the amount of variance explained by the model. The overall model explained
19% of the variance in innovativeness and 12% of the variance in job-related performance.
In addition, the model explained 29% of the variance in the boundary spanner construct.
Discussions and Conclusions
The study explored the factors that lead to someone becoming a boundary spanner, and
examined the performance consequences of a boundary spanner. The results indicate
that boundary spanners are more innovative than non-boundary spanners (H1a) because
individuals with ties across different departments gain non-redundant information
sooner than those without such ties. On the other hand, our ﬁndings suggest that boundary
spanners did not achieve a lower level of job-related performance than non-boundary
spanners. There were no job-related performance differences between them (H1b).
These results indicate that a company needs to have an appropriate mixture of boundary
spanners and non-boundary spanners, because boundary spanners would have normal job
performance but may have higher innovative performance. The results are consistent with
previous ﬁndings (Teigland & Wasko, 2003), which suggested that interactions between
individuals at the same location tend to have a negative effect on their creativity, while
individual interactions between different locations have a positive effect on creativity.
Our results suggest that the antecedents for boundary spanners are competence (H2) and
status (H4). Put differently, if an individual is perceived to be competent and has a higher
status, he or she is more likely to become a boundary spanner. Previous research suggested
that perceived work-related competence is a primary determinant of boundary spanners
(Tushman & Scanlan, 1981b). The intellectual capabilities of boundary spanners help
them appreciate the conﬂicts between different departments. In terms of status, higher-
status individuals, by virtue of their control over resources and their decision-making auth-
ority, are better positioned to emerge as boundary spanners.
However, contrary to our expectation in Hypothesis 3, an individual’s trustworthiness
had no signiﬁcant effect on their chances of becoming a boundary spanner. One potential
explanation for the result is that people become boundary spanners because others contact
them for job completion or technical problems. Thus, whether a boundary spanner is trust-
worthy is not very important because the main purpose of the contact is for solving
problems.
Implications for Practice
As organizations evolve, specialized units are created to deal with specialized tasks.
However, such specialization reduces the probabilities for resource recombination
1142
S.-H. Hsu et al.
between different departments. As a fundamental requirement for knowledge creation is to
draw upon different knowledge, this study suggests that boundary spanners who connect
with a number of otherwise disconnected departments provide themselves with the initial
conditions for innovation. Such access, as Kanter (1988) observed, ‘allows innovators to
go across formal lines and levels in the organization to ﬁnd what they need.’ A company
can reap substantial beneﬁts by recognizing its boundary spanners because of their net-
works of relationships and intellectual capabilities, constituting a valuable resource for
the organization. An organization without boundary spanners tends to have reduced inno-
vation by limiting the awareness of opportunity, alternative approaches and the perspec-
tives of others.
Corporate life may not be friendly to boundary spanners, who might spend too much time
developing an external network and less time in the immediate work. Supervisors may view
their broad boundary-spanning interests as unfocused or undisciplined (Davenport &
Prusak, 1998: 30). If boundary spanners are evaluated primarily on their job performance,
they will have less incentive to do boundary-spanning jobs. Furthermore, boundary span-
ners cannot easily be replaced because relationships are not built overnight. People need
a certain amount of time to develop a sufﬁcient understanding of the jargon, needs, and
requirements of the departments with which they connect. As a result, ﬁrms should encou-
rage boundary spanners by providing resources and tangible or intangible incentives,
enabling them to perform the task of relationship management across department bound-
aries. As the development of cross-boundary contacts can be time-consuming and may
divert attention from performing productive activities, it is preferable to have boundary
spanners do all the networking instead of having everyone engage in it.
This study also provides another important insight for organizations by recognizing the
antecedents for becoming boundary spanners. For example, an organization can actively
arrange for someone to be a boundary spanner if they have the intellectual capabilities and
know-how to mobilize resources embedded within different functional units. A new man-
agerial job would take responsibility for boundary spanning by getting the right people
together from different departments to develop opportunities.
Note
1. PLS requires a minimum sample size that equals 10 times the greater of (1) the indicators on the most
complex formative construct or (2) the largest number of antecedent constructs leading an endogenous
construct.
References
Ancona, D. G. & Caldwell, D. F. (1992) Bridging the boundary: external activity and performance in organiz-
ational teams, Administrative Science Quarterly, 37, pp. 634–665.
Barclay, D. et al. (1995) The Partial Least Squares (PLS) approach to causal modeling, Technology Studies, 2(2),
pp. 285–309.
Barney, J. (1991) Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage, Journal of Management, 17, pp. 99–120.
Bond III, E. U. et al. (2004) Reputational effectiveness in cross-functional working relationships, The Journal of
Product Innovation Management, 21, pp. 44–60.
Brailsford, T. W. (2001) Building a knowledge community at Hallmark Cards, Research Technology Manage-
ment, pp. 18–25.
Brown, J. S. & Duguid, P. (2001) Knowledge and organization: a social-practice perspective, Organization
Science, 12(2), pp. 198–213.
The Source of Innovation: Boundary Spanner
1143
Carmines, E. G. & Zeller, R. A. (1979) Reliability and Validity Assessment (Beverly Hills, CA: Sage).
Cohen, B. & Zhou, X. (1991) Status processes in enduring work groups, American Sociological Review, 56,
pp. 179–188.
Cross, R. et al. (2001) Beyond answers: dimensions of the advice network, Social Networks, 23, pp. 215–235.
Cross, R. & Prusak, L. (2002) The people who make organizations go – or stop, Harvard Business Review,
pp. 5–12.
Davenport, T. H. & Prusak, L. (1998) Working Knowledge (Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press).
Dyer, J. & Singh, H. (1998) The relational view: cooperative strategy and sources of interorganizational competi-
tive advantage, Academy of Management Review, 23(4), pp. 660–679.
Fornell, C. & Larcker, D. F. (1981) Evaluating structural equation models with unobservable variables and
measurement errors, Journal of Marketing Research, 18, pp. 39–50.
Galbraith, J. (1973) Designing Complex Organizations (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley).
Gittel, J. H. (2002) Coordinating mechanisms in care provider groups: relational coordination as a mediator and
input uncertainty as a moderator of performance effects, Management Science, 48(11), pp. 1408–1426.
Granovetter, M. (1973) The strength of weak ties, American Journal of Sociology, 78, pp. 1360–1380.
Granovetter, M. (1985) Economic action and social structure: the problem of embeddedness, American Journal of
Sociology, 91, pp. 481–510.
Grifﬁn, A. & Hauser, J. R. (1996) Integrating R&D and marketing: a review and analysis of the literature, Journal
of Product Innovation Management, 13, pp. 191–215.
Kale, P. et al. (2000) Learning and protection of proprietary assets in strategic alliances: building relational
capital, Strategic Management Journal, 21, pp. 217–237.
Kanter, R. M. (1988) When a thousand ﬂowers bloom: structural, collective, and social conditions for innovation
in organizations, Organizational Behavior, 10, pp. 169–211.
Leonard-Barton, D. (1995) Wellsprings of Knowledge (Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press).
Levinthal, D. A. & March, J. G. (1993) The myopia of learning, Strategic Management Journal, 14, pp. 95–112.
Lohmoller, J. -B. (1981) LVPLS 1.6 Program Manual: Latent Variables Path Analysis with Partial Least Squares
Estimation (Munchen: Hochschule der Bundeswehr).
McEvily, B. et al. (2003) Trust as an organizing principle, Organization Science, 14, pp. 91–103.
Mehra, A. et al. (2001) The social networks of high and low self-monitors: implications for workplace perform-
ance, Administrative Science Quarterly, 46(1), pp. 121–146.
Nahapiet, J. & Ghoshal, S. (1998) Social capital, intellectual capital, and the organizational advantage, The
Academy of Management Review, 23(2), pp. 242–265.
Nunnally, J. C. (1978) Psychometric Theory (New York: McGraw-Hill).
Pelled, L. H. et al. (1999) Exploring the black box: an analysis of work group diversity, conﬂict, and performance,
Administrative Science Quarterly, 44, pp. 1–28.
Porter, M. (1985) Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sustaining Superior Performance (Free Press).
Saunder, C. et al. (1994) The persistence of status differentials in computer conference, Human Communication
Review, 20(4), pp. 443–472.
Sherman, J. D. et al. (2000) Differential effects of the primary forms of cross functional integration on product
development cycle time, Journal of Product Innovation Management, 17, pp. 257–267.
Song, X. M. et al. (1997) Antecedents and consequences of cross-functional cooperation: a comparison of R&D,
manufacturing and marketing perspectives, Journal of Product Innovation Management, 14, pp. 35–47.
Sparrowe, R. T. et al. (2001) Social networks and the performance of individuals and groups, Academy of Man-
agement Journal, 44(2), pp. 316–325.
Teigland, R. & Wasko, M. M. (2003) Integrating knowledge through information trading: examining the relation-
ship between boundary spanning communication and individual performance, Decision Sciences, 34(2),
pp. 261–286.
Tsouksa, H. (1996) The ﬁrm as a distributed knowledge system, Strategic Management Journal, 17, pp. 11–25.
Tushman, M. & Nadler, D. (1978) Information processing as an integrating concept in organizational design,
Academy of Management Review, 3(3), pp. 613–624.
Tushman, M. & Scanlan, T. J. (1981a) Boundary spanning individuals: their role in information transfer and their
antecedents, Academy of Management Journal, 24, pp. 289–305.
Tushman, M. & Scanlan, T. J. (1981b) Characteristics and external orientations of boundary spanning individ-
uals, Academy of Management Journal, 24, pp. 83–98.
Uzzi, B. (1997) Social structure and competition in interﬁrm networks: the paradox of embeddedness, Adminis-
trative Science Quarterly, 42(1), pp. 35–67.
1144
S.-H. Hsu et al.
Wernerfelt, B. (1984) A resource-based view of the ﬁrm, Strategic Management Journal, 5, pp. 171–180.
Wold, H. (1985) Partial least squares, in: S. Kotz & N. Johnson (Eds) Encyclopedia of Statistical Sciences,
pp. 581–591 (New York: Wiley).
Yli-renko, H. et al. (2001) Social capital, knowledge acquisition, and knowledge exploitation in young technol-
ogy-based ﬁrms, Strategic Management Journal, 22, pp. 587–613.
The Source of Innovation: Boundary Spanner
1145
