Special Boundary Roles
inthe Innovation
Process
Michael L. Tushman
The research described in this article focuses on one im-
portant aspect of the innovation process — the need for
the innovating system to gather information from and
transmit information to several external information
areas. Special boundary roles evolve in the organiza-
tion's communication network to fulfill the essential func-
tion of linking the organization's internal network to ex-
ternal sources of information. These boundary roles
occur at several organizational boundaries, and their dis-
tribution within the organization is contingent on the na-
ture of the organization's work. This research supports
literature on boundary spanning in general and high-
lights the importance of boundary roles in the process of
innovation.*
A version of this paper was presented at
the Academy of Management meetings,
August 1976. The author thanks his col-
leagues David Lewin, Noel Tichy, and
Michael Ginzberg, and an anonymous
reviewer for/\SQ for their helpful com-
ments and criticism. This work was sup-
ported by grants from the Center for Re-
search in Career Development at Colum-
bia University and from the Shell Com-
panies Foundation.
1
This study was conducted at the R&D
facility of a major American corporation.
The facility is divided into seven depart-
ments, which are, in turn, divided into
projects. Projects range from basic re-
search to technical service. Details ap-
pear in the methods section.
December 1977, volume 22
Social scientists have long been interested in the develop-
ment and the diffusion of innovations (Myers and Marquis,
1969; Rogers and Shoemaker, 1971; Achilladeles, Jervis,
and Robertson, 1971; Baldridge and Burnham, 1975). This
interest in innovation has extended over a range of organi-
zations (for example, research and development laborato-
ries, health and welfare organizations, and school systems)
as well as over a range of innovations (for example, hybrid
corn, drugs, types of social service, and new technologies).
One critical aspect of the innovation process is the ability of
the innovating unit to gather information from and transmit
information to several external domains (Myers and Mar-
quis, 1969; Miller, 1971; Kelly and Kranzberg, 1975). Yet,
while information from external areas is crucial to the effec-
tive development or diffusion of innovation, substantial lit-
erature suggests that communication across organizational
boundaries is both inefficient and prone to bias and distor-
tion (Dearborn and Simon, 1958; March and Simon, 1958;
Wilensky, 1967). There is, then, a dilerTima — accurate in-
formation from external areas is vital to the innovation pro-
cess yet relatively difficult to gather. This dilemma and its
consequences are an important impediment to the innova-
tion process (Utterback, 1974; Mansfield and Wagner,
1975).
Building on the innovation-oriented research of the organi-
zational behavior and R&D management literature, this
study investigates the existence and the characteristics of
special boundary roles as one means for innovating organi-
zations to deal with the necessity of cross-boundary com-
munication. The distribution of these special boundary roles
within the organization and their impact on subunit per-
formance is also investigated. While the setting for this
field study was an R&D laboratory,-" the thrust and logic of
this paper are directed toward the more generally interest-
ing question of the place of boundary roles in the innova-
tion process.
INNOVATION AND THE IMPORTANCE OF COMMUNICA-
TION ACROSS SEVERAL BOUNDARIES
Zaitman, Duncan, and Holbek (1973) have argued that the
development and diffusion of innovations can be seen as a
process composed of several phases. Each phase is charac-
587/Administrative Science Quarterly
terized by different types of decisions and problems of
coordination as well as by different patterns of communica-
tion (Zaitman, Duncan, and Holbek, 1973; Allen, 1977).
Consistent with these ideas, Myers and Marquis (1969)
have proposed a three-step innovation process: idea devel-
opment (the generation of a design concept), problem solv-
ing (technical efforts and problem solving in developing the
proposed idea), and implementation (pilot production, inter-
area coordination). Baker, Siegmann, and Rubenstein (1967)
and Mansfield et al. (1971) have suggested similar pro-
cesses based on R&D settings; Van de Ven and Koenig
(1976) have developed a similar approach based on innova-
tion in social service settings.
While this process approach to innovation suggests a range
of problem solving differences in the various phases, one
important difference is the locus of critical information and
feedback (Figure 1). During the first phase, idea generation.
Innovation Phases
1 idea Generation:
Deveioping a design or proposal by
integrating market need with tech-
nical means.
ii. Problem Sotvtng
Research, development, and en-
gineering to oeveloD a technical
solution to the proposal
III. Implementation
R&D, manufacturing, market tooi-
ing up. coordination, and adminis-
tration to bring the new product to
firsi use or to the market
Key Communication Domains by Phase
i Extra-laboratory, extra-organiza-
tional communication
With untverstties, suppliers, ven-
dors, literature
II. Intra-iaboratory communication
With functional areas as wei! as
technical areas outside laboratory.
lli. Laboratory and functional area
communication
Particularly between R&D and
manufacturing and marketing
Figure 1. Innovation phases and corresponding key communication
domains. (Figure adapted from Myers and Marquis [1969]).
information pertaining to new ideas or new approaches to
technical or marketing problems can be found most effec-
tively outside the innovating organization (Utterback, 1971).
In the second phase, the more focused problem solving
requires exchanging substantial information within the R&D
subunit as well as between the laboratory and its manufac-
turing and marketing areas (Pelz and Andrews, 1966;
Gerstenfeld, 1970). The third phase, implementation, de-
mands effective coordination and problem solving among all
the functional areas (Morton, 1971; Mansfield and Wagner,
1975).
This process-oriented approach to innovation emphasizes
the importance of several external sources of information
(from the point of view of the innovating unit). While need
for communication and information will vary over time, this
approach suggests that to be effective, the innovating sub-
unit must efficiently gather information from and transmit
588/ASQ
Special Boundary Roles
R&D laboratory
Departments
Larger organization boundary
•External boundary
^ 
r : Flow of communication between Department A and
other sources of information
Figure 2. Communication boundaries in R&D laboratories.
information to several external information domains. Figure
2 distinguishes three external sources of information and
thus three communication boundaries for work areas within
an R&D laboratory — the extra-organization boundary, the
laboratory to larger organization boundary, and the intra-
laboratory boundary. While these boundaries are specifically
relevant to R&D settings, the importance of transferring in-
formation across analogous organizational boundaries exists
for all innovating systems (Baldridge and Burnham, 1975;
Czepiel, 1975; Van de Ven, Delbecq, and Koenig, 1976). The
following section discusses the relevance of these three
boundaries in the innovation process.
Extra-Organization Boundary
The literature on innovation in R&D organizations em-
phasizes the importance of extra-organizational communica-
tion since the laboratory must receive up-to-date informa-
tion about market and technological developments. Among
others, Schmookler (1966), Myers and Marquis (1969), and
Von Hippel (1976a, 1976b) have stressed the importance of
gathering information on user or market need, while Allen
(1966, 1970), Achilladeles, Jervis, and Robertson (1971), and
Utterback (1971) have emphasized gathering information on
new technological products, processes, and knowledge.
Innovation-related research not focusing on the R&D or-
ganization also highlights the importance of communicating
with information areas external to the innovating system
(Miller, 1971; Keegan, 1974; Baldridge and Burnham, 1975;
Czepiel, 1975). Moreover, the literature on the task envi-
ronment suggests that a changing environment, otten en-
countered by innovating systems, increases the need for
effective communication with the organization's environ-
ment (Burns and Stalker, 1966; Lawrence and Lorsch,
1967; Aiken and Hage, 1971; and Roberts et a/., 1974).
Laboratory to Larger Organization
The importance of this communication boundary is twofold.
If market or technical information is important in the inno-
vation process, and if marketing, sales, or manufacturing
589/ASQ
have relevant information, then the successful projects will
benefit from an effective laboratory to larger organization
interface (Mansfield and Wagner, 1975; Rothberg, 1976).
Further, as the project moves through the laboratory, it can
benefit from technical input, support, and feedback from
several organizational areas.
Innovation-related research not focusing on the R&D labora-
tory also supports the importance of intra-organizational
coordination (Lawrence and Lorsch, 1967; Hage, Aiken, and
Marrett, 1971; Hage, 1974). Further, to the extent that in-
novation builds in reciprocal task interdependence between
subunits, the need for effectively integrating these subunits
will be substantial (Thompson, 1967; Galbraith, 1973).
Intra-Laboratory Boundary
Frequently the innovating subunit is itself highly differ-
entiated (Rosenbloom and Wolek, 1970; Lorsch and Morse,
1975). Substantial research exists demonstrating the impor-
tance of effectively transferring information within differ-
entiated R&D laboratories. Utterback (1971) found that while
sources outside the laboratory were most useful in generat-
ing new ideas, sources inside the laboratory were most
helpful in providing problem solving and implementation as-
sistance. Similarly, research by Allen (1966, 1970), Pelz, and
Andrews (1966), Smith (1970), Farris (1972), and Goldhar,
Bragaw, and Schwartz (1967) supports the importance of
intra-laboratory communication links to take advantage of
in-house technical expertise.
In all, this review suggests that to develop successful inno-
vations, the innovating unit must attend to information and
feedback from several external information domains. Much
of the literature has concentrated on the extra-organization-
al communication boundary (Utterback, 1974). This review
suggests, however, that work areas must attend to com-
munication boundaries within the organizational as well (see
Figure 2).
COMMUNICATION ACROSS ORGANIZATIONAL
BOUNDARIES AS A TWO-STEP PROCESS
While communication across organizational boundaries is
vital to each phase of the innovation process, much litera-
ture emphasizes the difficulties, inefficiency, and hazards of
transferring information across organizational interfaces
(Dearborn and Simon, 1958; Wilensky, 1967; Allen and Co-
hen, 1969; Roberts eta/., 1974). Why should these difficul-
ties exist?
Systems theory suggests that as organizations grow, they
differentiate. Specialized areas evolve to deal with particular
tasks or environments (Katz and Kahn, 1966; Thompson,
1967). As these specialized units develop, each generates
its own idiosyncratic norms, values, time frame, and coding
schemes to permit effective processing of information
(March and Simon, 1958; Katz and Kahn, 1966). Thus, not
only will different organizations have a mismatch in coding
schemes, but differentiated subunits within the same or-
ganization will likely also have contrasting languages and
coding schemes.
590/ASQ
Internal communication stars (the term is
borrowed from the early sociometric re-
search) are those individuals most fre-
quently approached as technical discus-
sion partners. See methods section for
greater detail.
Special Boundary Roles
These inherent conceptual and linguistic differences act as
a communication impedance or as a communication bound-
ary hindering the free flow of information. The greater the
differentiation, the greater the communication impedance
Rogers and Shoemaker, 1971; Miles, 1976). Supporting this
communication mismatch logic, studies by Allen (1964,
1966), Schilling and Bernard (1964), and Baker, Siegmann,
and Rubenstein (1967) found an inverse relationship be-
tween the amount of an individual's extra-organizational
communication and his or her work performance.
If communication across organizational boundaries is dif-
ficult and prone to bias and distortion, yet is simultaneously
a requirement for successful innovation, then how are in-
novating subunits effectively linked to external information
areas? One way to deal with the difficulties of communicat-
ing across organizational boundaries is to develop special
boundary roles (March and Simon, 1958; Thompson, 1967;
Allen and Cohen, 1969; Allen, 1970; Aldrich and Herker,
1977; Schwartz and Jacobson, 1977). Individuals filling
these roles are capable of translating contrasting coding
schemes and therefore of acting as boundary spanners be-
tween the work unit and external information areas. Thus,
information may flow into the R&D laboratory in a two-step
fashion, through a set of key persons who channel this
information to their colleagues within the laboratory.
This two-step flow of information across organizational
boundaries is analogous to sociological research dealing
with social influence, voting behavior, and the diffusion of
innovation (Lazarsfeld, Berelson, and Gaudet, 1948; Cole-
man, Katz, and Menzel, 1966; and Rogers and Shoemaker,
1971). This research found evidence of opinion leaders,
who because of their characteristics were well connected to
external sources of information. These opinion leaders were
sought after for advice and, in turn, influenced the deci-
sions of the less active members of the social system.
These converging results suggest that opinion leaders or
those filling special boundary roles, evolve to mediate the
transfer of information from external information areas into
the organization's internal communication network. While
the idea of boundary roles is not new, much of the litera-
ture has focused on the extra-organizational communication
boundary (Allen and Cohen, 1969; Frost and Whitley, 1971;
Keller and Holland, 1975a, 1975b). This paper contributes to
the boundary-role literature by extending the gatekeeper re-
search as well as by investigating the existence of
boundary-spanning roles attending to other communication
domains (see Figure 2). This paper then investigates the
distribution of these boundary roles within the R&D labora-
tory. Specific hypotheses appear below.
Existence of Special Boundary Roles
Gatekeepers. Based on the social influence studies of
Lazarsfeld, Berelson, and Gaudet (1948), Allen (1966) and
Allen and Cohen (1969) suggested that key nodes m the
innovating system's communication network convey infor-
mation from external domains into the internal communica-
tion network. Allen and Cohen (1969) identified internal
communication stars^ and found that they were more
591/ASQ
strongly connected to external sources of information than
nonstars. These internal communication stars both were
consulted more frequently and were well connected to ex-
ternal information areas. Those internal stars who also had
a substantial amount of extra-organizational communication
were termed gatekeepers. Allen (1970) replicated these find-
ings in a large aerospace firm.
While the gatekeeper idea has stimulated extensive re-
search (Pettigrew, 1972; Whitley and Frost, 1973; Taylor
and Utterback, 1975), a question can be raised as to the
existence of specializtion among gatekeepers: Do all
gatekeepers attend to all external areas, or is there spe-
cialization by information domain (Allen and Cohen, 1969;
Kelly and Kranzberg, 1975)? It may be that due to task re-
quirements and different information needs, gatekeepers in
different areas tend specific information domains (Allen and
Cohen, 1969; Walsh and Baker, 1972; Whitley and Frost,
1973).
This idea of specialized gatekeepers can be made more
exact. Since research projects require state-of-the art tech-
nical input, they must be well connected to professional
areas outside the laboratory (Myers and Marquis, 1969; Ut-
terback, 1971, 1974). Given the importance of this profes-
sional link, it may be that research gatekeepers direct their
external communication specifically to universities, profes-
sional societies, and to the professional literature. On the
other hand, technical service areas require up-to-date in-
formation on new products, processes, and markets
(Achilladelles, Jervis, and Robertson, 1971; Czepiel, 1975).
If so, gatekeepers in the technical service areas may focus
their external communication on suppliers, vendors, and
customers. This logic suggests that gatekeepers may not
attend to all external communication areas, but may spe-
cialize in those external areas most critical to the work of
their subunit.
Due to the location of relevant information, one can reason
that for subunits engaged in research the professional
communication boundary (universities or professional
societies) is more critical than the operational communica-
tion boundary (suppliers, vendors, customers). The reverse
should hold true for the technical service areas. If so, it can
be hypothesized that:
Hypothesis 1. Gatekeeper specialization will occur by task area. Stars in
research areas will have significantly more communication than nonstars
with professional areas outside the organization. Similarly, stars in technical
service areas will have significantly more communication than nonstars
with operational areas outside the organization.
Organizational liaisons. Studies on the diffusion of innova-
tion (Langrish, Gibbons, and Evans, 1972; Czepiel, 1975) as
well as on the process of innovation (Utterback, 1971; Bal-
dridge and Burnham, 1975; Von Hippel, 1976) emphasize
the importance of the boundary between the innovating
subsystem and the larger organization. In R&D settings, the
communication boundary between the laboratory and the
marketing, manufacturing, and sales areas is critical (Gruber,
Poengsen, and Prakke, 1973; Mansfield and Wagner, 1975).
As discussed earlier, task and coding differences make
communication across organizational boundaries difficult.
592/ASQ
Spedai Boundary
Given this inherent communication impedance, it may be
that special boundary roles evolve to mediate communica-
tion between the laborator/'s internal network and the
larger organization. These intra-organizational boundary roles
may perform a function similar to that of the integrator in
Lawrence and Lorsch's (1967) work; boundary roles are dif-
ferent only in that they operate at a lower level in the
organization and are not formally defined. Similarly, what
Myers and Marquis (1969) term key people or product
champions are probably more than particularly active indi-
viduals; they may act as key nodes in the information net-
work, bridging the laboratory to other organizational areas.
Using the two-step flow logic, one can hypothesize that
communication between the R&D laboratory and the larger
organization will not be direct but will be mediated by or-
ganizational liaisons.
Hypothesis 2. Internal communication stars will have significantly more
communication with areas in the larger organization than nonstars.
Laboratory liaisons. Innovating subsystems may them-
selves be highly differentiated. If there is task interdepen-
dence between subsystems, then these units face the
problem of internal integration (Lorsch, 1965). If R&D or-
ganizations are differentiated, they face an accentuated
problem of integration given both task interdependence and
the need for feedback from different laboratory areas (Pelz
and Andrews, 1966).
With the same logic used for gatekeepers and organizational
liaisons, one can hypothesize that because of the com-
munication boundary between differentiated task areas,
communication across even intra-laboratory interfaces oc-
curs in a two-step fashion. Boundary roles may connect the
department to other areas of the laboratory. This reasoning
suggests that communication between differentiated task
areas in the laboratory is not equally distributed among the
technical staff but occurs through a few key network nodes
— laboratory liaisons.
Hypothesis 3. Internal communication stars will have significantly more
communication with other areas, that is, departments, of the laboratory
than nonstars.
Note that to test Hypotheses 1, 2, and 3, communication
stars as a set will be contrasted with nonstars. If significant
differences between the two groups are found, that is evi-
dence for the two-step flow of communication.
Distribution of Special Boundary Roles
The preceding discussion has hypothesized the existence of
several kinds of boundary roles. What, however, is the dis-
tribution of these roles within the innovating system? The
final set of hypotheses deals with this question.
As discussed earlier, boundary roles evolve to deal with the
difficulties of gathering and diffusing information across or-
qanizational boundaries. However, increased work-related
uncertainty may accentuate the difficulties of cross-
boundary communication; the need for e>^^^f.^^f ^°^^^^^^
cation will increase (Lawrence and Lorsch, 1967), while the
ability to deal with the communication impedance may well
decrease given the more complex problem-solving require-
593/ASQ
ments in the work area (Lorsch and Morse, 1975; Miles and
Perreault, 1976). If increased task uncertainty accentuates
both the need for extra-unit information as well as the dif-
ficulties of extra-unit communication, it can be hypothesized
that under such conditions, the number of boundary roles
will increase to deal with the greater information-processing
requirements (Keller and Holland, 1975a; Aldrich and Herker,
1977).
This reasoning implies that special boundary roles not only
function as links to external sources of information, but that
they also buffer the subunit from external uncertainty
(Thompson, 1967). If so, the greater the subunit's work-
related uncertainty, the greater will be the number of roles
to deal with that uncertainty. Task characteristics, task envi-
ronment, and task interdependence are each sources of
work-related uncertainty (Pennings, 1975; Van de Ven, Del-
becq, and Koenig, 1976). The distribution of special bound-
ary roles, then, will not be equal throughout the innovating
system, but will be contingent on the nature of the sys-
tem's work. Lastly, if this logic has merit, work areas which
fit the number of boundary roles to the demands of their
work will be high performers (Galbraith, 1973; Tushman and
Nadler, forthcoming).
This core hypothesis leads to the following more specific
hypotheses:
Hypothesis 4a. Research projects will have more boundary roles per proj-
ect than technical service projects.
Hypothesis 4b. Projects facing a changing environment will have more
roles per project than projects facing a stable environment.
Hypothesis 4c. Projects with substantial task interdependence will have
more roles per project than projects with little task interdependence.
SETTING AND METHODS
This study focused on the communication activity of all the
professionals (A/=345) in the R&D facility of a large mid-
western U.S. corporation. The laborator/ is isolated from the
rest of the corporation and is divided into seven depart-
ments (divisional laboratories). The departments are, in turn,
organized into separate project areas. The projects were
stable over the course of the research and each respondent
was a member of only one project.
Technical Communication
To provide communication data, each professional was
asked to report his or her actual, work-related, oral com-
munication for a number of selected days (the respondents
were asked not to report strictly social communication, nor
did they report written communication). These data were
collected once a week for 15 weeks, with an equal number
of each of the weekdays chosen. The overall response rate
was 93 percent; moreover, 68 percent of all the communi-
cation reported within the laboratory was mentioned by
both parties (cf. Weiss and Jacobson, 1960). The extra-
laboratory data were self-report data which could not be
corroborated with discussion partners.
In order to identify the internal communication stars and to
test for boundary roles, the communication activity of each
594/ASQ
Spedal Boundary Roles
professional was separated into the following mutually ex-
clusive communication domains — intra-department, intra-
laboratory (outside the department), organizational, and
extra-organizational. Extra-organizational communication was
further separated into a professional domain (universities,
professional societies) and an operational domain (suppliers,
vendors, customers). The literature has used a number of
criteria to define internal communication stars (Allen, 1970;
Whitley and Frost, 1973). This study arbitrarily defined inter-
nal stars as those individuals in the top fifth of the intra-
department communication distribution. Since one of the
departments was substantially larger than the other six, it
was excluded from these analyses. Fifty stars were located
by these methods.
Project Task Characteristics
A number of analysts have suggested that task characteris-
tics can be ordered on a dimension from complex (non-
routine) to simple (routine). In R&D settings, tasks can differ
by (1) length of time required for feedback, (2) specific prob-
lem versus general problem orientation, and (3) their gener-
ation of new knowledge in contrast to their use of existing
knowledge (Rosenbloom and Wolek, 1970). With these at-
tributes, four task categories were developed with the labo-
ratory's manaigers to form a task dimension ranging from
complex (research) to less complex (technical service) (see
Table 1).
Table 1
Categories of Task Characteristics
I. Basic Research
Work of a general nature
i ntended to apply to a broad
range of applications or to
the development of new
knowledge about an area.
II. Applied Research
Work involving basic
knowledge for the solution
of a particular problem. The
creation and evaluation of
new concepts or compo-
nents but not development
for operational use.
III. Development
The combination of exist-
ing or feasible concepts,
perhaps with new knowl-
edge, to provide a distinctly
new product or process.
The application of known
facts and theory to solve a
particular problem through
exploratory study, design
and testing of new compo-
nents or systems.
IV. Technical Services
Cost/performance im-
provement to existing
products, processes or sys-
tems. Recombination,
modification and testing of
systems using existing
knowledge. Opening new
markets for existing
products.
Using these categories, respondents answered two ques-
tions about their work:
(1) In which of these categories (see Table 1) would you place the objec-
tives of your work? The Arabic numbers indicate the degree of refinement
within each category, where 1 is "pure."
I 
II 
III 
IV
123 
123 
123 
123
(2) Roughly what percentage of the work required to accomplish the task's
objectives falls in each of the four categories?
_ J 
II 
III 
IV
The individual responses to the two questions were corre-
lated highly (Spearman-Brown reliability=.91). Thus, indi-
vidual task scores were calculated by taking the average of
the two questions. Project scores were calculated by pool-
ing individual scores; 58 projects provided usable responses.
595/ASQ
Project Task Environment
Of the many environmental dimensions studied (cf. Jur-
kovitch, 1974), Duncan (1972) and Negandi and Reimann
(1973) suggest that the dimension showing the range be-
tween stability and change is a particularly important con-
tributor to perceived uncertainty. Following this research,
only the stable-changing dimension of the task environ-
ment was investigated. Each respondent answered the fol-
lowing question:
We are interested in how rapidly you see the demands of your job chang-
ing. To what extent are techniques or skills or information needed for your
project(s) changing?
1
2 
3 
4 
5
To a very 
Little 
Some 
Great 
To a very
little extent 
great extent
Fifty-eight projects provided usable responses. Again, proj-
ect scores were calculated by pooling individual scores.
Project-Task Interdependence
Project-task interdependence refers to the extent to which
a task requires working with other areas of the organization.
If the focal organization is itself highly differentiated, then it
is necessary to distinguish between the amount and the
location of the interdependence. The amount and location
of task interdependence were operationalized in the follow-
ing fashion:
On the scales below, please indicate the degree to which your work is
interrelated with the work of:
1. technical personnel in other departments.
1 
5 
10
very low 
moderate 
very high
interrelationship 
interrelationship
2. technical personnel in the organization hut outside of the laboratory.
1 
5 
10
very low 
moderate 
very high
interrelationship 
. . 
interrelationship
Fifty-eight projects provided usable responses. Project
scores were calculated by pooling individual scores.
Unit of Analysis
Since the unit of analysis in Hypothesis 4 is the project,
individual responses must be pooled to get project scores.
To check the appropriateness of pooling, the homogeneity
of project members' perceptions of each variable was
tested. A one-way analysis of variance was done to detect
any significant differences among individual perceptions;
Bartlett's M-test (Dixon and Massey, 1969) was used to test
specifically for the homogeneity of intra-project perceptions.
For variables which passed both of the above tests, a more
stringent test was performed on each project. Each proj-
ect's variance was compared to the pooled variance for the
particular variable studied. If a project's variance was signifi-
cantly greater (p<.01) than the pooled variance, then that
project was not used in the analysis of that particular
variable.
The ANOVA and Bartlett tests indicated that pooling was
appropriate for each of the variables. The individual F-tests
596/ASQ
Because of the skewed distributions,
Mann-Whitney U-tests are used. Since
each of the hypotheses predicts the di-
rection of difference, one-tailed tests are
utilized. (As the numbers of cases in the
larger groups are all greater than 20, the
power-efficiency of these tests ap-
proaches that of equivalent t-tests
[Siegei, 1956]).
Table:
Spedal Boundary Roles
eliminated between two and four projects per variable. Proj-
ect task scores fell into three distinct areas: research
(A/=13), development (A/=22), and technical service (A/=20).
Project Performance
Since performance measures are particularly difficult to de-
velop for R&D settings (Whitley and Frost, 1971), a subjec-
tive measure similar to that used by Lawrence and Lorsch
(1967) was employed. All group managers {N=7) and both
laboratory directors (A/=2) were interviewed individually.
Each was asked to evaluate the overall technical perform-
ance of all projects with which he was technically familiar.
Since each project was developing new technologies or
new products or revising existing products, this perform-
ance measure can be taken as a proxy for the innovative-
ness of the project. An average of 4.7 managers indepen-
dently rated each project on a seven-point scale. Since the
intercorrelations of the nine judges correlated moderately
(Spearman-Brown reliability=.81), individual ratings were
averaged to yield overall project scores.
RESULTS
Existence of Special Boundary Roles
To test for the existence of gatekeepers (Hypothesis 1),
organizational liaisons (Hypothesis 2), and laboratory liaisons
(Hypothesis 3), the amount of external communication of
stars and nonstars must be compared. Table 2 compares
the median absolute amount of communication, over 15
weeks, of stars and nonstars with the three extra-depart-
mental communication domains.^* The data are organized by
department. There is strong support for the existence of
both the organizational and laboratory liaisons: 11 of the 12
differences between stars and nonstars are statistically sig-
nificant. Stars, as a set, have significantly more communica-
tion than the nonstars with the larger organization as well
as with other areas in the laboratory. Therefore, as pre-
dicted, communication between organizationally distant
areas is not direct but occurs in a two-step fashion; that is,
the majority of the technical staff keep informed of extra-
departmental issues by speaking with the internal stars
who, in turn, are strongly linked to other areas in the larger
organization.
Median Amount of External Communication by Stars (st) and Nonstars (nst)t
DEPARTMENTS
Communication
between:
Control
Systems
st 
nst
(43)
Special
Products
st 
nst
(6) 
(22)
Product
Analysis
st 
nst
(7) 
(29)
Construction
Development
st 
nst
(7) 
(28)
Development
st 
nst
(11) 
(38)
Research
st 
nst
(9) 
(33)
Laboratory
Organization
Extra-organization
4
19
7
0
6'
22
26
3
18
10*
3
37
23
4
14...
7"
2
20
37
7
2^
7
12 
3*
3 
T
4 
1*
23
3
3
12*
Mann-Whitney U-Test —one tail:
p<.10
p<.05
p<.01
tTables 2 and 3 report the median absolute amount of external communication forstarsand nonstarsovera 15-week period.
597/ASQ
While support for both organizational and laboratory liaisons
is strong, support is weak for the gatekeeper role (see Table
2). In only two departments do the stars have significantly
more communication than the nonstars with areas outside
the organization. However, Hypothesis 1 argued that
gatekeepers specialize in specific external information do-
mains. It was hypothesized that given the need in research
areas for state-of-the-art technical information, research
stars would focus their extra-organizational communication
on the professional domain (universities, professional
societies). On the other hand, it was hypothesized that
technical service stars would focus on operational areas
(suppliers, vendors, and customers) given the technical ser-
vice areas' need for up-to-date information on new products
and processes.
Table 3
Median Amount of
Nonstars (nst)
Communication
between:
Operational areas:
Professional areas
Extra-organizational Communication
Technical Service
Department
Control Systems
st 
nst
6 
^••
0 
0
by Stars
Research Departments
Development
st 
nst
2
2
1
0»*
Research
st
1
4
(st) and
nst
1
0*
Mann-Whitney U-Test —one tail:
p<.10
p<.05
Various kinds of projects made up the
other departments. Since task
heterogeneity would confound the
analysis, these other departments could
not be used to test the gatekeeper-
specialization hypothesis.
To test this specialization hypothesis, research departments
and technical service departments had to be located, and
extra-organizational communication separated into profes-
sional and operational categories. In this laboratory, the Re-
search and the Development Departments were made up
solely of research projects, while only the Control Systems
Department was composed solely of technical service
projects.*
For these three departments then. Table 3 compares the
median absolute amount of communication to operational
and professional areas for stars and nonstars. The data indi-
cate support for the gatekeeper specialization hypothesis. In
the two research departments, the stars have significantly
more communication to professional areas than the
nonstars; there is no role specialization to the operational
domain for these research departments. In the technical
service department, however, stars have significantly more
communication than nonstars to the operational domain.
And, as hypothesized, there is no role specialization to the
professional domain for this technical service department.
These analyses, therefore, support the existence of several
boundary-spanning roles. Persons filling these roles serve
an important function in the innovation process in that they
link their work areas to several external information do-
mains. The laboratory and the organizational liaisons span
598/ASQ
Spedal Boundary Roles
Table 4
Mean Number of Boundary Roles per Project for Different Task Areas*
Technical 
Degree of
Research 
Service 
Significance 
Freedonrj
Total 
.64(.67) 
.50(.56) 
(19)
Performance:
High 
.80(.84) 
.50(.84) 
(9)
Low 
.50(.71) 
.50(.71) 
(8)
For Tables 4, 5, and6bounclary roles were isolated by taking those internal
connmunication stars which were also connected strongly to an external
infornnation domain (top fifth of the external communication distribution).
Standard deviations are within parentheses.
Table 5
Mean Number of Boundary Roles per Project for Different 1
Conditions
Total
Performance:
High
Low
Environnnent
Changing 
Stable 
Significance
1.00(.81) 
.39(.6O) 
••
.86(.69) 
.OO(.OO) 
•••
1.11 (.93) 
.64(.67)
t-tests:
•• 
•••
p<.05 
P<.01
(Standard deviations are within parentheses.)
Table 6
Environmental
Degree of
Freedom
(32)
(12)
(18)
Mean Number of Boundary Roles per Project for Different Amounts of Task
Interdependence
Total
Performance:
High
Low
Interdependence^:
High 
Low 
Significance
.94(.7O) 
.50(.77)
.83(.82) 
.12(73)
1.10(.95) 
.70(.46)
Degree of
Freedom
(32)
(12)
(18)
t-tests:
•
p<.10
:tlnterdependence is the sum of laboratory and organizational interdepen-
dence.
(Standard deviations are within parentheses.)
intra-organizational boundaries, while the gatekeepers span
the extra-organizational boundary. However, because of the
differing information needs of the various task areas,
gatekeepers do seem to specialize in particular external in-
formation domains. Research gatekeepers focus on profes-
sional areas, while technical service gatekeepers focus on
operational areas.
Distribution of Special Boundary Roles
These results indicate the existence of special boundary role
599/ASQ
holders who attend to several communication boundaries.
What, however, is the distribution of these roles within the
laboratory? Based on information processing ideas. Hypoth-
esis 4 suggested that the greater the subunit's work-related
uncertainty, the greater the number of special boundary
roles to deal with that uncertainty.
Tables 4, 5, and 6 support this core hypothesis. Projects
with more complex information-processing requirements
consistently have more boundary roles than projects with
less complex information processing requirements. In the
total sample, research projects have more boundary-
spanning roles than technical service projects; projects fac-
ing a changing environment have significantly more roles
per project than projects facing a stable environment; and
projects with substantial task interdependence have signifi-
cantly more roles per project than projects with little task
interdependence. Evidently, under routine technical condi-
tions, a small number of boundary roles can meet the ex-
ternal information requirements, while more complex or un-
certain technical conditions require more boundary roles to
attend to the increased uncertainty. Thus, boundary roles do
seem to be a way of dealing with work-related uncertainty
and are, therefore, distributed differentially within the labo-
ratory, with distribution being contingent on the nature of
the project's work.
But what is the relationship between the number of bound-
ary roles per project and project performance? If the logic of
Hypothesis 4 holds, then the results found for the total
sample should be accentuated in high-performing projects.
Tables 4, 5, and 6 contrast the number of roles per project
for high- and low-performing subsets (the performance
scores were split at the median). As predicted, the results
are accentuated for high-performing projects: high-
performing projects facing greater information processing
requirements (projects performing research tasks, facing a
changing environment, or substantial interdependence)
have more boundary roles per project than high-performing
projects facing less uncertainty. However, for the low-
performing projects, the hypothesized differences decrease
in magnitude and do not approach statistical significance.
The patterns of Tables 5 and 6 suggest that there can be an
excess of boundary roles even under conditions of substan-
tial work-related uncertainty. High-performing projects fac-
ing a changing environment or substantial task interdepen-
dence have fewer roles per project than low-performing
projects facing the same task conditions. Evidently, high-
performing projects facing substantial work-related uncer-
tainty tend to share their boundary roles. In contrast, low-
performing projects facing a changing environment and/or
substantial task interdependence tend to have more than
one boundary role per project. It may well be that having a
boundary role for each project is redundant and associated
with problems of coordination and integration.
These ideas suggest a curvilinear relationship between the
number of boundary roles and project performance for proj-
ects facing substantial work-related uncertainty (due either
to the task environment or the demands of task interde-
pendence). Supporting this idea. Figure 3 shows that for
600/ASQ
Spedal Boundary Roles
6—1
5 —
U
C
CO
EI
01
a.
"o
0
Task environment
Task interdependence
Weak interdependence
ence
Stable environment
Number of boundary roles per project
I
Figure 3. Average project performance for different numbers of boundary
roles per project (N = 16).
such projects, an increase in the number of boundary roles
per project is associated initially with an increase in project
performance. After a point, however, an increased number
of boundary roles is associated with decreased project per-
formance. In further support of the ideas behind Hypothesis
4, Figure 3 also shows that projects facing smaller informa-
tion processing requirements have fewer boundary roles.
For these projects, an increase in the number of boundary
roles is consistently associated with lower project perform-
ance. Thus, under conditions of both minimal uncertainty
and substantial uncertainty, too many boundary roles may
be redundant and actually impede coordination and control.
As Figure 3 is made up of a limited number of points, these
results should be seen as suggestive of a curvilinear rela-
tionship between the number of boundary roles and project
performance, and as a stimulus for future research.
In review, boundary roles evolve to deal with several com-
munication boundaries. These analyses suggest that the
number of boundary roles per work area is dependent on
the characteristics of the area's work. More roles per project
are not always related to higher performance. For high-
performing projects, the number of boundary roles per proj-
ect is contingent on the nature of the project's work. The
more the uncertainty in the task, the greater the
information-processing requirements and, up to a point,
more roles evolve to deal with that increased uncertainty.
Thus, beyond the cross-boundary communication function,
boundary roles also seem to be an effective way of dealing
with extra-unit uncertainty. Finally, the results indicate that
work characteristics do not cause boundary roles; rather,
the high-performing work areas develop the appropriate
number of boundary roles to fit the external information-
processing demands of their work.
601/ASQ
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS
This research is based on the premise that the process of
innovation is sensitive to the effective transfer of informa-
tion across organizational boundaries. Yet because of the
consequences of differentiation, widespread communication
across boundaries tends to be inefficient and prone to dis-
tortion. This study has investigated one mechanism for ef-
ficiently linking an innovating subsystem, an R&D labora-
tory, to its diverse sources of external information.
This research indicates that special boundary roles function
to link the innovating system with various sources of exter-
nal information and feedback. Thus, communication with
external areas is not distributed equally among the innovat-
ing unit's staff but takes place through a limited set of
individuals able to translate between several coding
schemes. These individuals, or special boundary roles, are
well connected to external information areas and are fre-
quently consulted within the innovating unit. These bound-
ary roles exist to mediate communication across several or-
ganizational interfaces.
These results support the idea that information from exter-
nal areas enters innovating units in an indirect, two-step
fashion. Similarly, this research supports the organizational
work on boundary-spanning roles (March and Simon, 1958;
Thompson, 1967; Galbraith, 1973; Miles and Perreault,
1976; Aldrich and Herker, 1977; Schwartz and Jacobson,
1977). Finally, this research indicates that while too many
boundary roles may be inefficient, for high-performing proj-
ects, the number of special boundary roles is nevertheless
contingent on the nature of the innovating unit's work.
These results suggest several directions for future research.
Most obviously, future research can develop a stronger
operationalization of the boundary-spanning role. Ideally,
one would like a multidimensional measure which taps for-
mal as well as informal aspects of the role. Future research
can also focus on the characteristics of these boundary
roles and what functions they actually perform. Do persons
filling these roles simply transfer (or filter) information, or
are they involved in a wider range of activities, given their
exposure to scarce information (Pettigrew, 1972; Kelly and
Kranzberg, 1975). Other research questions concern the
coordination of several boundary-spanning roles and devel-
oping these special roles over a period of time. Lastly, while
the literature relating individual differences to boundary-role
status has not been fruitful (Farris, 1972; Keller and Holland,
1975b; Allen, 1977), research by Miles and Perreault (1976)
and Keller, Szylagyi, and Holland (forthcoming) suggests that
an interesting avenue of research is the relation among
boundary-role status, individual differences, and role
conflict.
From a more pragmatic point of view, these results have
several implications for managers. Most generally, those in-
terested in managing innovation should explicitly recognize
the importance of key individuals in the system's communi-
cation network. Not only are special boundary roles an effi-
cient mechanism for gathering and transmitting informa-
tion, but evidence also suggests that they are important in
602/ASQ
REFERENCES
Achilladeles, A., P. Jervis, and A.
Robertson
1971 Success and Failure in Inno-
vation: Project Sappho. Sus-
sex, England: University of
Sussex Press.
Aiken, Michael, and Jerald Hage
1968 "Organizational interdepen-
dence and intra-organizational
structure." American Sociolog-
ical Review, 33: 912-930.
Spedal Boundary Roles
Other organizational areas (for example, as integrators or as
implementors of management information systems), given
their exposure to critical information and their informal
status (Rogers and Shoemaker, 1971; Pettigrew, 1972; Kelly
and Kranzberg, 1975; Schwartz and Jacobson, 1977).
Beyond recognizing the existence and the importance of
special boundary roles in the innovation process, this re-
search suggests that managers can actively encourage the
development of boundary roles. Recognizing and rewarding
boundary-spanning activity are most important, particularly if
the role is associated with stress and conflict (Miles and
Perreault, 1976). In terms of facilitating boundary-role status,
managers can ease the access of their high perfomers to
both areas of external information (for example, marketing,
professional meetings) and to professional literature. Simi-
larly, managers can facilitate extensive communication net-
works for their high-performing individuals through a set of
job assignments (Edstrom and Galbraith, 1977).
Lastly, this research suggests that managers be sensitive to
the impact of task characteristics on boundary roles. The
number of boundary roles per work area should be tailored
to meet the unit's information processing needs, and dif-
ferent task areas may require boundary roles with particular
backgrounds and characteristics (Whitley and Frost, 1973). It
is not clear that promotion or formal boundary-role status
facilitates boundary-role activities (Allen, 1970). However,
these several implications do suggest that managers can
enhance the process of innovation by recognizing the im-
portance of boundary roles and working to actively develop
and use their organization's emergent or informal communi-
cation systems.
In conclusion, given their ability to scan and interpret infor-
mation from external areas and to transfer this information
to the innovating unit, persons filling boundary roles can be
seen as an important information processing mechanism in
the innovation process. Of course, this research is limited
by the type of organization studied. However, if the underly-
ing logic has merit, similar results should be found in non-
R&D settings. Future research must extend and replicate
these results as well as deal with other organizational pro-
cesses which promote the flow of information so critical to
the innovation process.
Michael L. Tushman is an assistant professor in the
Graduate School of Business, Columbia University, New
York, NY 10027.
Aiken, Michael, and Jerald Hage
1971 "The organic organization and
innovation." Sociology, 5:
63-82.
Aldrich, Howard, and Diane
Herker
1977 "Boundary spanning roles
and organization structure."
Academy of Management
Review, 2: 217-230.
Allen, Thomas J.
1964 "The use of information
channels in R&D proposal
preparation." Working paper,
Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Sloan School of
Management, Paper No. 97-64.
1966 "Studies of the problem-
solving process in engineer-
ing design." IEEE Transac-
tions on Engineering Man-
agement, EM 18: 72-83.
603/ASQ
1969 "Roles in technical communi-
cation networks." In Carlos
Cadura (ed.). Review of In-
formation Sciences: 1-29.
New York: Basic Books.
1970 "Communication networks in
R&D labs." R&D Manage-
ment, 1: 14-21.
1977 Managing the Flow of
Technology. Cambridge, MA:
M.I.T. Press.
Allen, Thomas J., and Steven
Cohen
1969. "Information flow in R&D
labs." Administrative Science
Quarterly, 14: 12-19.
Baker, Norman, James Siegmann,
and Albert Rubenstein
1967 "Effects of perceived needs
on the generation of ideas in
R&D labs." IEEE Transactions
on Engineering Management,
EM 14: 156-163.
Baldridge, J. Victor, and Robert
Burnham
1975 "Organizational innovation:
individual, organizational, and
environmental impacts." Ad-
ministrative Science Quar-
terly, 20: 165-176.
Burns, Thomas, and G. Stalker
1966 The Management of Innova-
tion. London: Tavistock
Press.
Coleman, James, Elihu Katz, and
Herbert Menzel
1966 Diffusion of Innovation. New
York: Free Press.
Czepiel, John
1975 "Patterns of inter-
organizational communication
and the diffusion of a major
technological innovation."
Academy of Management
Journal, 18: 6-24.
Dearborn, Robert, and Herbert
Simon
1958 "Selective perceptions in ex-
ecutives." Sociometry, 21:
140-144.
Dixon, Wilfred, and Frank Massey
1969 Statistical Analyses. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Duncan, Robert
1972 "Characteristics of organiza-
tional environments." Ad-
ministrative Science Quar-
terly, 17: 313-327.
Edstrom, Anders, and Jay Gal-
braith
1977 "Management transfer as a
coordination and control
strategy." Administrative Sci-
ence Ouarterly, 22: 248-263.
Farris, George
1972 "The effect of individual roles
on performance in innovative
groups." R&D Management,
3: 23-28.
Frost, Robert, and Richard Whitley
1971 "Communication patterns in a
research lab." R&D Manage-
ment, 1: 71-79.
Galbraith, Jay
1973 Designing Complex Organiza-
tions. Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley.
Gerstenfeld, Arthur
1970 Effective Management of
Research and Development.
Reading, MA: Addison-
Wesley.
Goldhar, Joel, Louis Bragaw, and
Jules Schwartz
1976 "Information flows, manage-
ment styles, and technologi-
cal innovation." IEEE Transac-
tions on Engineering Man-
agement, EM 23: 51-62.
Gruber, William, Qtto Poengsen,
and Frits Prakke
1973 "The isolation of R&D from
corporate management." Re-
search Management,
November: 27-31.
Hage, Jerald
1974 Communication and Organiza-
tional Control. New York:
Wiley.
Hage, Jerald, Michael Aiken, and
Cora B. Marrett
1971 "Organization structure and
communication." American
Sociological Review, 36:
860-871.
Jurkovich, Ray
1974 "A core typology of organiza-
tion environments." Adminis-
trative Science Ouarterly, 19:
380^10.
Katz, Daniel, and Robert Kahn
1966 The Social Psychology of Or-
ganizations. New York: Wiley.
Keegan, William
1974 "Multinational scanning — a
study of information sources
utilized by executives in mul-
tinational companies." Ad-
ministrative Science Ouar-
terly, 19: 411-422.
Keller, Robert, and Winford Hol-
land
1975a "Boundary spanning activity
and R&D management."
IEEE Transactions on En-
gineering Management, EM
22: 130-133.
1975b "Boundary spanning roles in
an R&D organization."
Academy of Management
Journal, 18: 388-393.
Keller, Robert, Andrew Szilagyi,
and Winford Holland
"Boundary spanning activity
and employee reactions."
Human Relations (forthcom-
ing).
Kelly, Patrick, and Melvin
Kranzberg
1975 Technological Innovation: A
Critical Review of Current
Knowledge. Atlanta, GA: Ad-
vanced Technology and Sci-
ence Studies Group, Georgia
Institute of Technology.
Langrish, John, Michael Gibbons,
and William Evans.
1972 Wealth from Knowledge.
London: McMillan.
Lawrence, Paul, and Jay Lorsch
1967 Organizations and Environ-
ment. Cambridge MA: Har-
vard University Press.
Lazarsfeld, Paul, Bernard Berel-
son, and Hazel Gaudet
1948 The People's Choice. New
York: Free Press.
Lorsch, Jay
1965 Product Innovation and Or-
ganization. New York: McMil-
lan.
Lorsch, Jay, and Robert Morse
1975 Organizations and Their
Members. New York: Basic
Books.
Mansfield, Edwin, John Rapoport,
Jerome Schnee, Samuel Wagner,
and Michael Hamburger
1971 Research and Innovation in
the Modern Corporation. New
York: Norton.
Mansfield, Edwin, and Samuel
Wagner
1975 "Organizational and strategic
factors associated with prob-
abilities of success in indus-
trial research." Journal of
Business, 48: 179-198.
March, James, and Herbert Simon
1958 Organizations. New York:
Wiley.
Miles, Robert
1976 "Role set configuration as a
predictor of role conflict and
ambiguity." Working Paper,
Yale University School of Or-
ganization and Management,
Paper No. 716.
Miles, Robert, and William Per-
reault
1976 "Organizational role conflict:
its antecedents and conse-
quences." Organizational Be-
havior and Human Perform-
ance, 17: 19-44.
604/ASQ
Spedal Boundary Roles
Miller, Roger
1971 Innovation, Organization, and
Environment. Sherbrooke,
Canada: University of Sher-
brooke Press.
Morton, Jack
1971 Organizing for Innovation.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Myers, Summer, and Donald
Marquis
1969 Successful Industrial Innova-
tion. Washington, DC: Na-
tional Science Foundation.
Negandi, Anant, and Bernard
Reimann
1973 "Task environment, decen-
tralization, and organizational
effectiveness." Human Rela-
tions, 26: 203-214.
Pelz, Donald, and Frank Andrews
1966 Scientists in Organizations.
New York: Wiley.
Pennings, Johannes
1975 "The relevance of the
structural-contingency model
for organizational effective-
ness." Administrative Science
Ouarterly, 20: 393-410.
Pettigrew, Andrew
1972 "Information control as a
power resource." Sociology,
6: 187-204.
Roberts, Karlene, Charles O'Reilly,
Gene Bretton, and Lyman Porter
1974 "Organizational theory and
organizational communica-
tion: a communication fail-
ure." Human Relations, 27:
501-524.
Rogers, Edward, and Floyd
Shoemaker
1971 Communication of Innova-
tions. New York: Free Press.
Rosenbloom, Richard, and Frank
Wolek
1970 Technology and Information
Transfer. Boston: Harvard
Business School.
Rothberg, Robert
1976 Corporate Strategy and Prod-
uct Innovation. New York:
Free Press.
Schmookler, Jacob
1966 Invention and Economic
Growth. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Schwartz, Donald, and Eugene
Jacobson
1977 "Organizational communica-
tion network analysis: the
liaison communication role."
Organization Behavior and
Human Performance, 18:
158-174.
Schilling, C, and J. Bernard
1964 "Informal communication
among bio-scientists."
Washington, DC: George
Washington University, Re-
port 16A.
Siegal, Sidney
1956 Non Parametric Statistics.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Smith, Claget G.
1970 "Consultation and decision
processes in a R&D labora-
tory." Administrative Science
Ouarterly, 15: 203-215.
Taylor, Robert, and James Utter-
back
1975 "A longitudinal study of
communication in research."
IEEE Transactions on En-
gineering Management. EM
22: 80-87.
Thompson, James D.
1967 Organizations in Action. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Tushman, Michael L., and David
A. Nadler
"Communication and techni-
cal roles in R&D laboratories:
an information processing
approach." Management Sci-
ence (forthcoming).
Utterback, James
1971 "The process of technological
innovation within the firm."
Academy of Management
Journal, 14: 75-88.
1974 "Innovation in industry and
the diffusion of technology."
Science, 183: 620-626.
Van de Ven, Andrew, Andre Del-
becq, and Richard Koenig
1976 "Determinants of coordina-
tion modes within organiza-
tions." American Sociological
Review, 41: 322-338.
Van de Ven, Andrew, and Richard
Koenig
1976 "A process model for pro-
gram planning and evalua-
tion." Journal of Economics
and Business, 28: 161-170.
Von Hippel, Eric
1976a "The dominant rote of the
user in semiconductor and
electronic subassembly pro-
cess innovation." Working
Paper, Massachusetts Insti-
tute of Technology, Sloan
School of Management,
Paper No. 853-76.
1976b "The dominant role of users
in the instrument innovation
process." Research Policy,
5: 212-239.
Walsh, V., and A. Baker
1972 "Project management and
communication patterns in
industrial research." R&D
Management, 2: 103-109.
Weiss, Robert, and Eugene Jacob-
son
1960 "Structure cf complex organi-
zations." In Jacob Moreno
(ed.), Sociometry Reader:
522-533. New York: Free
Press.
Whitley, Richard, and Penelope
Frost
1971 "The measurement of per-
formance in research."
Human Relations, 24: 161-
178.
1973 "Task type and information
transfer in a government re-
search lab." Human Rela-
tions, 25: 537-550.
Wilensky, Harold
1967 Organizational Intelligence.
New York: Basic Books.
Zaitman, Gerald, Robert Duncan,
and Jonny Holbek
1973 Innovation and Organizations.
New York: Wiley.
605/ASQ
