INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
1 
 
Running Head: INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
 
Invisible Network Drivers of Women’s Success 
 
Inga Carboni 
College of William & Mary 
 
Rob Cross 
Babson College 
 
Aaron Page 
University of Exeter 
 
Andrew Parker 
University of Exeter 
 
Please address all correspondence to Inga Carboni, College of 
William & Mary, Raymond A. Mason School of Business, 101 Ukrop 
Way, Williamsburg, Virginia, 23185 (inga.carboni@mason.wm.edu) 
 
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding 
agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. 
 
Declarations of interest: none 

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
2 
 
Generating gender diversity at senior levels through gender-
inclusive networks 
Gender diversity pays off, particularly at senior levels in 
organizations. Companies with higher rates of gender diversity 
among senior leaders outperform their peers by a 15% margin; 
those with the highest percentages of female board directors 
enjoy as much as a two-thirds higher return on equity, sales, 
and invested capital. The key to occupying a high-level position 
in any organization is building an effective network of positive 
workplace relationships. Decades of research on organizational 
networks have shown that who you know – and who knows you – is 
critical to performance and career success. Full inclusion of 
both genders in informal organizational networks has been shown 
to drive productivity, innovation, and profitability. Full 
inclusion also supports individual well-being and deep 
engagement. Yet many leaders – both men and women – fail to 
develop gender-inclusive networks, potentially disadvantaging 
women since they are less likely to be connected to people in 
senior-level positions, given the overwhelming dominance of men 
in these roles. No wonder that feeling excluded from 
organizational networks has been identified as one of women’s 
top barriers to career success. 
Any organization that is truly trying to promote gender 
inclusion – as opposed to just managing quotas – needs to assess 

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
3 
 
and measure how involved women are in the inner workings of an 
organization. One potent measure of women’s involvement is their 
position in an organization’s informal network of relationships. 
Unlike the formal structure of an organization – usually 
captured in formal organizational charts – the informal 
structure reflects how work really happens. Mapping the 
structure of responses to a question as simple as, Who do you 
turn to for information to get your work done?, can reveal 
patterns of inclusion or exclusion. It can also locate women (or 
men) who may be overwhelmed with demands for their input as well 
as those whose expertise is rarely tapped.  
We’ve long known that men and women create different 
networks. Research stretching back decades establishes that 
women’s networks differ from men’s networks in distinct ways. 
Compared to men, the average woman’s network is smaller and 
narrower in range, especially in terms of connections to senior 
leaders. As a result, women have weaker reach into the center of 
the organization’s power structure. Women are also more likely 
to create two separate networks: one network of people who meet 
their social and emotional needs – composed mostly of other 
women – and a second network of people that they turn to for 
advice on work-related matters, which tends to include a greater 
proportion of men. In contrast, men have one network that they 
turn to for both socio-emotional and work-related needs. This 

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
4 
 
means that they tend to have richer, more complex relationships, 
a key advantage when others are judging their abilities. 
Despite knowing that men and women create different 
networks, we don’t know much about differences between 
successful and less successful women. Clearly, some women are 
rising to the highest levels of their organizations. Given the 
well-documented association between performance on the one hand 
and particular network structures and networking behaviors on 
the other, it is likely that these successful women are building 
networks differently than less successful women. But what are 
they doing differently?  
Specifically, we engaged in this research to focus on one 
question: What network features distinguish more successful 
women? We wanted to understand if and how high-achieving women 
build and use networks differently than other women. We hoped 
that understanding exactly how high-achieving women build their 
networks would give us a blueprint for replicating those 
practices with others.  
One problem with the state of the research on gender in 
networks is that it is often based on findings within one 
organization or among small samples of MBA students. Conclusions 
drawn from one organization are hard to generalize and of 
course,  MBA students are a decidedly unrepresentative group 
because they belong to a relatively short-term organization in 

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
5 
 
which there is no formal hierarchy. We set out to identify  
drivers of inclusion in the average professional network by 
assessing networks within many organizations. We were privileged 
to have access to network data collected from more than 30 
organizations and 16,500 people over 15 years across a range of 
industries. To supplement our quantitative analyses, we also 
conducted 125 interviews with individuals at different levels in 
their organizations and in different positions in networks.  
-- Insert About the Research here -- 
What we learned was a surprise. We had hypothesized that 
the networks of successful women would look more like the 
networks of successful men. But we learned that what was going 
on was not what we expected. In some cases, the networking 
strategies that work for men also worked for women. In other 
cases, however, the strategy playbook looked different for 
women. A deep dive into the data revealed four relational 
elements that distinguished more successful women from less 
successful women: 
 Boundary-spanning 
 Energy 
 Collaborative Efficiency 
 Stickiness 
-- Insert Table 1 here --  
Invisible network drivers of women’s success 

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
6 
 
Boundary-spanning 
High performers have long been distinguished by the ability 
to collaborate across various types of boundaries, such as 
hierarchical level (vertical or horizontal), stakeholder group, 
demographic category (e.g., gender), and geography. In today’s 
fast-paced marketplace, no one person can possibly have all the 
knowledge or experience needed to innovate or even to 
efficiently deliver results. Particularly during early-stage 
problem solving, network range and structural diversity 
distinguish high performers from low performers. Boundary-
spanners have an advantage because they are more likely to 
access diverse perspectives, information, and insights, all of 
which are critical determinants of innovation, high quality 
decision-making, and performance.  Across decades of research, a 
structurally diverse network is a significant predictor of 
performance.  
---Insert Figure 1 here--- 
Not surprisingly, in our research, women who rose to the 
highest levels in their organizations were far more likely to 
have cultivated a network rich with boundary-spanning 
connections than were women who did not make this ascension. In 
fact, women were indistinguishable from men in this regard. 
Everyone at the highest levels in their organizations had 
structurally diverse networks. For women, though, there was a 

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
7 
 
catch. While boundary-spanning was clearly associated with 
successful promotion, it also heightened uncomfortable feelings 
of inauthenticity. Women who fail to address this challenge can 
find themselves falling out of the upwardly mobile category. 
Inauthenticity. Many women, especially at lower levels in 
their organizations, said that they preferred to let 
relationships develop organically. They disliked “bothering” 
people who they didn’t already know and were uncomfortable 
reaching out to others for the explicit purpose of getting work 
done before they had established a personal connection. In a 
way, this isn’t surprising. The urge to connect with similar 
others is hard-wired into our DNA. Commonalities foster shared 
identity, ease of interaction, and liking. Similar others are 
also more likely to be available for relationship building 
because similar people tend to be involved in similar 
activities. In contrast, relationship-building with people 
across boundaries requires purposeful and strategic action.  
Taking purposeful action to build a relationship can also 
be perceived as inherently manipulative because it suggests that 
one person is only building the relationship to get something 
from the other person. For women – who are often socialized to 
place a high priority on mutuality in relationships – 
purposefully developing a relationship to support professional 
goals may go against core values. Women in our research 

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
8 
 
repeatedly indicated that it felt wrong to build relationships 
for purely work-related purposes. “I wouldn’t feel right doing 
that,” they told us. Perhaps this also is why many lower level 
women avoided engaging instrumentally with someone in their 
network until long after a relationship based on purely social 
interaction had been firmly established. They felt the need to 
establish mutuality on a social level before they could begin to 
develop it on a professional level.  
Lastly, some women, especially at lower levels, told us 
that they felt uncomfortable adapting their behavior when 
interacting with people from different “groups.” “That’s not 
really me, you know,” said one woman. Successful boundary-
spanners adjust their self-presentation for different audiences. 
They speak accounting with the accountants, marketing with the 
marketers, and IT with the tech team. They selectively release 
facets of their true self. But, for some women, this felt 
inauthentic. 
Successful women at higher levels in our research 
understood the challenge of inauthenticity and resolutely forced 
themselves to develop relationships with dissimilar others 
(including men!). In truth, boundary-spanning networks are not 
difficult to form, but they do require individuals to be 
proactive and – in some cases – to move out of their comfort 
zone. High-level women had well-developed strategies for 

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
9 
 
reaching out to others. One successful woman regularly mapped 
out her LinkedIn contacts to find individuals that she could ask 
to introduce her to someone in a different stakeholder group. 
Another made a point of working out at her organization’s on-
site gym in order to make “spontaneous” run-ins with different 
people more likely.  
These women were also able to shift relational focus from 
the interpersonal (What can I do to enrich this social 
relationship?) to the instrumental (Who isn’t in my network but 
should be based on expertise needed for this new initiative?). 
They reframed professional relationships in terms of mutuality 
and sought to offer their connections information, insight, and 
professional advice or support. They leveraged their 
relationship-building strengths by harnessing tendencies toward 
honesty, civility, and compassion to form authentic 
relationships across key boundaries. At least four types of 
boundary spanning ties help women—and men!—from a performance 
standpoint.  
Emergence/Creativity Ties. Bridges across two siloed 
thought worlds, such as expertise domains and functions, 
encourage cross-fertilization of ideas. One senior female 
executive succinctly captured this type of boundary-spanning: 
“People tell me about great stuff happening in their areas. 

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
10 
 
Quite often I bring back elements of what they’re doing into our 
organization because I see we could do some of that, too.” 
Depth/Best Practice Ties. Connections between people with 
similar expertise—across geography, company, or functional 
lines—promote depth or efficiency of work. A high-achieving 
woman at a large organization told us that she regularly reached 
out to her counterparts in other areas of the company. “I had 
heard about a tool that they were using in their team and I 
wanted to know more about it. So I cold-called the team leader. 
She was great and it worked out really well. Now we use the tool 
for all of our engagements.”  
Sensemaking/Landscape Ties. Connections with disparate 
people that enable an accurate picture of the stakeholder 
network relative to critical tasks. Senior leaders in our study 
were more likely to proactively build relationships with 
stakeholders in anticipation of future collaborations. One woman 
told us that she attended at least one meeting a month in 
another part of the organization as a way of getting to know 
more about the business and to build relationships with opinion 
leaders and influencers. 
Professional Growth Ties. Relationships with formal or 
informal mentors and sponsors play an important role in the 
career success. Women are typically over-mentored and under-
sponsored. Sponsors are particularly valuable because they are 

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
11 
 
usually skip-level (or higher) managers who promote talent. They 
provide access to jobs, high-visibility projects, and other 
powerful people. Both men and women in our research reported 
that their sponsors initiated the relationship, although 
successful women were more likely than other women to seek out 
opportunities to build visibility and attract sponsors. But men 
and women perceived the benefits of a sponsor differently. Women 
identified their sponsors as senior leaders who persuaded them 
to take on a new position, even when they doubted their own 
capability. Men described their sponsors as senior leaders who 
facilitated access to opportunities by vouching for their 
capabilities. This subtle difference means that sponsors of 
women need to be more proactive than do sponsors of men. This 
may be why male protégées are far more likely to benefit from 
their relationships with male – or female – sponsors than are 
female protégées.  
Energy 
We mapped the networks of high performers in over 30 
organizations and found that having a structurally diverse 
network – one rich in boundary-spanning relationships – is the 
second biggest predictor of high performance. The biggest? It 
turns out that it has nothing to do with reaching across 
boundaries but, instead, has everything to do with creating 
engagement and energy in others. Across the many industries and 

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
12 
 
organizations that we have worked with, we consistently see that 
being an energizer is four times more predictive of performance 
than the most significant network variables.  
Energizers win not because they are happy people – although 
they usually are – but because the way that they engage with 
others results in better opportunities, ideas, talent, and 
resources that flow to them over time. People want to be around 
energizers. But energizers may not be who you think they are. 
Certainly, they aren’t all stereotypical cheerleaders or hyper-
extraverted networkers. In fact, a low-key person is just as 
likely to be an energizer as someone who is considered 
charismatic, and introverts are just as likely to be seen as 
energizing as extraverts. Rather, it is what energizers do that 
sets them apart.  
Energizers create enthusiasm in part because they engage in 
a set of foundational behaviors that build trust. When you 
interact with an energizer, you don’t have to worry that you 
will be judged, dismissed, or devalued. Without fear of 
rejection, it’s easier to share fledgling ideas or novel plans—
to innovate, take risks, and think big. Energizers create trust, 
but trust isn’t all that they create.  
Energizers go a step further and engage in behaviors that 
instill a sense of purpose and energy in the work. However, it 
is not their purpose and energy. Rather, it is the sense of 

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
13 
 
purpose and energy of others. As a product of these investments, 
energizers win because people bring them their newest, boldest 
ideas and their most exciting innovations. Although most top 
energizers in networks are themselves high performers, the real 
magic comes from what they bring out in others. Energizers 
attract other high performers, have lower attrition rates and 
higher engagement scores among the people they work with, and 
increase their own performance over time as their own abilities 
are enriched by what is shared with them.  
When we asked men and women in our study who energized 
them, we made an unexpected discovery. Both men and women were 
more likely to identify women as energizing. Successful women 
were most likely to identify other successful women as 
energizing, especially when the overall percentage of women in 
their organization was low. What surprised us, though, were the 
differences in why men and women identified someone as 
energizing.  
Although men and women listed some of the same reasons, the 
women we interviewed were much more likely to single out caring 
as critical to the energizing relationship. Some women noted 
that their new ideas felt “fragile” and that they could share 
them only in a “safe space.” Others described the energizers in 
their network as providing needed emotional support. In 
contrast, men explained that energizing people either helped 

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
14 
 
them explore new ideas or provided a welcome, critical eye on 
more fleshed-out ideas before they were shared with others. For 
them, the foundational component of the energizing relationship 
was a deep trust in the other’s competence. While trust in the 
other’s competence was also important to women, caring was much 
more foundational to the energizing relationship than it was for 
men. An energizer, then, must communicate both competence and 
caring. High-achieving women know this. “I am intentional about 
how I build credibility with men,” one high-achieving woman told 
us. “I focus on evidence of what I have done to build their 
trust. With women, I focus more on getting to know them. Energy 
gets built in these relationships once trust is there. But I do 
build it differently.” 
 
Women in our study were more likely to be identified as 
energizing by both men and women, suggesting that they may have 
an edge when it comes to being an energizer. However, this edge 
may be double-sided. We know from other research that women in 
the workplace often face a trade-off between being perceived as 
competent and being perceived as warm and likable. This can make 
it difficult for them to be perceived as both caring and 
competent. Backlash occurs when people feel that women should be 
caring and come to resent those women who aren’t. Perhaps this 
explains why our research also found that women were more likely 
to be identified as de-energizing, especially by other women. 

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
15 
 
More so than men, women described their de-energizers as self-
centered complainers who talk too much about themselves and 
rarely listen to the concerns of others. Men – sometimes when 
describing the same individuals – were much more likely to 
describe de-energizers in instrumental terms: as people who 
blocked their ability to get work done.  
 
Successful women walked a fine line. They demonstrated 
their capability, expertise, and knowledge so that people 
learned to trust their competence. They avoided making comments 
that downplayed their abilities or that attributed their success 
to random factors. They conveyed ideas quickly through concrete 
examples and storytelling to shift attention onto what they had 
done and what they could do next (and away from whether they 
could actually do it). At the same time, they signaled caring 
and positivity by communicating warmth through humor, presence, 
and small gestures. One C-Suite woman literally closed all of 
her emails with Warmly rather than Best or Best regards.  
 
Lastly, many successful women leveraged strong listening 
skills to demonstrate caring and to lower barriers to 
information-sharing and creative brainstorming. In fact, the 
women we interviewed felt that it was easier for them to build 
trusting relationships than it was for men. They cited their 
listening skills as their main relationship-building strength 
and one of the reasons that people sought them out. They 

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
16 
 
leveraged these skills to develop a reputation as someone who 
listens more than talks, someone who is other-focused rather 
than self-centered. 
Collaborative Efficiency 
At every level in their organizations, women in our study 
were more likely to be sought by their coworkers for information 
and advice but – at the most junior and most senior levels – 
were less likely than men to seek information and advice from 
others. Networks characterized by unbalanced relationships leave 
individuals susceptible to the performance degradation and 
burnout associated with collaborative overload. 
Our research on collaborative efficiency over the years 
shows that engaging in just a handful of critical behaviors can 
help create more efficient networks, typically returning 18–24% 
of collaborative time. We wanted to know if successful women 
employed different strategies than did men or less successful 
women. To get at this, we surveyed 2,000 women and 1,500 men 
regarding their collaborative efficiency practices.1 Although men 
                                                 
1 The Collaborative Overload Assessment is a diagnostic tool that captures the 
extent to which people manage their collaborative demands. Participants are 
presented with a number of statements about collaborative practices and ask 
to indicate the extent to which they agree or disagree with each statement. 
Statements include, My desire to be influential or recognized for my expertise 

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
17 
 
and women utilized a number of collaborative efficiency 
practices similarly, some practices were particularly potent 
enablers for women while a few others could lead to career 
derailment. We combined these data with insights gleaned from 
interviews to identify three (in)efficiency traps that some 
women fall into and ways that our successful women avoided them. 
 
Feel compelled to collaborate. The need for control and 
concern over identity and reputation drives some individuals to 
engage in excessive collaborative demands. Although men and 
women share many similarities in this regard, the women in our 
survey enjoyed several advantages over men when it came to 
collaboration. Women were more likely than men to credit their 
higher comfort level with ambiguity and managing adaptation as a 
factor in their collaborative and career success. They were also 
far less likely than men to report engaging in excessive 
collaborative work out of a desire to be recognized for their 
expertise or because their need for closure led them to 
communicate in ways that created unnecessary work or stress for 
others (e.g., late-night emails). High-achieving women, in 
particular, avoided the FOMO trap – taking on more work out of 
fear of missing out.  
                                                 
sometimes creates excessive reliance on me and I write streamlined emails and 
encourage efficient norms of email use. 

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
18 
 
Yet, at all levels – and particularly at lower levels – 
women reported a greater sense of obligation to respond to 
requests for their time and energy. Men rarely saw a downside of 
turning down a request for their time, but women reported 
“feeling bad” if they were unable to say Yes and often took 
steps to “soften” the blow by offering to give time in another 
way (e.g., by setting up an informal meeting). In one sense, 
this is smart. Previous research tells us that women who don’t 
respond positively to requests for help are perceived far less 
favorably than are men who don’t. Nevertheless, feeling the 
pressure to respond positively to requests puts women at 
increased risk of collaborative overload.  
More successful women were much more likely than junior 
women to challenge their identity-driven desire to help, even 
though they received as many and often more requests for their 
time and energy. They avoided seeing the word “no” as binary. 
When responding to a request for collaboration, they offered 
transparency into competing demands and discussed alternatives 
to complete what needed to get done. As one woman told us when 
reflecting upon the early stages of her career, “I tended to 
jump into help mode too much. When I began to look at every 
decision to jump in with a quick rubric – Saying Yes Means 
Saying No – whether No was to priorities, personal goals, or 
health, I was able to catch myself more often.” 

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
19 
 
Fail to impose structure. To improve collaborative 
efficiency, both men and women focused on priorities and 
reshaped roles, routines, and interactions. Women were 
especially skilled at employing regularly scheduled meetings to 
address one-off requests. But women were far less likely than 
men to block out time each day for reflective work or to 
periodically review their calendar to remove non-essential 
requests, decisions, or meetings. By not imposing structure on 
their schedule, women give themselves fewer opportunities to 
engage in higher-level thinking which hinders their ability to 
innovate, strategize, and make high-level decisions.  
Failing to impose structure also leaves some women even 
more susceptible to performance degradation from switching 
costs—moving from one cognitive task to another. This is a 
subtle but very important way that collaborative overload hurts 
performance. Cognitive psychologists have shown that even the 
simple act of checking a text takes 64 seconds’ recovery to get 
back on track. Successful women scheduled regular time for 
reflective thinking. The majority preferred to engage in 
reflective work early. As one senior executive told us, “Most 
people come in around 9 but I like to get in my office by 7:30. 
That gives me time to plan my day and catch up on how my 
accounts are doing without being pinged by a dozen IMs. By the 
time everyone else shows up, I’m ready to chit-chat or stomp out 

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
20 
 
fires or whatever else needs to be done.” Several women told us 
that they used their reflective time to identify potential 
boundary-spanning ties by thinking about core objectives or 
projects for the coming six months and identifying the project-
relevant categories of people (or roles) with whom to connect.  
Fail to create pull. Compared to men, women were far less 
likely to draw people toward collaborative work. Pulling people 
toward collaboration means envisioning joint success, diffusing 
ownership, generating a sense of purpose/energy around an 
outcome. Pulling encourages others to seek out opportunities to 
collaborate. When this is done well, colleagues come to 
collaborative work prepared and willing to engage. In contrast, 
pushing is much less efficient. People who push others toward 
collaborative work use persuasion or coercion. Pushing requires 
time, effort, and some degree of skill. Even so, it often 
results in mere compliance rather than true collaboration. 
Successful women created pull rather than push to bring 
people to the table. They clearly articulated a vision and 
generated enthusiasm to motivate collaboration, instead of 
hoping that the work alone would provide a compelling reason to 
collaborate. “I spend a lot of time building rapport and 
community in my teams,” said one leader of top-performing teams. 
“That way, when someone needs something done, they all jump to 
help each other out.” People who create pull seed relationships 

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
21 
 
long before they are needed by looking for opportunities to give 
first; giving sparks a cycle of gratitude and reciprocated 
giving that makes collaboration much more likely downstream. 
Successful individuals also assess the interests and workstyles 
of those who will or could support their work. “I always make a 
point of sending a quick Welcome email whenever a new director 
comes on board. I write maybe three sentences: welcome, here’s 
who I am, look forward to meeting. I don’t do it to kiss up but 
just so that when I meet them later, they’ll remember the 
initial email. And so we’ve already started a relationship.”   
Part of the reason that some women failed to create pull is 
that they were also less likely to run streamlined meetings and 
more likely to allow inefficient norms of use with 
communication. Inefficient meetings and technology usage 
discourage deep collaboration. Successful women adopted 
efficient meeting practices. They distributed materials 
beforehand, focused their meetings on desired outcomes, set – 
and adhered to – efficient agendas and agile practices, included 
only people who need to be involved, and posted minutes after 
meetings. Successful women also proactively set norms around 
technology usage for themselves and their teams that remove 
barriers to collaboration (e.g., send after-hours emails on 
delay). One senior executive told us that she instructed all her 
direct reports to summarize all email requests in the first 

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
22 
 
three sentences and to pick up the phone if the request was more 
complicated.   
Creating efficiencies in collaboration has another bonus: 
it opens up space for other, more strategic activities. In 
addition to creating more time for reflection, it also creates 
time to engage in energizing conversations, which often occur 
under more impromptu circumstances – a head popped into an 
office, an IM asking for a chat, or bumping into someone in the 
hall. It also opens up opportunities to tap broad networks early 
in a project’s history, a practice linked to performance 
success. As one successful women put it, “It’s so easy to fall 
into the habit of just stomping out fires and getting the job 
done. I have learned the hard way that I can’t just focus on 
what’s happening today. I also have to figure out what’s going 
to happen tomorrow.”   
Stickiness 
Women in our study demonstrated a greater stickiness in 
their relationships over time. When we assessed networks at two 
points in time, we found that women were much more likely than 
men to form and maintain same-sex relationships. Further, 
women’s relationships – unlike men’s relationships – grew 
stronger and more mutual over time. In contrast, men were more 
likely to build relationships with either gender, adapting their 
networks instrumentally to meet shifting work demands.  

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
23 
 
Underlying this tendency is a fundamental difference in how 
women and men develop their professional networks. Women tend to 
perceive relationships as important for their own sake. The 
women we interviewed, for example, were much more likely than 
men to report exchanging personal, authentic, and sometimes 
intimate information with select work colleagues, often bonding 
over family or children. Most men took a more instrumental 
approach to relationship building. When they reported 
socializing with their work colleagues, men were much more 
likely to describe their interaction as “good for team building” 
or as a necessary aspect of good work relations. For men, 
relationships are the backdrop through which work is 
accomplished.  
These different ways of approaching work relationships have 
significant implications. On one level, greater relational 
stickiness may deepen collaborative demands as women feel ever 
more obligated to respond to demands for their time or 
attention. Too, women can get derailed if they focus too much on 
the social side of professional relationships without searching 
for ways that relationships can also support professional 
growth. But the biggest career derailer caused by stickiness is 
the failure to maintain network churn. 
Fail to maintain network churn. Forging new relationships 
and letting others go dormant is a critical component of network 

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
24 
 
effectiveness. Women get trapped in outdated networks when they 
fail to reach out to new stakeholders or seek out new learning 
partners. Worse, they may be creating tightly knit echo 
chambers, blocking out new ideas and perspectives.  
In work contexts characterized by a greater velocity of 
change or where project teams form and disperse rapidly, 
relational stickiness is even more problematic. People who do 
not adapt their networks to match the new contexts or the pace 
of change in a given context are likely to fall behind those who 
do adapt their networks more fluidly. Network adaptability is 
critical during times of transition. Our research shows that 
people need to build diverse networks, engage others, and refine 
their networks to successfully transition to new roles and 
positions. Those who don’t, don’t make it.  
 
Successful women surround themselves with a few trusted 
advisors and truth tellers – people who offer ideas based on a 
long personal history. They lean on established relationships 
for honest feedback and personal support during inevitable 
setbacks and uncertainties. But they don’t let their networks 
stagnate. Instead, they also build relationships with a steady 
and constantly evolving stream of people who bring expertise and 
perspectives that align with their current constellation of work 
activities. They do this by identifying skill gaps created by 
new projects or shifting role requirements and then initiating 

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
25 
 
new connections that help them close those gaps by developing, 
for example, agility on market understanding, technical 
expertise, political acumen, and cultural awareness. These 
successful women know that it is highly unlikely that all the 
people who should be part of a professional network in one year 
are the same people who should be there even a few years later.  
In stark contrast to their internal relationships, a core 
strength for women’s networks appears consistently to be their 
external connections. Women are much more likely than men to 
maintain relationships with co-workers from previous positions 
and jobs, through one-on-one phone calls and get-togethers, or 
even just through social media. Successful women leveraged the 
greater strength and external reach of their networks without 
getting derailed by collaborative demands and sticky lower-level 
internal relationships.  
Strong external networks offer natural boundary-spanning 
opportunities. They provide access to new ideas, job 
opportunities, and sales possibilities. They can also enhance 
visibility and create influence. A female executive at a 
consulting company told us, “I make sure to stay in touch with 
people from my previous company and the one before through 
dinners or coffee. It is amazing the number of times those 
relationships have led to opportunities.”  

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
26 
 
Organizations have begun to tap the power of women’s 
external networks by instituting cross-organizational mentoring 
programs and alumni networks, and providing explicit 
opportunities for women to connect to their community through 
nonprofit organizations or targeted conferences. Savvy women 
build these connections whether or not they work in sponsoring 
organizations. By taking part in events hosted by other 
companies – and by inviting members of their external network to 
participate in their own companies’ events – successful women 
build their organizations’ expertise and brand along with their 
own.  
Building gender diverse networks 
Gender diversity can and does work, but creating gender-
inclusive networks can be challenging. If the ultimate goal of 
gender diversity efforts is to build organizations in which 
employees work together and evolve as professionals without 
regard to gender, then leaders must focus on the relationships 
themselves. When it comes to job and career outcomes, networks 
and networking do matter. They matter for women for the same 
reasons that they matter for men. Creating a sustainable, 
strategic, and effective network is just as important for a 
woman as it is for a man. But what our research has shown is 
that the playbook and strategies for cultivating an effective 
network looks different. 

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
27 
 
Our research suggests that successful women build networks 
of professional relationships characterized by four network 
drivers. One, they overcome challenges posed by feelings of 
inauthenticity to develop critical boundary-spanning 
relationships. Two, they create efficiencies in the way they 
work to open up opportunities for balanced relationships without 
collaborative overload. Three, they create energizing 
relationships by leveraging relational strengths such as 
listening skills. Four, they overcome internal stickiness by 
continually refreshing their networks—and they leverage their 
stronger external connections to expose themselves to new ideas, 
opportunities, and perspectives. By creating opportunities for 
men and women to work together, and by supporting the invisible 
network drivers of women’s success, organizations and 
individuals can dramatically reshape their networks.  
 
 
 

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
28 
 
Selected Bibliography 
A well-developed literature based on several decades of 
research has firmly established the link between characteristics 
of networks and performance outcomes. For overviews of this 
research see: Burt, R. (2005). Brokerage and Closure: An 
introduction to social capital. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 
and Kilduff, M., & Brass, D. J. (2010) Organizational social 
network research: core ideas and key debates. Academy of 
Management Annals, 4(1), 317–357. This literature has 
particularly stressed the career and performance implications of 
boundary-spanning positions (see, for example, Burt, above), 
energy (see Owens, B. P., Baker, W. E., Sumpter, D. M., & 
Cameron, K. S. (2016). Relational energy at work: Implications 
for job engagement and job performance. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 101(1), 35-49), collaborative efficiency (see Cross, 
R., Rebele, R., & Grant, A. (2016). Collaborative overload. 
Harvard Business Review, 94(1), 74–79), and stickiness (see 
Uzzi, B. (1996). The sources and consequences of embeddedness 
for the economic performance of organizations: The network 
effect. American Sociological Review, 61(4), 674-698).   
In contrast to the above research, relatively little has 
looked at gender differences in network characteristics and 
career or performance outcomes. For some examples of work in 
this area, see Brands, R. A., & Mehra, A. (2019). Gender, 

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
29 
 
brokerage, and performance: a construal approach. Academy of 
Management Journal, 62(1), 196–219; Forret, M. L. & Dougherty, 
T.W.  (2004). Networking behaviors and career outcomes: 
differences for men and women? Journal of Organizational 
Behavior, 25, 419-437; Lutter, M. (2015). Do women suffer from 
network closure? the moderating effect of social capital on 
gender inequality in a project-based labor market, 1929 to 
2010. American Sociological Review, 80(2), 329–358; and 
McDonald, S. (2011). What’s in the “old boys” network? Accessing 
social capital in gendered and racialized networks. Social 
Networks, 33, 317-330. 
 
 
 

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
30 
 
Insert: About the Research 
Organizational Network Analysis (ONA) is grounded in the 
idea that formal structures in organizations do not reflect the 
actual patterns of connection in an organization. Our data 
captured the networks of more than 16,500 individuals in 31 
different companies via web-based surveys. To ensure that we 
accurately represented each organization’s network, we collected 
responses from at least 80% of organizational members in every 
organization. Each individual was asked to name the people in 
their organization to whom they turned for “important work-
related information” and about whom they said that interactions 
with this person left them “feeling more energized, with a sense 
of enthusiasm and/or that your work really matters.” Below is a 
graphic depiction of one of the organizational networks, with 
circles indicating people, lines indicating relationships, and 
arrows indicating the direction of the relationship (i.e., who 
nominated whom). 
 
 

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
31 
 
 
These data were organized into matrices and analyzed 
statistically. To complement our quantitative findings, we also 
interviewed 125 individuals in these organizations. These semi-
structured hour-long interviews included open-ended questions 
such as,  
I want you to think about the people who get you energized 
and excited about new ideas and directions. These are the 
people you enjoy bouncing around ideas with. You come away 
from conversations with this person jazzed and motivated. 
They may be people in your organization or outside of it. 
Tell me about some of them. What did they do or say that 
got you energized? What do you say or do that leaves other 
people energized?  
Transcripts were analyzed to identify themes, patterns, and 
examples. 
 
  
 
 
 

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
32 
 
Table 1. Invisible network drivers of women’s success 
Network 
Driver 
Career  
enabler 
Career derailer 
for women 
Suggested 
Strategies 
Boundary-
spanning  
 Access 
diverse 
perspectives, 
information, 
and insights 
 Feelings of 
inauthenticity 
 Move out of 
comfort zone 
 Build 4 types 
of ties 
Energize 
 Attract 
talent and 
high-
performers 
 
 May face 
backlash if 
not appearing 
both caring 
and competent 
 Harness 
relationship-
building 
strengths, 
such as 
listening 
 Proactively 
demonstrate 
competence 
 Demonstrate 
warmth 
Collaborative 
efficiency 
 Optimize time 
spent on 
collaboration 
 Feel 
compelled to 
collaborate 
 Reduce 
tendency to 
say Yes to 
all requests 

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
33 
 
 Fail to 
impose 
structure 
 Fail to 
create pull 
for time or 
effort 
 Schedule 
reflective 
time 
 Adopt meeting 
and 
technology 
usage 
efficiency 
practices 
Stickiness 
 Build strong 
and enduring 
connections 
 Fail to 
maintain 
network churn 
 Maintain a 
core group of 
trusted 
advisors 
 Identify 
skill gaps 
and reach out 
to others to 
close gaps 
 Leverage 
strong 

INVISIBLE NETWORK DRIVERS OF WOMEN’S SUCCESS 
34 
 
external 
connections 
 
Figure 1. Structurally diverse versus closed network 
 
Structurally Diverse 
 
 
 
Closed Network 
Network 
 
 
