Previous research has focused on purchasing man-
agers’ experience with role stressors and the negative
effect of stress on job attitudes and perf o rmance. 
The potential benefits of having multiple responsibil-
ities and a diverse role set have been overlooked. This
study explored the relationship
between purchasing managers’
involvement in multiple boundary
spanning roles and their perceptions of positive
social outcomes related to work. The relationship 
of these social benefits to job satisfaction was also
evaluated. The relationships were analyzed using
s t ructural equation modeling. The results indicated
positive relationships between each variable in the
model. The implications for recruitment, superv i s i o n ,
and job design are discussed.
INTRODUCTION
This study focuses on the potential benefits that pur-
chasing managers can gain from their involvement in
multiple job roles. Specifically, roles associated with
external boundary spanning activities were assessed.
This approach presents a contrast to previous studies
that focused on the negative outcomes associated with
the diverse responsibilities of and conflicting demands
on purchasing managers (Michaels, Kumar, and Samu
1995). The results suggest that the characteristics of pur-
chasing managers’ jobs can contribute to their personal
enrichment and job satisfaction. Suggestions are provided
for designing and managing purchasing positions to maxi-
mize these outcomes.
PURCHASING MANAGERS’ BOUNDARY
SPANNING ROLES
The purchasing manager’s position is a classic example
of organizational boundary spanning. Purchasing man-
agers are responsible for maintaining relationships with
a variety of suppliers and must also respond to the needs
of multiple constituents within their organizations. The
definition of boundary spanning in this study focuses
exclusively on purchasing managers’ externally-oriented
b o u n d a ry spanning activities.
Six boundary spanning roles relevant to the purc h a s i n g
managers’ position have been identified (Adams 1980;
Aldrich 1979; Alrich and Herker 1977; Ginter, Duncan,
Richardson, and Swayne 1991; Jemison 1984; Katz and
Kahn 1978; Miles 1976; Miles 1980; Oliver 1993; Renz
1981; Rosen and Adams 1974):
•
Gathering, Filtering, and Transmitting (Gate-
keeping): This set of three roles involves man-
aging information relevant to the purchasing
function. For example, a purchasing manager
seeking to acquire a new type of material for 
the organization may gather information from
several potential supplies. Next, the purchasing
manager will analyze the information collected
and filter out those bids that do not fit the orga-
nization’s material needs or cost goals. Finally,
the purchasing manager will transmit pertinent
3 8
The Journal of Supply Chain Management | Spring 1999
The Benefits of Multiple Boundary
Spanning Roles in Purc h a s i n g
George S. Hallenbeck, Jr.
is a Management Consultant with Gehlhausen Ruda and Associates.
He earned his Ph.D. degree from Colorado State University. Dr.
H a l l e n b e c k ’s re s e a rch interests include boundary-spanning positions in
organizations, leadership development, and diagnosing organizational
c u l t u re s .
Jacob E. Hautaluoma 
is Professor of Psychology at Colorado State University. He earned his
Ph.D. degree from the University of Colorado, Boulder. Dr.
H a u t a l u o m a ’s re s e a rch interests include organizational psychology,
conflict management, and international development.
Scott C. Bates
is a Doctoral Candidate at Colorado State University. He earned his
M.S. degree from We s t e rn Washington University. Mr. Bates’ curre n t
re s e a rch interests include statistical and methodological issues in
social science, social problems, and social psychology.
The Journal of Supply Chain
Management: A Global
Review of Purchasing 
and Supply Copyright 
© May 1999, by the National
Association of Purchasing
Management, Inc
A U T H O R S
SUMMARY

3 9
The Journal of Supply Chain Management | Spring 1999
The Benefits of Multiple Boundary Spanning Roles in Purc h a s i n g
information to internal constituents. The trans-
mitting role further involves gatekeeping, the
process of deciding what information to pass
on, to whom, and at what time.
•
Transacting: The transacting role addresses the
core of the purchasing function and includes,
for example, negotiating with supplies to acquire
materials and services for the organization.
•
Being Proactive: The proactive role complements
the transacting role and involves representing 
the organization to suppliers and establishing and
maintaining supplier relationships.
•
Protecting: This role involves protecting the
organization’s interests and guarding proprietary
information. Forecasting of market conditions is
an activity related to this role.
In addition to assessing involvement in each of the
above boundary spanning roles, this study measured 
the intensity of boundary spanning. Specifically, respon-
dents were asked how many hours they were involved
in the different boundary spanning roles during a typical
week and how many persons or groups outside the
organization they had contact with on a frequent basis.
POTENTIAL SOCIAL BENEFITS
Social scientists have theorized why individuals faced
with multiple, complex job roles choose to enter and
remain in such positions. They have been interested 
in benefits, other than pay, that attract people to these
jobs. The research suggests that the more roles an indi-
vidual assumes, the more social benefits they are able 
to accumulate as a result of the variety and unique
aspects associated with different role responsibilities
(Sieber 1974). Attaining these social benefits should 
positively influence job satisfaction.
Six classes of social benefits, that may accrue as a
result of taking on multiple role responsibilities, have
been identified (Sieber 1974):
•
Role privileges: Each boundary spanning role
has its own set of distinct privileges.
•
Status security: Difficulty encountered with
performing one role can be compensated for 
by engaging and excelling in an alternate role.
•
Access to social perquisites: These include 
having high “visibility” in the organization,
receiving recognition for work accomplishments,
and having meetings at fine restaurants.
•
Expert power: Being sought out by others as a
source of specialized job information.
•
Personality enrichment: Having situations on
a job that enrich one’s personal experience.
•
Ego gratification: Having others see one’s job
as desirable and attractive.
The respondents were asked about the degree to which
they had obtained these different benefits, as well as how
strongly they desired each of them.
RESEARCH HYPOTHESES
The following hypotheses were proposed:
Hypothesis 1: The number of boundary spanning
roles engaged in by a purchasing manager will be 
positively related to the attainment of social benefits.
Hypothesis 2: The intensity of boundary spanning
role involvement will be positively related to the attain-
ment of social benefits.
Hypothesis 3: The attainment of social benefits will
be positively related to job satisfaction.
A previous study involving retail purchasing managers
provides preliminary evidence that the overall level of
involvement in boundary spanning (similar to the mea-
sure of intensity used in this study) is positively related
to social benefits (Keaveney 1988). The results also indi-
cate that social benefits are positively related to job sat-
isfaction. The current study sought to evaluate a similar
set of relationships with a more explicit definition of
different boundary spanning roles and expanded mea-
surement of the social benefits construct. Relationships
between boundary spanning roles and social benefits
were also analyzed.
THE STUDY
Sample Characteristics
Each of the 529 members of NAPM’s Tr a n s p o r t a t i o n
Group was sent a questionnaire along with a stamped
return envelope. A total of 134 completed question-
naires were returned for a response rate of 25.3 perc e n t .
Job title classifications were adapted from a previous
study (Carter and Narasimhan 1994). The majority of
respondents indicated that they were purchasing man-
agers or senior purchasing officers. The average respon-
dent had been with his or her organization for about 10
years. Specific demographics of the sample are shown in
Table I.
Measures
The questionnaire took approximately 15 minutes to
complete. It included the following measures:
B o u n d a ry spanning roles. A 23-item scale describing
the activities associated with each boundary spanning
role was developed. Respondents were asked to indicate
on a 5-point scale their involvement in each of the role
activities (1 = Almost never; 5 = Almost always). The
scale had a coefficient alpha reliability of 0.91. A coeffi-
cient alpha reliability provides an indicator of the
degree to which a measurement scale is internally 
The data suggest that the same set of roles that con-
tribute to stressful outcomes, can also lead to personal
gains that positively influence job satisfaction.

4 0
The Journal of Supply Chain Management | Spring 1999
The Benefits of Multiple Boundary Spanning Roles in Purc h a s i n g
consistent. Coefficient alpha reliabilities of 0.70 or
greater are considered to be indicative of a scale that 
has items that agree with each other in meaning.
B o u n d a ry spanning intensity. Respondents were
asked to indicate the number of hours they engaged 
in boundary spanning roles during a typical week and
how many individuals or groups outside the organiza-
tion they had boundary spanning contact with on a 
frequent basis.
Social benefits. Respondents were presented with 
two, 10-item scales describing the different categories of
social benefits. These scales were revisions of an existing
scale (Keaveney 1988). On one scale, respondents indi-
cated the degree to which they found each statement
describing the benefits to be a desirable outcome (Desired
scale), and on the other scale they indicated the degree
to which each statement was true for their present job
(Obtained scale). Each scale used a 5-point rating system
(1 = Not at all; 5 = Definitely). The coefficient alpha reli-
abilities were 0.67 for the Desired scale and 0.73 for the
Obtained scale.
Job satisfaction. An existing measure of general job
satisfaction was converted to a 4-item, 5-point rating
scale (1 = Strongly disagree; 5 = Strongly agree) (Brayfield
and Rothe 1951). The revised measure had a coefficient
alpha reliability of 0.87 for this sample.
Analyses
The hypothesized relationships were analyzed with 
a structural equation model using the EQS program
(Bentler 1993). This type of analysis procedure tests 
the “fit” of a hypothesized set of relationships with the
resulting data. Individual boundary spanning role-social
benefit relationships were assessed using correlations.
PURCHASING MANAGERS’ BOUNDARY
SPANNING ROLE CHARACTERISTICS, SOCIAL
BENEFITS, AND JOB SATISFACTION
Mean values for each of the variables are reported in
Table II. The results indicate moderate to high levels of
involvement in each of the specific boundary spanning
roles, and in boundary spanning roles overall. Not sur-
p r i s i n g l y, the transacting role has the highest mean, 
followed closely by the proactive role. The intensity of
b o u n d a ry spanning is also relatively high. Respondents
have boundary spanning contact with close to two
dozen individuals or groups on a frequent basis and
spend nearly 40 percent of their time on the job engaged
in boundary spanning. (Note: An average of 19.23 hours
per week was spent engaged in boundary spanning.
Responses to a separate question indicated that individ-
uals in the study worked an average of 49.86 total hours
per week.)
The results show a moderate level of attained social
benefits. Expert power, however, was obtained at a fairly
high level. Each of the social benefits was desired at a
slightly higher level than it was obtained, indicating
some modest gaps in what respondents desired and
what they actually received. Role privileges are the most
desired social benefit and show the largest discrepancy
from obtained levels. The overall job satisfaction of the
respondents is moderately high.
The data demonstrated an adequate fit with the pro-
posed structural model. The results for this original model,
showing the strengths of the relationships between each
variable, are displayed in Figure 1. Some slight changes
in the model were necessary to obtain an optimal fit and
are briefly explained below. Results for the final model
are shown in Figure 2.
Hypotheses 1 and 3 were supported, but Hypothesis 
2 was not. The frequency of involvement in different
b o u n d a ry spanning roles is associated with attainment
of social benefits (Hypothesis 1). Social benefits have a
strong positive relationship to job satisfaction (Hypothesis
3). However, when the initial model of hypothesized
relationships was tested, the results showed a weak 
relationship between boundary spanning intensity 
and social benefits (Hypothesis 2).
Structural equation modeling procedures allow for
removing some of the originally specified paths linking
variables and replacing them with alternate paths in
order to improve the model’s fit. Such changes, 
h o w e v e r, cannot be made arbitrarily and must make
theoretical sense in terms of how the variables in the
model relate to each other. The removal of the path in
the original model from boundary spanning intensity 
to social benefits, and its replacement with a path from
b o u n d a ry spanning role frequency to boundary span-
ning intensity, led to a substantial improvement in
model fit. This change is depicted in Figure 2. It appears
that boundary spanning intensity is an indicator of
b o u n d a ry spanning role frequency. That is, the more
roles a purchasing manager engages in, the more time 
is required to perform them. The number of persons the
p u rchasing manager interacts with also increases with
each additional role.
Specific Boundary Spanning Role-Social Benefit
Relationships
Correlational matrices of the relationships of specific
b o u n d a ry spanning roles to the obtained and desired
social benefits are presented in Tables III and IV, respec-
t i v e l y. The gathering, proactive, and protecting roles
have the most consistent significant correlations with
individual social benefits. The social benefits most 
frequently correlated with involvement in different 
roles are role privileges, access to social perquisites, and
expert power. A similar, but generally weaker, set of rela-
tionships is seen between boundary spanning roles and
desired social benefits.
The transacting role, a major function of purc h a s i n g
managers’ jobs, is distinguished by only a single s i g n i f i-
cant correlation with any of the obtained or desired
social benefits. It may be that successfully negotiating

4 1
The Journal of Supply Chain Management | Spring 1999
The Benefits of Multiple Boundary Spanning Roles in Purc h a s i n g
contracts with suppliers that are cost effective and meet
the organization’s needs is a routine expectation for all
p u rchasing professionals. Negotiating is what purc h a s i n g
managers are hired to do and is something that they
should perform satisfactorily without expecting signifi-
cant rewards (other than pay) from the organization.
It is also interesting that the proactive role, which is
partner to many of the activities in the transacting role,
has a much stronger pattern of relationships with the
various benefits. A possible explanation for this relation-
ship is that effective representation and strong relation-
ship building skills have long-term, value-added benefits
for the purchasing function and are thus a likely sourc e
of benefits and rewards. Suppliers who are treated well
and dealt with honestly will likely want to continue the
relationship with the buying organization.
CONCLUSIONS, LIMITATIONS, AND 
IMPLICATIONS
This study took a closer look at the boundary spanning
roles performed by purchasing managers. The data sug-
gest that the same set of roles that contribute to stressful
outcomes, can also lead to personal gains that positively
influence job satisfaction. Additionally, the results pro-
vided a view into the patterns of relationships between
specific boundary spanning roles and social benefits.
The results should generalize to purchasing managers
in other manufacturing industries. Two factors, however,
limit the scope of conclusions that can be drawn from
this study. First, a specific definition of boundary span-
ning was used and only boundary spanning behaviors
directed at individuals outside the organization were
examined. Therefore, the internal counterparts to each
of these roles (e.g., interactions with the production,
finance, and transportation departments) were not
assessed. Previous research suggests that higher levels 
of role conflict and ambiguity are associated with these
internal boundary spanning roles and may overshadow
the social benefits that could be gained from them
(Michaels, Kumar, and Samu 1995). Second, boundary
spanning roles represent only a subset of the many roles
for which a purchasing manager is responsible. The con-
tributions of general supervision, training and develop-
ment, financial management, and other roles to social
benefits and job satisfaction were not assessed.
Implications for Purchasing Professionals
The results have implications for increasing purc h a s i n g
professionals’ job-related social benefits and improving
their job satisfaction by expanding their involvement in
different types of boundary spanning roles. The findings
suggest that adding new roles to purchasing jobs could
lead to job-related benefits and greater job satisfaction.
New roles should be appropriate for the position, and
should fit the employees’ qualifications to perform them.
F o r t u n a t e l y, each of the boundary spanning roles that
were examined have some relationship to purc h a s i n g
SAMPLE DEMOGRAPHICS — HIERARCHICAL 
LEVEL AND ORGANIZATIONAL TENURE
Table I
Hierarchical Level
N
Vice President or Director of Purchasing
18
Purchasing Manager, Senior Purchasing Officer, or Senior Buyer
81
Buyer, Purchasing Agent, or Associate Buyer
24
Other
11
Mean
Standard Deviation
Organizational Tenure (years)
9.95
8.85
MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS OF BOUNDARY SPA N N I N G ,
SOCIAL BENEFITS, AND JOB SAT I S FACTION VA R I A B L E S
Table II
Standard 
Scale/Subscale
Mean
Deviation
Boundary Spanning Roles a
3.45
0.60
Gathering
3.43
0.74
Filtering
2.71
0.94
Transmitting
3.72
0.83
Transacting
4.05
1.19
Proactive
3.92
0.73
Protecting
3.15
0.80
Boundary Spanning Roles Average b
4.82
1.44
Boundary Spanning Hours c
19.23
11.78
Boundary Spanning Contacts c
23.84
23.95
Desired Social Benefits d
3.57
0.54
Role Privileges
4.13
0.85
Status Security
3.34
0.97
Access to Perquisites
3.43
0.67
Expert Power
3.87
0.80
Personality Enrichment
3.77
0.88
Ego Gratification
3.43
1.01
Obtained Social Benefits
3.09
0.60
Role Privileges
3.43
0.96
Status Security
2.99
1.09
Access to Perquisites
2.89
0.71
Expert Power
3.72
0.90
Personality Enrichment
3.33
0.96
Ego Gratification
2.96
1.15
Job Satisfaction e
3.87
0.76
aResponses on a sale of 1 (= almost never) to 5 (= almost always)
b Responses on a scale of 0 to 6
cResponses on a scale of 0 to 99
d Responses on a scale of 1 (= not at all) to 5 (= definitely)
e Responses on a scale of 1 (= strongly disagree) to 5 (=strongly agree)

4 2
The Journal of Supply Chain Management | Spring 1999
The Benefits of Multiple Boundary Spanning Roles in Purc h a s i n g
and are performed with at least a moderate frequency
by most purchasing professionals. Caution should be
e x e rcised when adding roles that are outside the boundary
spanning function or are less frequently associated with
p u rchasing (e.g., new product evaluation) (Fearon 1989).
A d d i t i o n a l l y, employees must be able to accommodate
the added responsibilities within their existing jobs. As
was discussed earlier, the intensity of boundary span-
ning (i.e., the hours worked, the number of contacts
maintained) increases with the number of boundary
spanning roles performed.
If the purchasing staff is already heavily involved in
each of the boundary spanning roles previously dis-
cussed, an additional boundary spanning function might
be considered. Respondents were asked to identify a n y
b o u n d a ry spanning roles that were not addressed in the
s u rv e y. Some respondents suggested a role called p ro f e s-
sional service. This role includes activities associated with
p u rchasing professionals providing expert knowledge to
outside groups. Examples include making presentations
to local business groups, serving on committees in a
professional association, and conducting training semi-
nars. This role would be potentially beneficial to those
employees with a strong interest in professional and
educational activities. Additional research is needed to
verify the significance of this role.
Another positive outcome of having an expanded variety
of boundary spanning roles may be an increase in employee
skills. The set of boundary spanning roles for a p a r t i c u l a r
position could be associated with a distinct family of work
competencies necessary for effective job performance. The
o r g a n i z a t i o n ’s human resource managers could identify
the individual knowledge, skills, abilities, and other char-
acteristics that are involved in performing different types
of roles and then establish appropriate training (Shankster-
C a w l e y, Cawley, and Lee 1996).
The positive correlations between specific boundary
spanning roles, obtained social benefits, and desired
social benefits may create a platform for recruitment.
That is, benefits whose attainment was correlated with
involvement in a particular role, and that were also
highly desired by individuals who perform the role,
may be used to attract individuals to a position which
incorporates this role. The incentive would be especially
attractive if a frequently performed role is associated
with a highly desired benefit. Two such relationships
appear promising. Gathering information is strongly
associated with attainment of and a desire for expert
power and the proactive role is linked with attaining
and desiring personality enrichment.
F i n a l l y, granting privileges related to the transmitting
role may be an effective means for managers to provide
incentives. The gatekeeping activities associated with
the transmitting role (i.e., deciding what information to
pass on to whom at what time) are privileges in and of
themselves. Supervisors can curtail these privileges by
requiring subordinates to report specific information 
to them at certain times. Relaxing the restrictions on
reporting could be used as an incentive for the employee
to enhance his or her performance.
REFERENCES
Adams, J.S., “Interorganizational Processes and Organization
B o u n d a ry Activity,” in R e s e a rch in Organization Behavior, vol. 2, B.
Staw and L.L. Cummings (eds.), (Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1980).
Aldrich, H.E. and D. Herker, “Boundary Spanning Roles and
Organizational Structure,” Academy of Management Review,
vol. 2 (1997), pp. 217-230.
Aldrich, H.E., Organizations and Environments (Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1970).
Bentler, P.M., EQS Structural Equations Program Manual (Los
Angeles, CA: BMDP Statistical Software, 1993).
Brayfield, A.H. and H.F. Rothe, “An Index of Job Satisfaction,”
Journal of Applied Psychology, vol. 35 (1951), pp. 307-311.
Carter, J.R. and R. Narasimhan, “The Role of Purchasing and
Materials Management in Total Quality Management and
Customer Satisfaction,” International Journal of Purchasing and
Materials Management, vol. 30, no. 3 (1994), pp. 2-13.
ORIGINAL MODEL OF RELATIONSHIPS
Figure 1
Role Frequency
Intensity
Social Benefits
Job Satisfaction
0.67
0.50
–0.02
FINAL MODEL OF RELATIONSHIPS
Figure 2
Role Frequency
Intensity
Social Benefits
Job Satisfaction
0.67
0.49
0.65

4 3
The Journal of Supply Chain Management | Spring 1999
The Benefits of Multiple Boundary Spanning Roles in Purc h a s i n g
Fearon, H.E., “Organizational Relationships in Purchasing,”
International Journal of Purchasing and Materials Management,
vol. 24, no. 4 (1989), pp. 2-13.
Ginter, P.M., W.J. Duncan, W.D. Richardson, L.E. Swayne,
“Analyzing the Health Care Environment: ‘You Can’t Hit
What You Can’t See’,” Health Care Management Review, vol.
16, no. 4 (1991), pp. 35-48.
Jemison, D.B., “The Importance of Boundary Spanning Roles
in Strategic Decision-Making,” Journal of Management, vol. 21,
no. 2 (1984), pp. 131-152.
Katz, D. and R.L. Kahn, The Social Psychology of Organizations,
second edition (New York: Wiley, 1978).
K e a v e n e y, S.M., The Effects of Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivational
Orientations in a Boundary Spanning Model of Retail Buyers
(unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Colorado,
1 9 8 8 ) .
Michaels, R.E., A. Kumar, and S. Samu, “Activity Specific Role
Stress in Purchasing,” International Journal of Purchasing and
Materials Management, vol. 31, no. 1 (1995), pp.11-19.
Miles, R.H., “Role Requirements as Sources of Organization
Stress,” Journal of Applied Psychology, vol. 61 (1976), 
pp. 172-179.
Miles, R.H., Macro Organizational Behavior (Santa Monica, CA:
Goodyear, 1980).
O l i v e r, C., “Organizational Boundaries: Definitions, Functions,
and Properties,” Canadian Journal of Administrative Science, 
vol. 10, no. 1 (1993), pp. 1-17.
Renz, D.O., Boundary Spanning in Institutions of Private Higher
Education: An Assessment of the Interactions Between Private
Colleges and Their Environments (unpublished doctoral disser-
tation, University of Minnesota, 1981).
Rosen, B. and J.S. Adams, “Organizational Coverups: Factors
Influencing the Discipline of Information Gatekeepers,”
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, vol. 4 (1974), pp. 375-384.
Shankster-Cawley, L., B. Cawley, and S. Lee, Work Analysis and
Competency Development, paper presented at the 11th Annual
Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychology
Conference, San Diego, California (1996).
Sieber, S.D., “Toward a Theory of Role Accumulation,”
American Sociological Review, vol. 39 (1974), pp. 567-578.
CORRELATIONS BETWEEN INDIVIDUAL BOUNDARY SPANNING ROLES AND OBTAINED SOCIAL BENEFITS
Table III
Role
Status 
Access to 
Expert 
Personality 
Ego 
Activity
Privileges 
Security
Perquisites
Power
Enrichment
Gratification
G a t h e r i n g
0 . 1 8 *
0 . 0 3
0 . 2 8 * *
0 . 4 2 * *
0 . 3 2 * *
0 . 2 2 *
F i l t e r i n g
0 . 2 3 * *
- 0 . 0 8
0 . 3 4 * *
0 . 2 5 * *
0 . 0 8
0 . 1 6
Tr a n s m i t t i n g
0 . 2 8 * *
0 . 0 5
0 . 2 1 *
0 . 2 7 * *
0 . 1 3
0 . 0 6
Tr a n s a c t i n g
0 . 1 4
- 0 . 0 6
0 . 0 8
0 . 0 6
0 . 1 2
0 . 1 8 *
P r o a c t i v e
0 . 2 3 * *
- 0 . 0 8
0 . 2 9 * *
0 . 2 7 * *
0 . 3 1 * *
0 . 1 4
P r o t e c t i n g
0 . 2 4 * *
- 0 . 1 0
0 . 3 5 * *
0 . 3 0 * *
0 . 3 3 * *
0 . 2 1 *
* Significant at p   0.05
** Significant at p   0.01
CORRELATIONS BETWEEN INDIVIDUAL BOUNDARY SPANNING ROLES AND DESIRED SOCIAL BENEFITS
Table IV
Role
Status 
Access to 
Expert 
Personality 
Ego 
Activity
Privileges 
Security
Perquisites
Power
Enrichment
Gratification
G a t h e r i n g
0 . 1 5
- 0 . 0 5
0 . 2 4 * *
0 . 3 3 * *
0 . 2 0 *
0 . 0 6
F i l t e r i n g
0 . 1 3
- 0 . 1 7 *
0 . 1 3
0 . 1 3
0 . 0 0
0 . 1 8 *
Tr a n s m i t t i n g
0 . 2 3 * *
- 0 . 0 1
0 . 1 9 *
0 . 0 8
0 . 1 0
- 0 . 0 1
Tr a n s a c t i n g
0 . 1 3
- 0 . 1 1
0 . 0 0
0 . 0 1
- 0 . 0 1
- 0 . 0 7
P r o a c t i v e
0 . 1 1
- 0 . 1 2
0 . 2 7 * *
0 . 2 2 * *
0 . 2 4 * *
0 . 2 4 * *
P r o t e c t i n g
0 . 1 0
- 0 . 0 8
0 . 2 0 *
0 . 2 8 * *
0 . 2 3 * *
0 . 1 7
* Significant at p   0.05
** Significant at p   0.01
