Case management for high-intensity service users: towards a relational
approach to care co-ordination
Phil McEvoy RMN PhD1,2, Diane Escott PhD2and Penny Bee PhD2
1Salford Community Health, NHS Salford, Salford, UK and2School of Nursing, Midwifery and Social Work, University of
Manchester, Manchester, UK
Accepted for publication 28 June 2010
Correspondence
Phil McEvoy
The Angel Healthy Living
Centre
1 St Philip’s Place
Salford,
M3 6FA, UK
E-mail: phil.mcevoy@salford.nhs.uk
What is known about this topic
dCase managers are at the forefront
of attempts to develop services for
high intensity service users.
dThey can act as effective care facili-
tators and resource negotiators.
dTheir ability to work effectively is
inﬂuenced by resource constraints,
service ideology and the quality of
organizational infrastructure.
What this paper adds
dThe pattern of interaction between
case managers and their co-work-
ers inﬂuences the scope and
quality of care co-ordination.
dClearly deﬁned, relational work-
spaces help case managers to
engage with their co-workers and
support the management of inter-
dependent care activities.
dFlexible and efﬁcient, task focussed
workspaces are needed to improve
the quality of care co-ordination in
dispersed networks of care.Abstract
This study is based on a formative evaluation of a case management ser-
vice for high-intensity service users in Northern England. The evaluation
had three main purposes: (i) to assess the quality of the organisational
infrastructure; (ii) to obtain a better understanding of the key inﬂuences
that played a role in shaping the development of the service; and (iii) to
identify potential changes in practice that may help to improve the
quality of service provision. The evaluation was informed by Gittell’s
relational co-ordination theory, which focuses upon cross-boundary
working practices that facilitate task integration. The Assessment of
Chronic Illness Care Survey was used to assess the organisational
infrastructure and qualitative interviews with front line staff were
conducted to explore the key inﬂuences that shaped the development of
the service. A high level of strategic commitment and political support
for integrated working was identiﬁed. However, the quality of care co-
ordination was variable. The most prominent operational factor that
appeared to inﬂuence the scope and quality of care co-ordination was
the pattern of interaction between the case managers and their co-work-
ers. The co-ordination of patient care was much more effective in
integrated co-ordination networks. Key features included clearly deﬁned,
task focussed, relational workspaces with interactive forums where case
managers could engage with co-workers in discussions about the
management of interdependent care activities. In dispersed co-ordination
networks with fewer relational workspaces, the case managers struggled
to work as effectively. The evaluation concluded that the creation of
ﬂexible and efﬁcient task focused relational workspaces that are
systemically managed and adequately resourced could help to improve
the quality of care co-ordination, particularly in dispersed networks.
Keywords: care co-ordination, case management, dispersed networks,
high-intensity service users, integrated networks, relational approach
Introduction
The growing number of frail older people with multiple,
long-term conditions such as diabetes, heart failure,
chronic respiratory problems and depression presents a
major challenge to public health and social servicesacross the world (Strong et al. 2005, Mathers & Loncar
2006). Evidence suggests tha t the systemic implementa-
tion of integrated, patient centred, case management
approaches such as the Chronic Care Model (Wagner
et al. 1996, 2001, Bodenheimer et al. 2002), can help to
maximise the health status, level of functioning and qual-
60 ª2010 Blackwell Publishing LtdHealth and Social Care in the Community (2011) 19(1), 60–69 doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2524.2010.00949.x
ity of life of this vulnerable population (Ouwens et al.
2005, Minkman et al. 2007, Parchman et al. 2007). Case
management generally involves a combination of coreelements including: assessment, planning, linkage, moni-toring, advocacy and outreach (Huber 2002). However,there is a considerable variation in case managementmodels that are adopted, particularly in local contextsand the extent to which case managers provide directclinical care, psychosocial support and responses to crisis
situations (Sargent et al. 2007).
Under optimal conditions, case managers for high-
intensity service users should act as effective care facilita-tors and ‘resource negotiators’ (Zander 1995), assistingservice users to manage their conditions, deal with exac-erbations, cope with transfers of care between differentcare providers and deal with the everyday stresses of liv-ing with chronic illness (Lynn 2000, Kodner & Spreeu-
wenberg 2002, Chapman et al. 2009). Yet, their ability to
carry out their role effectiv ely may vary, due to differ-
ences in the resources available, service ideology and thequality of the local organisational infrastructure(Hroscikoski et al. 2006, Iliffe 2006, Sargent et al. 2008).
The national evaluation of the Evercare approachtowards case management in England identiﬁed that theintervention had no signiﬁcant effect on the level of
emergency admissions and con cluded that more radical
service redesign was needed to improve outcomes(Gravelle et al. 2007). Given that case managers are cur-
rently at the forefront of attempts to develop integratedservices for high-intensity service users within the Eng-lish National Health Service ( Department of Health 2004,
2005a, 2006), there is an urgent need to develop a betterunderstanding of inﬂuences that may enable or constrain
the development of case management services (Dixon
2007).
This study outlines the ﬁndings from a formative
evaluation of a case management service for high-inten-sity service users run by the provider arm of a PrimaryCare Trust in Northern England. The evaluation hadthree main purposes: ﬁrst, to assess the quality of the or-ganisational infrastructure supporting the case manage-
ment service; second, to try to obtain an understanding
of the key inﬂuences that played a role in shaping thedevelopment of the service; and third, to identify poten-tial changes in practice that may help to improve thequality of service provision.
Theoretical framework
The evaluation was informed by Gittell’s relational co-ordination theory, which focuses upon cross-boundaryworking and the social relationships that facilitate taskintegration (Gittell 2002a,b, Gittell & Weiss 2004). Theorigins of Gittell’s approach are rooted within organisa-tional sociology and the stu dy of high-performance work
systems (Hackman 1987, Pfeffer 1998). Gittell examines
the dynamic, interactive proc esses that shape collective
working practices and explores how human resourcesc a nb eu s e di np r o d u c t i v ea n de f ﬁ c i e n tw a y s .I nd o i n gso, she has developed an alte rnative to bureaucratic
based theories, which frame co-ordination as a functionof impersonal, instrumental control (Pfeffer & Salancik1978) and network theories which map the inﬂuence of
social ties and attitudes upon general behaviour (Kilduff
& Brass 2010). Gittell conceptualises co-ordination as themanagement of task interdepen dencies via relational net-
works. High quality co-ordination is facilitated by socialbonds and shared identities , which are underpinned by
three relational mechani sms: shared goals, shared
knowledge and mutual respect. Relational boundaryspanners such as case managers can build bridges via
these mediating mechanisms and improve task integra-
tion (Gittell 2002a, 2003, 2009).
Support for Gittell’s theory has come from empirical
studies that have identiﬁed the impact of different com-munication patterns and relational networks betweenkey service providers. A study of surgical units in ninehospitals, for example, identiﬁed a clear correlationbetween the quality of relational co-ordination and over-
all quality of care provision, as measured by length of
stay, levels of postoperative pain and patient satisfactionwith the quality of care (Gittell et al. 2000). The study
found that relational co-ordination was improved bythe development of a shared ethos, as well as formalworking practices and functional routines that facilitatedfrequent, timely communica tion, joint problem-solving
and mutual respect. This type o f relational co-ordination
is necessary to facilitate efﬁc ient and effective task inte-
gration in conditions characterised by complex taskinterdependencies, clinical uncertainty and role ambigu-
ity (Gittell et al. 2008). Gittell’s theory may therefore be
especially relevant to the co-ordination of care for high-intensity service users, in which a combination of serviceproviders is typically required to act in a timely, ﬂexiblea n di n t e g r a t e dw a yt od e a lw i th unpredictable contin-
gencies.
Methods
The evaluation was conducted between February 2007
and August 2008. There were a number of stafﬁngchanges during this time period but for the majority of
the time that the evaluation was being conducted the ser-
vice comprised the following staff members; a servicemanager, three community matrons who acted as bothadvanced clinical practitioners and case managers, sixcase managers and an administrator. The service usersthat the case managers supported had complex needsCase management for high-intensity service users
ª2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 61arising from conditions that severely compromised their
health and ability to function. All had a Patients at Risk
of Rehospitalisation (PARR) score of over forty, indicat-ing that there was a high risk they would require emer-gency readmission to hospital (Billings et al. 2006).
The quality of the organisational infrastructure sup-
porting the case manageme nt service was measured
using the Assessment of Chronic Illness Care (ACIC)Survey (Bonomi et al. 2002), a self assessment question-
naire and quality improvement tool which is designed to
measure ﬁdelity to the principles of the Chronic CareModel. The ACIC has six subscales (quality of deliverysystem design, patient–provi der relationships, decision
support, clinical informa tion systems, community
resources and healthcare organisation) as well as an extrasubscale that measures the overall integration of theChronic Care Model. The ACIC questionnaires were
posted to 23 of the team members and managerial staff
who had been employed or involved in the developmentof the case management service. Ten questionnaires werecompleted and returned (response rate 44%). Six werefrom team members within the case management serviceand four from managers within the Primary Care Trust.
Semi-structured qualitative interviews were con-
ducted to explore how case managers, community
matrons and the managers who were responsible for the
service conceptualised their role, their position withinnetworks of care and their responses to the challengesthey faced. The interviews took the form of a guided con-versation (Rubin & Rubin 1995) based on a topic guidewhich was developed after three pilot interviews (seeFigure 1). Potential interviewees were approached usingformal channels such as staff meetings and informal con-
tacts that were developed with the practitioners who
worked for the service. Everyone who was approachedagreed to be interviewed. The interviewees were givenan assurance of anonymity and all of the interviewees
agreed to have their interviews digitally recorded. A
total of 19 individual and four group interviews wereconducted. The ﬁrst nine individual and two groupinterviews were conducted w ith a convenience sample.
The remainder of the interviews were conducted with apurposively selected sample of interviewees who wereidentiﬁed as key informants who were able to expandupon the key themes that were emerging from the analy-
sis. The average duration of the interviews was approxi-
mately 45 minutes. The interviews were conducted inthe interviewees’ workplace over the course of a12-month period and the topic guide was adapted toincorporate emerging themes as the interviews pro-gressed. Five of the interviewees were interviewed onmore than one occasion. The interview data were analy-sed using a combination of elements from framework
analysis (Ritchie & Spencer 19 94) and the realistic evalua-
tion approach developed by Pawson & Tilley (1997). Theinterviews were independently analysed by two of theauthors (PM and DE) who then worked together to codethe transcripts and construct a thematic matrix. Five keymechanisms that were central to the case manager’s rolewere abstracted, plus one key contextual factor: the pat-terns of interaction between the case managers and their
co-workers (see Figure 2). This matrix was then used to
explore the links between the themes and facilitate theinterpretation of the dataset as a whole.
Findings
Organisational infrastructure
The scores on the ACIC subscales are presented in
Figure 3. The results indicate that the area perceived as
Role of case manager 
How would you describe your role as a case manager? 
What type of work does this involve?  
Factors influencing work
What sorts of things help you to do your work well? 
What sorts of things get in the way? 
Working relationships
How would you describe, both the nature and the quality of, your relationship with the other 
service providers you work with? 
Internal organisation/Team working 
Can you tell me about the internal organization of the service and how you work as a team?
Other issues  
Are there any other issues that you would like to comment on?
Figure 1 Interview guide.P. McEvoy et al.
62 ª2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltdmost developed was the organisation of the healthcare
system. This subscale represents the perceived level of
strategic commitment and po litical support from key or-
ganisational leaders. The scores on the ACIC subscalesthat measured the quality of care processes such as selfmanagement support, community linkages and overallintegration of the Chronic Care Model were substantiallylower.
The interview data conﬁrmed that the development
of case management and integrated working was a stra-
tegic priority for the Pri mary Care Trust and Local
Authority. This was reﬂected in comments regardingthe substantial investment that had been made in devel-
oping integrated care systems. These systems had joined
up organisational structures, standardised assessmentprocedures, single points of access and co-located multi-disciplinary teams with integrated information systems.
Inﬂuences on service development
It was clear that case managers faced considerable
challenges, as they endeavo ured to establish and main-
tain an effective service that improved the quality of careco-ordination and collaborative working. Many serviceusers lived in exacting social circumstances, alone orwith carers who were struggling to cope and their difﬁ-culties were regularly compounded by alcohol abuse,
mental health problems and cognitive decline. Further-
more, their relationships with service providers weresometimes ambivalent, as they struggled to retain a senseof stability and control over the course of their lives.
Newly appointed case managers, in particular, high-
lighted difﬁculties that they encountered in adjusting tothe demands of their role. For example, a case managerwho had previously worked for many years as a district
nurse, described how she had been accustomed to deliv-
ering discrete, time limited interventions for service userswith conditions such as chronic obstructive pulmonarydisease:
As a district nurse, I did ask you know, were they okay
with their inhalers, could they show me their technique.
But that would be my only involvement. Whereas nowwhen I’m at some of these patients’ houses and they’ve got
four inhalers and I’m having to sort of do an idiots’ guide.
What I’m sadly lacking in is conﬁdence. That might be anage thing. I seem to be trying to pick things up as I go
along.Boundary spanning – forging links and connections across service boundaries  
Resource negotiation – discussions with the institutional gatekeepers who 
exercise control over resources via the interpretation of eligibility criteria 
and negotiations about the mechanics of care ‘hand overs’  
Heedful interacting – responding in a prompt and flexible way to deal 
appropriately with changes in circumstances  
Functional routines – norms and procedures designed to facilitate co-working  
Performance measurement – the process of quantifying efficiency and 
effectiveness  
The patterns of interaction between the case managers and their co-workers – the 
pattern of communication and exchange relationships with members of different disciplines, organizations and occupational communities who needed to work 
together in order to facilitate task integration   
Figure 2 Items in thematic matrix.
012345678
Organization
Community links Self management Decision support Delivery system Information
Integration of CCMACIC scores
Figure 3 Results from Assessment of Chronic Illness Care
(ACIC) Survey.Case management for high-intensity service users
ª2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 63An equal, if not much greater challenge than that of
developing the requisite tech nical knowledge and clini-
cal skills, was the task of co-ordinating patient care.Three relational mechanisms were identiﬁed that werecentral to the co-ordination of care by the case managers;boundary spanning, resource negotiation and heedfulinteraction. Boundary spanning entailed forging linksand connections with co-workers and other agencies thattranscended the boundaries of the service. Resource
negotiation involved discussions with gatekeepers who
exercised control over acces s to information, expertise
and material resources, concerning issues such as theapplication of eligibility criteria and the mechanics oftransfers of care. Heedful interactions involve responsesthat are prompt, ﬂexible and cohesive and that dealappropriately with changes in circumstances and unex-pected contingencies (Weick & Roberts 1994). The way
in which the case managers sought to co-ordinate patient
care via these mechanisms was inﬂuenced by the pat-terns of communication and interaction with theirco-workers, together with the characteristics of the net-works they accessed. There was a continuum of networkstructures ranging from formally organised, integratedco-ordination networks to d ispersed co-ordination
networks. The deﬁning difference between the network
types was the pattern of interaction and the quality of
t h ec a s em a n a g e r s ’i n t e r p e r s onal relationships with their
co-workers. Integrated networks were characterised by asense of common purpose. They were supported by reg-ular, informal exchanges and the presence of relationalworkspaces, interactive forums that facilitated taskfocused discussions about interdependent care activities.Dispersed networks were characterised by more tempo-
rary links and patterns of interaction. Joint working
occurred in dispersed networks, however, connectionsbetween co-workers were not grounded by the samesense of collective consciousness. Both network typeswere located within and acro ss formal organisational
boundaries.
Integrated networks
Integrated networks were built upon relatively strong
relational ties and structure d organisational systems that
enabled the transfer of information and the leveraging ofresources. The institutional ised norms and procedures in
these networks facilitated collaborative, interdisciplinaryworking via integrated care pathways and programmesfor the delivery of population based chronic illness care.A structured, collegial atmosphere was sustained by reg-
ular, ad hoc exchanges between team members and their
joint participation in organisational team meetings. Thishelped to foster a sense of collective responsibility. Teammembers engaged in co-operative problem-solving andworked towards common goals. Working in co-locatedintegrated nursing and social care teams, with one point
of entry, shared assessment and information systems
and a single team manager, made it far easier for casemanagers to harness the coll ective effort of team mem-
bers and access discrete resources. A case manager in anintegrated health and social care team described howintegrated working had helped her to secure access tosheltered accommodation for a service user.
On the board you can see at a glance who is involved with
your patients and if you’re sat next to them (social worker
in shared ofﬁce) they don’t pass it back. They know what
they’re doing there’s no wait. They know who to ring, howthe system works.
Dispersed networks
There was a diverse array of statutory and non-statutorycare providers who were connected to the case managersthrough weak ties (Granovetter 1973) and loose institu-tional arrangements. These care providers included spe-cialist hospital-based services, nursing homes,intermediate care facilities, community nursing, mental
health and social services. The transfer of information,
the leveraging of resources and the rationale for jointworking in the dispersed networks tended to be more adhoc and were often negotiated between co-workers on acase-by-case basis. There w ere relatively few standar-
dised routines to facilitate c ollaborative working. Care
procedures were often difﬁcult to enact due to an absenceof relational workspaces and the difﬁculty of combining
the work of services whose operations were shaped by
divergent norms, expectations, organisational processesand temporal rhythms. Boundary spanning, resourcenegotiation and heedful res ponses were more time con-
suming within the dispersed networks and connectionswith co-workers were more difﬁcult to maintain.
I tw a su s u a l l yp o s s i b l ef o rt h ec a s em a n a g e r st on e g o -
tiate access to resources to deal with cases of exceptional
need. However, when dealing with non-urgent matters,
case managers had to be much more resourceful and cre-ative in using their local knowledge, contacts and negoti-ation skills to secure the co-o peration of co-collaborators
and organisational gatekee pers. Care providers often
exercised their power of veto and withheld their co-oper-ation. For example, a case manager described the ‘brickwalls’ she had encountered when she had tried to act as
an advocate for a service user who risked losing her
home.
I’ve rung the social worker, housing, welfare rights they’re
not interested. They all said it’s nothing to do with us.Duty (social services) told me that they can’t take it on.
Some of the case managers were especially skilled at
breaking down boundaries and c ultivating relationshipsP. McEvoy et al.
64 ª2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltdacross dispersed networks. An illustrative example was
provided by a case manager who described how she had
secured the co-operation of a General Practitioner whohad initially opposed the introduction of the case man-agement service.
There was one …we didn’t hit it off at all but we’ve made
massive inroads and now it’s ‘Come and sit down’ and
you know she gets her pictures of her baby out. We’ve bro-ken the ice and she will come to me and say ‘Will you
come in and discuss these patients?’
However, faced with practical difﬁculties of trying to
co-ordinate activities across networks that were charac-
terised by ambiguous and overlapping spheres ofresponsibility, poor communication and contested roleboundaries, the principal response of the case managerswas often to try to muddle through and steer clear ofconﬂict. This approach was typiﬁed by a case managerwho explained how she had become cynical about theprospect of ever developing a collaborative relationship
with some primary care practices.
I go into Practices on a regular basis, less so in the one
where relationships aren’t established because I feel that
I’m wasting my time.
It was not uncommon for frustrated case managers to
deal (more or less exclusively) with the problems thatthey could address themselv es. In order to avoid paraly-
sing debates about whether or not service users met theeligibility criteria for spec iﬁc health or social services,
case managers often sought to work around the systemand ﬁll in gaps in service provision themselves.Although this ‘hands on’ work helped to reduce the
duplication of services, the downside of this work was
that it was very time consuming and left them with lesstime to concentrate on the co-ordination of care. Ratherthan acting as boundary spanners and system integra-tors, they then delivered interventions within the con-ﬁnes of their own individual roles. The knock on effectof this dynamic was that it impacted upon the ability ofthe case managers to manage their heavy workloads.
Keeping track of and maintai ning contact with all of the
service users on their caseloa ds became increasingly dif-
ﬁcult. A corollary of this was that it was common forcase managers to have a number of residual ‘sleepers’,who received very little active input. This situation wasviewed as highly unsatisfactory. One case manager com-mented:
You’re just another person who’s gone in and said ‘Oh I
could help with that’ and done one.
These pressures were exacerbated by the services’
performance measurement regime. The process of quan-tifying the efﬁciency and effectiveness of the service gaverise to three related challenges. First, pressure was being
placed upon the service managers, by commissioners
who were seeking to ensure that the case managersachieved the caseload targets of 50–80 service users spec-
iﬁed in guidelines issued by the Department of Health(2005b). Second, a large amount of time was absorbedcompleting mandatory paper work. Third, the signiﬁcant
amount of extra time and resources that needed to beinvested in establishing relationships and co-ordinating
the activities across dispersed co-ordination networks
was not formally recognised or acknowledged.
Overall responsibility for caseload management and
care co-ordination was left to individual case managersto determine. This was achieved on the basis of their pro-fessional judgement only, as they were given no clearguidance or sense of direction. When they were pushedto their limits, the shortcomings of their individualistic
approaches were exposed. As one case manager frankly
admitted:
We all have our own systems.
What these individual systems and ways of working
tended to have in common was that they were based on
the pragmatic logic of making do (March & Simon 1958).
Operating in this dispersed, fragmented marketplace forscarce resources, it was all too easy for case managers tolose sight of one of their key tasks, which was to co-ordi-nate the care of the vulnerable, high-intensity serviceusers, and reduce their over reliance on unscheduled
and emergency sources of care and support.
Discussion
The ACIC survey results and the data from the inter-views with front line staff were consistent with the bodyof research that has highlighted the beneﬁts of serviceintegration (Johri et al. 2003), along with considerable
challenges associated with collaborative working and its
potential limitations (Glasby & Peck 2005, Glendinning
et al. 2005, Gravelle et al. 2007). A high level of political
support for integrated working was identiﬁed, togetherwith a considerable amount of investment in interagencyworking, which was exempliﬁed by the establishment ofintegrated health and social care teams. There were clearsigns that the investment had helped to improve thequality of interdisciplinary working, but despite this
investment, there were still signiﬁcant variations in the
quality of care co-ordination.
Factors that may have contributed to the variations in
the quality of care co-ordination included the politicalprocess of negotiating and deﬁning common interests(Carlile 2004), the local barriers between fragmentedhealth and social care resources and the case managers’Case management for high-intensity service users
ª2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 65struggle for recognition and status as an emerging occu-
pational group. However, the most prominent opera-
tional factor appeared to be the patterns of interactionbetween the case managers and their co-workers. Theco-ordination of patient care appeared to be much moreeffective in integrated co-ordination networks withclearly deﬁned task focussed relational workspaces andinteractive forums where ca se managers could engage
with co-workers in discussions about the management
of interdependent care activities. In dispersed co-ordina-
tion networks with few established relational work-spaces, the case managers struggled to work aseffectively. Constrained by the quality of their relation-ships with other service providers and a relativelyimpoverished marketplace for resources, they tended toavoid conﬂict and muddle through. In many cases thisinvolved taking over direct responsibility for care provi-
sion themselves. These links are summarised in the con-
text, mechanism, outcome conﬁgurations CMO – 1 andCMO – 2 (see Figures 4 and 5).
We may need to re-appraise the role that relational
workspaces and team working play in supporting thecase management of high-intensity service users, giventhat high-quality connections between co-workers(Coiera 2000) are required to deal with the shifting and
unpredictable contingencies they encounter. The ability
to develop and sustain cordial and effective workingrelationships with their colleagues is among the corecompetencies that case managers have (Department ofHealth, 2006). However, they may also need to developmore speciﬁc sets of skills if they are to engage effectively
in the relational mechanics of boundary spanning,
resource negotiation and the facilitation of heedfulresponses. For example, advanced entrepreneurial andconﬂict resolution skills may be needed to disentangleand effectively deal with power differentials and con-ﬂicts of interest that can arise when managing complexinterdependencies (Gittell 2009). These sorts of skills canbe developed through high-quality supervision and
training (Carmeli & Gittell 2009). Nevertheless, without a
clear mandate it is still unlikely that individual case man-agers will make a substantial impact in binding fracturedorganisational relationships (Ring & Van de Ven 1994).Structurally engrained patterns of negative interactionand skewed exchange relationships (Cook 1977) arebound to place constraints on their ability to collaboratewith other care providers and it is necessary to develop
process level solutions to deal with these challenges
(Gittell 2009).
From a relational perspecti ve, structural solutions
such as clearly deﬁned care pathways and operationalprocedures need to be combin ed with a relat ional archi-
tecture that establishes the integrative conditions that arenecessary for effective communication and co-ordination(Okhuysen & Bechky 2009). This relational architecture
may need to contain both formal and informal elements,
if it is to promote a sense of collective efﬁcacy (Johnson2003). Informal task focussed discussions can emergespontaneously when co-workers work in close proximityto each other and the value of these informal interactions
ContextContext MechanismMechanism OutcomeOutcome
Figure 4 CMO – 1: context, mechanism, outcome conﬁguration for integrated co-ordination networks.
ContextContext MechanismMechanism OutcomeOutcome
Figure 5 CMO – 2: context, mechanism, outcome conﬁguration for dispersed co-ordination networks.P. McEvoy et al.
66 ª2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltdshould not be under-estimated. However, they need to
be supported by formal, scheduled meetings and interac-
tive routines, as they are dependent upon personal rela-tionships that are likely to break down due to staffturnover and competing pressures.
In dispersed networks of care, it is not feasible or nec-
essary to engage with all co-workers at the same level ofintensity and trade offs have to be made between thenumerous demands on case managers’ time. Establish-
ing relational priorities, creating functional routines and
making judicious use of alternative communicationmedia can enable productive use of time and effort.Thompson’s (1967) hierarc hical distinction between
pooled (separate), sequentia l and reciprocal interdepen-
dence may prove useful, as it could help case managersmap out their networks of int erdependency. Thompson’s
tiers of interdependence mi rror the different tiers in
stepped care approaches to treatment, except that they
identify the resources that need to be invested in devel-oping bridging social capital (Adler & Kwon 2002) withco-workers. More sophisticated tools such as processmapping techniques (Savor y & Olson 2001) and depen-
dency structure matrices (Browning 2002), can also helpto identify critical junctures such as hand overs of carewhere it is vital to have interactive discussions (Coleman
2003). Functional routines based on modular systems of
working (Sanchez & Mahoney 1996) can reduce the needfor protracted reﬂection and provide a stable platformon which to respond to changing circumstances ((Becker2004, Greenhalgh 2008). Technological approaches suchas tele-conferencing can also help case managers to over-come barriers to relational e ngagement, by establishing
the connections and bonds that are envisaged by
the advocates of ‘virtual teamwork’ (Lipnack & Stamps
1997).
Overstretched case managers may resort to the defen-
sive mechanism of reducin g relational engagement,
effectively becoming the de facto care provider them-selves. Therefore attention needs to be paid to caseloadcapacity and performance monitoring. Caseloads of upto 80 high-intensity service users (Department of Health,
2 0 0 5 b )a r el i k e l yt ob eu n r e a l i s t i c ,i fc a s em a n a g e r sa r et o
maintain the links that are necessary to communicateeffectively, share informa tion, develop common under-
standings, establish case reviews and provide the moni-
toring and back up that is necessary to ensure that plansare followed through (Sargent et al. 2008). Gittell (2009)
recommends that caseload capacity is assessed inconjunction with cross-functional systems for measuringtask integration and operational effectiveness. Thea d v a n t a g eo ft h i st y p eo fa p p r o a c hi st h a ti tf a c t o r si nt h eresources that need to be invested in order to improve
efﬁciency and effectivenes s of care co-ordination.
This formative evaluation has considerable limita-
tions. It is essentially a single case study and the ﬁndingsmay not be generalisable to oth er services. The quality of
the ACIC survey was impaired by the relatively lowresponse rate and the incompleteness of the dataset. Theinterview data were also abstracted from long conversa-tions with front line practitioners and focussed on issues
that were pertinent to them, rather than broader
structural inﬂuences that may have exerted an equallyinﬂuential, though less obvious, effect upon the co-ordi-nation of care. It may have understated the role thatinstitutional rules, regulat ions, governance structures,
information technology and occupational hierarchies
play in controlling access to r esources and facilitating
communication across networks. The analysis high-
lighted some of the relational mechanisms and organisa-
tional inﬂuences that played a role in shaping thepatterns of care co-ordination. However, more workneeds to be carried out in order to explore the subtle andvariegated networks of practice that may inﬂuencepatterns of care co-ordination.
Nevertheless, given that case management for high-
intensity service users has received comparatively little
attention, it is hoped that this evaluation may stimulate
further professional interes t and research. Developing
task focussed relational workspaces that are systemicallymanaged and adequately resourced, may help toenhance the quality of care co-ordination, particularly indispersed networks. The hypothetical links that need tobe established to move towards this relational form ofcare co-ordination are summ arised in the context, mech-
anism, outcome conﬁguration CMO – 3 (see Figure 6
below).
ContextContext MechanismMechanism OutcomeOutcome
Figure 6 CMO – 3: hypothetical context, mechanism, outcome conﬁguration.Case management for high-intensity service users
ª2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 67Concluding remarks
Edmondson et al. (2001) have suggested that ‘when a
new technology disrupts existing work routines, theadopting organization must go through a learning pro-
cess, making cognitive, interpersonal, and organisational
adjustments that allow new routines to become ongoingpractice (p. 686)’. Case management for high-intensityservice users is a relatively new technology. It is hopedthat the issues that have been highlighted may help toinform the development of other services that are wres-tling with similar challenges. A key issue that may needto be addressed is the need to develop ﬂexible and efﬁ-
cient, task focussed relational workspaces, which sup-
port care co-ordination by p romoting strong working
relationships between co-workers with different func-tional roles.
References
Adler P. & Kwon S. (2002) Social capital: prospects for a
new concept. Academy of Management Review 27, 17–40.
Becker M.C. (2004) Organizational routine s: a review of
the literature. Industrial and Corporate Change 13, 643–
678.
Billings J., Dixon J., Mijanovich J. & Wennberg D. (2006)
Case ﬁnding for patients at risk of readmission to hospi-tal: development of algorithm to identify high risk
patients. British Medical Journal 333, 327–330.
Bodenheimer T., Wagner E. & Grumbach K. (2002) Improv-
ing primary care for patients with chronic illness. Journal
of the American Medical Association 299, 1775–1779.
Bonomi A.E., Wagner E.H., Glasgow R.E. et al. (2002)
Assessment of Chronic Illness Care (ACIC): a practicaltool to measure quality improvement. Health Services
Research 37, 791–820.
Browning T. (2002) Process integration using the design
structure matrix. Systems Engineering 5, 180–193.
Carlile P.R. (2004) Transferring, translating, and transform-
ing: an integrative framework for managing knowledge
across boundaries. Organization Science 15, 555–568.
Carmeli A. & Gittell J.H. (2009) High quality relationships,
psychological safety and learning from failures in work
organizations. Journal of Organizational Behavior 30, 709–
729.
Chapman L., Smith A., Williams V. & Oliver D. (2009)
Community matrons: primary care professionals’ views
and experiences. Journal of Advanced Nursing 65, 1617–
1625.
Coiera E. (2000) When conversation is better than computa-
tion. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association
7, 277–286.
Coleman E.A. (2003) Falling through the cracks: challenges
and opportunities for improving transitional care for per-
sons with continuous complex care needs. Journal of the
American Geriatric Society 51, 549–555.
Cook K.S. (1977) Exchange and power in networks of inter-
organizational relations. The Sociological Quarterly 18, 62–
82.
Department of Health (2004) Improving Chronic Disease
Management . Department of Health, London.Department of Health (2005a) The National Service Framework
for Long-term Conditions . Department of Health, London.
Department of Health (2005b) Supporting People with Long
Term Conditions: An NHS and Social Care Model for
Supporting Local Innovation and Integration . Department of
Health, London.
Department of Health (2006) Caring for People with Long
Term Conditions: An Education Framework for Community
Matrons and Case Managers . Department of Health, Lon-
don.
Dixon J. (2007) Critical Essay: improving management of
chronic illness in the National Health Service: better
incentives are the key. Chronic Illness 3
, 181–193.
Edmondson A.C., Bohmer R.M. & Pisano G.P. (2001) Dis-
rupted routines: team learning and new technologyimplementation in hospitals. Administrative Science Quar-
terly 46, 685–716.
Gittell J.H., Fairﬁeld K., Bierbaum B. et al. (2000) Impact of
Relational Coordination on Quality of Care, Post-Opera-
tive Pain and Functioning, and Length of Stay: A Nine
Hospital Study of Surgical Patients. Medical Care 38, 807–
819.
Gittell J.H. (2002a) Coordinating mechanisms in care pro-
vider groups: relational coordination as a mediator and
input uncertainty as a moderator of performance effects.Management Science 48, 1408–1426.
Gittell J.H. (2002b) Relationships between service providers
and their impact on customers. Journal of Service Research
4, 299–311.
Gittell J.H. (2003) The Southwest Airlines Way: Using the
Power of Relationships to Achieve High Performance .
McGraw-Hill, New York.
Gittell J.H. (2009) High Performance Healthcare: Using the
Power of Relationships to Achieve Quality, Efﬁciency and
Resilience . McGraw-Hill, New York.
Gittell J.H. & Weiss L. (2004) Coordination networks within
and across organizations: a multi-level framework. Jour-
nal of Management Studies 41, 127–153.
Gittell J.H., Weinberg D., Bennett A. & Miller J.A. (2008) Is
the doctor in? A relational approach to job design andthe coordination of work. Human Resource Management
47, 729–756.
Glasby J. & Peck E. (2005) Partnership Working between
Health and Social Care: The Impact of Care Trusts . Health
Service Management Centre, University of Birmingham,
Birmingham.
Glendinning C., Hudson B. & Means R. (2005) Under
strain? Exploring the troubled relationship betweenhealth and social care. Public Money & Management 25,
245–251.
Granovetter M. (1973) The strength of weak ties. American
Journal of Sociology 78, 1360–1380.
Gravelle H., Dusheiko M., Sheaff R. et al. (2007) Impact of
case management (Evercare) on frail elderly patients:
controlled before and after analysis of quantitative out-come data. British Medical Journal 334, 31–34.
Greenhalgh T. (2008) Role of routines in collaborative work
in healthcare organisations. British Medical Journal 337,
1269–1271.
Hackman J.R. (1987) The design of work teams. In: J. Lors-
ch (Ed.) Handbook of Organizational Behaviour , pp. 315–
342. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Hroscikoski M.C., Solberg L.I., Sperl-Hillen J.M. et al.
(2006) Challenges of change: a qualitative study ofP. McEvoy et al.
68 ª2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltdchronic care model implementation. Annals of Family
Medicine 4, 317–326.
Huber D.L. (2002) The diversity of case management mod-
els.Lippincotts Case Management 7, 212–220.
Iliffe S. (2006) Case management of chronic diseases and
long-term conditions :make haste slowly. Primary Health
Care Research & Development 7, 185–187.
Johnson D.W. (2003) Social interdependence: interrelation-
ships among theory, research, and practice. American Psy-
chologist 58, 934–945.
Johri M., Beland F. & Bergman H. (2003) International
experiments in integrated care for the elderly: a synthesis
of the evidence. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry
18, 222–235.
Kilduff M. & Brass D.J. (2010) Job design: a social network
perspective. Journal of Organizational Behavior 31, 309–318.
Kodner D. & Spreeuwenberg C. (2002) Integrated care:
meaning, logic, applications, and implications – a discus-sion paper. International Journal of Integrated Care [WWW
document]. URL http://www.ijic.org/index.php/ijic/
article/view/67/133
Lipnack J. & Stamps J. (1997) Virtual Teams: Reaching Across
Space, Time, and Organizations with Technology . John Wiley
& Sons, New York.
Lynn J. (2000) Learning to care for people with chronic ill-
ness facing the end of life. Journal of the American Medical
Association 284, 2508–2511.
March J. & Simon H.A. (1958) Organizations . Wiley, New
York.
Mathers C.D. & Loncar D. (2006) Projections of global mor-
tality and burden of disease from 2002 to 2030. PLoS
Medicine 3[WWW document]. URL http://medicine.
plosjournals.org/perlserv/ ?request=get-document&doi=
10.1371/journal.pmed.0030442&ct=1
Minkman M., Ahaus K. & Huijsman R. (2007) Performance
improvement based on integrated quality managementmodels: what evidence do we have? A systematic litera-ture review. International Journal for Quality in Health Care
19, 90–104.
Okhuysen G.A. & Bechky B.A. (2009) Coordination in orga-
nizations: an integrative perspective. Annals of the Acad-
emy of Management 3, 463–502.
Ouwens M., Wollersheim H., Hermens R. et al. (2005) Inte-
grated care programmes for chronically ill patients: areview of systematic reviews. International Journal for
Quality in Health Care 17, 141–146.
Parchman M.L., Zeber J.E., Romero R.R. & Pugh J.A. (2007)
Risk of coronary artery disease in type 2 diabetes andthe delivery of care consistent with the chronic caremodel in primary care settings: a STARNet study. Medi-
cal Care 45, 1129–1134.
Pawson R. & Tilley N. (1997) Realistic Evaluation . Sage, Lon-
don.
Pfeffer J. (1998) The Human Equation: Building Proﬁts by
Putting People First . Harvard Business School Press, Bos-
ton.
Pfeffer J. & Salancik G.R. (1978)
The External Control of
Organizations: A Resource Dependence Perspective . Harper
and Row, New York.
Ring P.S. & Van de Ven A.H. (1994) Development pro-
cesses of cooperative interorganizational relationships.
Academy of Management Review 19, 90–118.
Ritchie J. & Spencer L. (1994) Qualitative data analysis for
applied policy research. In: A. Bryman & R.G. Burgess(Eds) Analysing Qualitative Data , pp. 173–194. Routeledge,
London.
Rubin H. & Rubin I. (1995) Qualitative Interviewing: The Art
of Hearing Data . Sage, London.
Sanchez R. & Mahoney J. (1996) Modularity ﬂexibility, and
knowledge management in product and organizationdesign. Strategic Management Journal 17, 63–76.
Sargent P., Pickard S., Sheaff R. & Boaden R. (2007) Patient
and carer perceptions of case management for long term
conditions. Health and Social Care in the Community 15,
511–519.
Sargent P., Boaden R. & Roland M. (2008) How many
patients can community matrons successfully case man-
age? Journal of Nursing Management 16, 38–46.
Savory P. & Olson J. (2001) Guidelines for using process
mapping to aid improvement efforts. Hospital Material
Management Quarterly 22, 10–16.
Strong K., Mathers C., Leeder S. & Beaglehole R. (2005)
Preventing chronic diseases: how many lives can we
save? Lancet 366, 1578–1582.
Thompson J.D. (1967) Organizations in Action: Social Science
Bases of Administrative Theory . McGraw-Hill, New York.
Wagner E., Austin B. & Von Korff M. (1996) Organizing
care for patients with chronic illness. Milbank Quarterly
74, 511–544.
Wagner E.H., Grothaus L.C., Sandhu N. et al. (2001)
Chronic care clinics for diabetes in primary care: a sys-
tem-wide randomized trial. Diabetes Care 24, 695–700.
Weick K.E. & Roberts K. (1994) Collective mind in organi-
zations: heedful interrelating on ﬂight decks. Administra-
tive Science Quarterly 38, 357–381.
Zander K. (1995) Managing Outcomes through Collaborative
Care. American Hospital Publishing, Chicago, IL.Case management for high-intensity service users
ª2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd 69