Information Systems Frontiers 3:4, 417–426, 2001
C/circlecopyrt2001 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Manufactured in The Netherlands.
Unresolved Issues in Supply Chain Network Design
Ronald H. Ballou
Weatherhead School of Management, Case Western Reserve
University, 10900 Euclid Ave., Cleveland, OH 44106, USAE-mail: Ronald.Ballou@Weatherhead.cwru.edu
Abstract. Designing a supply chain network provides the basic
structure for supply chain operations, where the network is a ma-jor element in a ﬁrm’s competitiveness and a signiﬁcant area ofcapital investment. With the boundary-spanning scope encour-aged by supply chain management, the question is whether exist-ing analyses used for network design are adequate. The generalanswer is yes, because the number of echelons that the analy-sis must span is self-limiting to a relative few. However, thereremain unresolved issues in network design analysis and in themodels used to support the analysis that can enhance its accu-racy, appropriateness, and acceptability to practitioners. Issuesdiscussed relate to the development of better models, the treat-ment of the data needed by them, and the need for comparing thevarious models for network design.
Key Words. facility location, logistics network conﬁguration,
supply chain management, network design
1. Introduction
Facility location, network conﬁguration, supply chain
design, and logistics system strategy are terms thathave been used to describe what has been known to re-searchers as the warehouse location problem. Amongthe many problems encountered in strategic logisticsplanning, this is perhaps the most signiﬁcant. Over theyears, top management has sponsored probably morestudies dealing with this problem than any other of alogistical nature. The need for this type of study hasbeen driven by change resulting from increasing cus-tomer expectations about logistics service, lengthen-ing distribution lines as global markets are penetrated,and shifting demand patterns brought about by mergerand acquisition programs. Since reconﬁguring the fa-cilities of a supply channel frequently can result in alogistics cost reduction of 5 to 15% while maintainingor improving customer service, the beneﬁts have beensigniﬁcant enough to deserve the attention of high-level
executives. Consider some of the reasons why compa-nies undertake a network redesign.
rA major acquisition by a division of a large corpo-ration resulted in two network designs, one for thecurrent division and one for the acquired company.Re-evaluation was needed to meld the network con-ﬁgurations into a single, efﬁcient design.
rAn automobile manufacturer was faced with import-ing vehicles to the U.S. market from Latin Americaand Europe. Latin America production was new,which changed the ﬂow of product that originally wasonly from Europe and brought new products into thesales mix. Revised product sourcing required deter-mining ports of entry and delivery staging areas thatwould optimize the product ﬂow patterns to dealersfrom plants of limited capacity.
rA rail car leasing company repairs the undercarriagesof the cars in its ﬂeet. Cars are brought back from railyards to repair locations on a scheduled or emergencyrepair basis. The number and location of the repairhubs had never been rationalized, thus an incentivewas provided for their evaluation.
Facility location provides the infrastructure for the
supply chain and establishes the base from which op-erating economies are realized. It is a problem of bal-ancing conﬂicting costs (production/purchase, ware-housing, inventory, and transportation) with customerservice goals and the associated revenue contribution.Historically, logistics system design has been limited tothat portion of the logistics channel under direct controlof the company. Concepts surrounding supply chainmanagement encourage making cost tradeoffs across
company boundaries. This is extending the scope ofthe analysis and placing increased demands on mathe-matical tools used to solve such problems.
417418 Ballou
In this article, the impact of the supply chain move-
ment on facility location analysis will be examined tosee the challenges posed to traditional location method-ology. In addition, other issues that affect the qualityof location analysis will be discussed. The intent is tosuggest directions for location analysis and model de-velopment that will enhance the accuracy and scope ofnetwork design.
2. The Network Design Problem
In the boldest sense, the network design problem is oneof con ﬁguring the nodal points on a product ﬂow net-
work that range from the sources of raw materials tothe points of ﬁnal consumption. It is to determine the
number, size, and location of terminals, ports, plants,warehouses, pool points, cross docks, or any point inthe transportation network where product is stoppedmomentarily on its way to the end consumer. A partic-ular network might look like that shown in Fig. 1. Theobjective of network design is to maximize a ﬁnancial
ratio such as ROLA.
ROLA =Revenue –Costs
Investment
Fig. 1. A typical supply chain network with associated costs.where ROLA =Return on logistics assets, Reve-
nue=Contribution that network design makes to sales,
Costs=Operating costs of the supply channel, Invest-
ment=Capital required to establish the facilities in the
network con ﬁguration.
Location has been a popular area of research, with
methods described in the literature as early as the mid1800s by land economists such as von Th ¨unen (1842)
and Weber (1909), and more recently by regionaleconomists such as Palander (1935), L ¨osch (1940),
Hoover (1957), Greenhut (1956), Isard et al. (1960),and Isard (1968). Many of the methods they describewere of a conceptual nature and have been referred toas“chart-compass-ruler techniques ”because of their
limited scope to deal with problems of a practical size.However, they are useful as aids to understanding thegeneral nature of location problems. Mathematicianshave continued with the search for location methodsthat can ﬁnd optimal answers to location questions
while expanding the scope and complexity of the prob-lems that can be treated. Brandeau and Chiu (1989) andDrezner (1995) have summarized the methods that areavailable. More recently, Ballou and Masters (1999)surveyed the commercial models used by ﬁrms to ana-
lyze their facility location problems. The most popularmethodology found in commercial use is some form ofUnresolved Issues in Supply Chain Network Design 419
mathematical programming, such as linear program-
ming or mixed integer programming. Heuristics arestill employed to aid these methods in the search foroptimal or nearly optimal locations.
Although substantial gains have been made in the
size of location problems that can be treated mathemati-cally, mainly due to increased computer power, there re-main numerous issues that need to be addressed. Somedeal with the scope of the problem being solved, butmany have to do with the data issues surrounding thelocation problem. It is the intent of this paper to high-light these needed directions in the hope that furtherresearch will be encouraged.
3. The Supply Chain and Facility Location
Supply chain is a recent term used to describe the entireproduct ﬂow process, from the source of raw materi-
als to end consumption, regardless of who owns thevarious stages of the process. Although not new to lo-gisticians, supply chain management is promoting theidea of planning across the legal boundaries of ﬁrms
within the supply channel. This potentially requires de-veloping multi- ﬁrm network con ﬁgurations that mesh
well with each other. A supplier ’s warehouses may be
located in concert with a buyer ’s plant, which they sup-
ply. Independent retailer outlets may be co-located withtheir supplying distributor/vendor location. Some ﬁrms
may locate a plant or warehouse near a large JIT cus-tomer to provide the necessary service, but in generalthere appears to be little evidence that ﬁrms are co-
ordinating their location decisions with other channelmembers. Typically, upstream sources and downstreamdemand are taken as given in the location decision. Thisremains the case even though most commercial-gradelocation models have the capability of handling themany echelons required in an extensive supply chain(Ballou and Masters, 1999).
There are several possible reasons for the general
lack of location coordination among channel members.First, information sharing is required with its attendantproblems, such as con ﬁdentiality. Second, the sales im-
portance of a downstream channel member may besmall relative to the total customer base such that thereis little incentive to co-locate. Third, there can be aproblem of product identi ﬁcation for upstream sup-
pliers with the end products of downstream buyers.Including additional channel members in the locationdecision may not be needed except in those limited situ-
ations where economic and service incentives are obvi-ous. A certain level of decoupling of the supply channelmay be reasonable in the case of location decisions.
4. Developmental Issues
in Facility Location
Facility location remains a signi ﬁcant problem in sup-
ply chain management. Large-scale facility locationmodels have been developed that assist in designingcomplex networks. Yet, there are a number of unre-solved issues that keep facility analysis and their asso-ciated models from being as effective as they might be.The mathematics of modeling seem reasonably well de-veloped, and computing power is great enough to com-putationally handle most practical location problems.Those issues that can increase the accuracy, applicabil-ity, and scope of current facility location analysis arediscussed.
4.1. Aggregate, hierarchical, and channel planning
Warehouse location is generally viewed as a strate-gic planning problem where the facility location is
found within a broad geographic area. However, avail-able models used for aggregate planning don ’t locate
the speci ﬁc facility site. Whereas aggregate location
planning can be effectively based on economic factors,site selection involves many subjective factors such aslocal laws, community attitudes, availability of utili-ties, quality of schools, and proximity to transportationlinks. To the extent that these subjective factors canbe quanti ﬁed, including them in the aggregate analysis
would be a step forward.
The location problem has a hierarchical nature. In
addition to its strategic orientation, operational consid-erations are sometimes brought into the analysis. Forexample, the scheduling of facility labor, the routingof privately-owned trucks, or the setting of inventorylevels (given the throughput assigned to a facility bythe location analysis) might be considerations withinnetwork design. These are dif ﬁcult issues to include in
network modeling, mainly because they are of a tem-poral nature. Warehouse location models are funda-mentally spatially based and do not handle temporalissues particularly well. Temporal matters have beentreated through preprocessing of data for spatial mod-els or through the iterative use of multiple models such420 Ballou
as mathematical programming and simulation. Effec-
tive models that handle spatial and temporal issues wellin a combined way remain elusive.
Taking a broad view of the supply chain, facility lo-
cation may involve the location of source facilities suchas plants, vendors, and ports; intermediate facilitiessuch as warehouses, consolidation points, terminals,and cross dock facilities; and retail outlets. The method-ologies on which location decisions are based through-out the channel have been quite different. Source pointand intermediate point location decisions have gener-ally followed a cost analysis with customer service, andtherefore contribution to sales, being taken as a con-straint on the analysis. On the other hand, retail locationis driven by the potential for generating sales, costs be-ing a secondary consideration (Ghosh and McLaffertry,1987). Combining these disparate approaches into aseamless analysis, or single model, so that a channel-wide network design can be accomplished would beideal.
4.2. Standards for data representation
Describing models and analyses that are comprehen-sive enough to treat an entire supply chain overlooksthe unresolved issues that remain within the existingmodels. One of those issues surrounds the way in
which data are represented in a location analysis. Eventhough developers of models may claim mathematicaloptimality, lacking standards for data representationleads to poor comparability among methods and vari-ability in location results that depend very much uponthe judgment of an individual analyst. Consider a fewof the problems that can occur.
Facility costs. Costs for company-owned facilities
are accumulated as accounting records. Individual ac-counts may show the costs for such categories as labor,trash removal, electricity, natural gas, and parking lotpaving. Since most analyses require that such costs begrouped as annual ﬁxed, variable handling, and some-
times storage, matching the accounts to these categoriescan vary widely among analysts. The result can be thatdifferent well-meaning analysts can arrive at strikinglydifferent network designs.
Facility capacity. Capacity is, and will remain, a
deﬁnitional problem. Limiting facility throughput is
a basis for arguing that mathematical programmingis the appropriate method for treating location prob-lems (Geoffrion and Van Roy, 1979). Mathematicalprogramming can handle capacity constraints in an ex-act way. In practice, capacity is rarely a ﬁxed numberagainst which to optimize. Adjusting production shifts,
product mix, overtime, and number of workers all canchange the throughput from a ﬁxed facility size. As
with facility costs, a precise de ﬁnition of capacity is
needed.
Product families. A location problem frequently
involves thousands of product items grouped intorelatively few families. Broad guidelines suggestthat products having the same general distributioncharacteristics, i.e., they ﬂow through the supply chan-
nel in the same manner, can effectively be treated in thesame way. There are no uniformly applied standards forproduct classi ﬁcation.
Customer service. Customer service in facility loca-
tion is particularly dif ﬁcult to handle mainly because
the analysis is geographically based, i.e., customersand facilities are identi ﬁed by geocodes. This leads to
treating customer service as some form of distance be-tween sourcing points and customers. With speed, ship-ping time may be represented. However, representingcustomer total order cycle time that includes inventoryavailability remains illusive for this type of analysis.Some location models prune network links with unac-ceptable service times through data preprocessing, butdon’t include time within their optimizing algorithm.
Representing customer service as total order cycle time,i.e., the time from when a customer requests a productto when it is received, is preferable to using deliverydistance as a surrogate for delivery time.
4.3. Accuracy associated with data aggregation
It is common practice in location analysis to aggregatea number of the data elements for the purpose of simpli-fying the analysis, decreasing computational time, andreducing the amount of data handling required in a loca-tion analysis. Research has provided little informationas to the error that may be caused by data aggregation.A few of the critical areas where further research isneeded are discussed.
Product families. Creating product groups, as pre-
viously mentioned, is the ﬁrst element in location anal-
ysis where data are aggregated. A company can havethousands of items in its product line. Modeling each isprohibitive and generally unnecessary since many ﬂow
through a supply channel in the same manner. How-ever, product grouping requires that the family be rep-resented in terms of average statistics, such as value,production costs, warehouse handling costs, and de-mand. In a word, the cost characteristics of an individ-ual product are lost in the averages of multi-productUnresolved Issues in Supply Chain Network Design 421
groupings without knowing the solution effects of
doing so.
Demand clusters. A company will sell to thou-
sands of geographically dispersed customers or pur-chase from numerous vendors. It is common practiceto cluster these customers/vendors into relatively fewgeographical zones, such as 3-digit zip codes (Bender,1985). The risk of doing this is transportation costsare calculated to the cluster center rather than to/fromthe actual customer/vendor address, causing a potentialcost estimating error. Some research on the error hasbeen conducted for truck shipments (Ballou, 1994), butno research reports have been found for other transportmodes. Since transportation costs are one of the impor-tant driving forces in facility location, the error mightsigni ﬁcantly affect the location outcomes.
Transport rate-estimating curves. In a network anal-
ysis, transportation rates are needed between all pointswithin all echelons. When shipments over a periodof time are made by different transport modes andwithin various weight breaks, there can be millionsof point-to-point transport rates needed. From a datacollection and computational standpoint, it is attrac-tive to construct transport rate estimating curves whererates are estimated from the distance between twopoints, since a computer can calculate the distanceand solve the rate equation faster than looking forthe rate in a large rate table. Fitting a linear leastsquares curve to rates plotted against distances givesa high degree of correlation, often greater than 0.90,for the published rates in the truck tariffs in most cases(Ballou, 1991), as illustrated in Fig. 2. Published ratesin other countries also show this same high degree of
Fig. 2. Truck rate estimating curve for selected destinations from
Chicago.rationalization. Although using the rate curves in loca-
tion analysis appears to be reasonable, the costing errorand its impact on location decisions have not been wellestablished.
Travel distances. Actual traveled distances are
needed in location analysis to approximate transporta-tion rates and determine distance-based customer ser-vice. Common practice is to approximate actual dis-tances from location coordinates, typically latitude andlongitude, and apply a multiplier (called a circuity fac-tor) to the straight-line distances so as to approximateactual travel distances. A circuity factor is the aver-age ratio of actual traveled distance to straight-line dis-tance. Although the calculation of straight-line, or greatcircle, distances can be quite accurate, the circuity fac-tors throughout the world can show great variability(Ballou, Rahardja, and Sakai, 2000). The preferred, orfrequently traveled, route through a road, rail, or othernetwork is subject to interpretation, which can causeinconsistencies among data sources. Perhaps improvedmethods can be found for distance estimation, althoughthe current approach is simple and computationallyefﬁcient.
Inventory levels. Estimating inventory levels
throughout a supply chain network as a result of de-mand allocation is a requirement of good location anal-ysis. Some general relationships for making the estima-tion have been developed from inventory theory andactual data (Ballou, 1981, 2000), but documentation ofthe error in practice remains. Combining items into anaggregate inventory-throughput relationship can losethe effect of individual inventory policies of individ-ual items and may be a signi ﬁcant source of estimating
error.
4.4. Extensions to scope
Facility location analysis, especially involving model-ing, is an incomplete work. Some of the limitationsare obvious from the previous discussion, but severaladditional ones are presented here. They deal with ex-tending the scope of the analysis and enriching locationmodels.
Proﬁt contribution. Some years ago, Shycon (1982)
argued that companies are in the business to generateproﬁt, growth, and a reasonable return on investment,
yet much of supply chain system design is focused oncost reduction. His suggestions have largely gone un-heeded, even though today many location models in-clude price and claim to have the capability of pro ﬁt
maximization. The ability to generate a reasonable422 Ballou
Fig. 3. Logistics revenue contribution as a factor in location.
sales-service (revenue) relationship as shown in Fig. 3
that will explain quantitatively the extent to which fa-cility locations impact sales is a key, but missing, in-gredient. Without it, location analysis fundamentallyminimizes costs while treating customer service as aconstraint. The revenue effects of location are largelyignored, except by Ho and Perl (1995). With it, locationbecomes part of the ﬁrm’s strategy to maximize ROLA.
However, extending the scope of location analysis toinclude revenue effects depends on developing meth-ods for accurately determining sales-logistics customerservice relationships, not just including such relation-ships within a location model.
Inventories in location analysis. There appears to be
no standard way to handle the “inventory consolidation
effect ”in location analysis. The inventory consolida-
tion effect refers to the changes in inventory levels thatoccur when the number of facilities in a supply chainnetwork, and the demand allocations to them, changes.Since inventory-carrying cost is in tradeoff with trans-portation cost, inventory-carrying cost should be an in-tegral part of the search for the optimal number of loca-tions. However, too many analyses set facility inventorylevels after locations are determined rather than during
the search process. This is probably due to most modelsused for warehouse location being of the mixed integerlinear programming type (Ballou and Masters, 1999)that require the relationship between facility inventorylevels to be linear, when the relationship may be non-linear as shown in Fig. 4 (recall the square root lawof inventory consolidation). Some analysts argue thatthey can treat nonlinear inventory costs in a piecewise
Fig. 4. Example of inventory levels increasing nonlinearly with ware-
house throughput, as developed from turnover ratios of a company ’s
warehouses.
linear fashion, but there is little evidence of doing this
routinely, probably because of the resulting signi ﬁcant
increase in problem size.
Transportation. In location analysis, it is generally
assumed that product movement is directly from anorigin point to a destination point. This is a reason-able assumption when simple common carrier movesare made, since rates are quoted between point pairs.However, when transportation involves the peddleroutes of private carriers or for-hire carriers offer tran-sit privileges where the rates are a result of combiningthe volumes for more than one stop, the problem oftransport costing becomes much more dif ﬁcult. The
assigning of customer demand to facilities is basedon transportation rates that can only be determinedafter the customer assignments are known. The loca-
tion and transportation problems can be solved sepa-rately and combined in an iterative fashion. Some re-search has been conducted to combine these two effects(Bookbinder and Reese, 1988; Perl and Daskin, 1984),but much work remains to bring the preliminary resultsto a practical level.
Selected product sourcing. It has previously been
pointed out that data aggregation is an important el-ement of location analysis to control problem size.However, when creating product families from thou-sands of product line items, the uniqueness of the sourc-ing location for intermediate facilities can be lost. Thatis, when a facility such as a warehouse is sourcedfrom plants, it is assumed that any particular plant canproduce all products within the family. If some prod-ucts can only be sourced from particular plants, thenUnresolved Issues in Supply Chain Network Design 423
Fig. 5. Selected sourcing among products within a product family.
misallocation can occur during optimization, as shown
Fig. 5. The recourse is to disaggregate the productfamily until all the remaining products in the familycan be sourced from an available plant. Of course,a way is sought to formulate the location problemso that selected sourcing can be achieved within theheterogeneous product family.
Demand uncertainty. Uncertainty of customer de-
mand in a location problem is rarely a considerationin model design. Static models dominate and demanduncertainty is treated in location analysis through sensi-tivity analysis. Since network design is usually handledas a strategic planning problem, demand uncertainty isnot quite as critical to analysis as it is in many operat-ing level problems. However, some research would beuseful to determine practical ways of treating uncertaindemand and under what circumstances it is appropriateto use the methods.
Flexible costing. Allocation models suffer from the
problem that their solutions are based on costs knownandﬁxed during the solution-searching process. Since
costs are typically derived from an assumed allocation,the costs used to generate a solution may change as a re-sult of the solution —the“chicken-and-egg ”dilemma.
This is frequently a problem in location analysis wherethe demand assignments to facilities are based on pro-duction, facility, and transportation costs that are in-ﬂuenced by economies of scale. Revising the demand
assignments can change these costs, making the assign-ments to facilities no longer optimal. A procedure needsto be developed where a model ’s costs can be adjusted
while the demand assignments are being developed sothat the costs are appropriate for the allocations.
Spatial vs. temporal issues. Some years ago, it was
observed that spatial location analysis did not ade-quately account for decisions that were strongly basedon time (Heskett, 1965, 1966). Inventory stocking,
transportation mode selection, shipment size, and or-der cycle time are issues only crudely handled in a spa-tial analysis, where spatial analysis dominates locationmethodology. On the other hand, supply channel sim-ulations treat these temporal issues nicely and provideinformation about facility inventory levels and trans-portation rates based on a mix of shipments inboundand outbound from a facility. However, this informa-tion that is important to location analysis depends onlocation analysis results to provide the demand assign-ments to the facilities in the network. Again, this is the“chicken-and-egg ”dilemma.
Simulators provide unique information for network
design, but they do not make good locators due to theirimpracticality to search for good locations. An attemptwas made to combine the temporal and spatial aspectsof network design (Bowersox et al., 1972), but spe-cial purpose supply channel simulators have not beencommercially popular. Even the idea of using locationanalysis and simulators in an iterative manner has notbeen fashionable. The ability is needed to generate in-formation about these temporal issues, so perhaps theycan be included effectively within the spatial analy-sis. If research cannot produce spatial models with thisbroader scope, then improved ways for combining lo-cators and simulators should be explored.
Static vs. dynamic analysis. Solving a location prob-
lem for a particular period of time (static analysis) doesnot capture the true nature of network design. If the timeperiod is the most recent year for which data are avail-able, the solution is probably already out of date. Newfacilities, or even modi ﬁed existing facilities, cannot be
brought online immediately. Of course, analysis can bedirected to the demand and costs for some future year soas to address the timing issue. However, location overtime is a dynamic problem where the optimal networkdesign may be different in each year. Since there areﬁxed costs associated with changing from one con ﬁgu-
ration to the next, merely switching to the current-yearoptimal design is not necessarily optimal over the en-tire planning horizon. A dynamic analysis is neededwhere the optimal set of moves from one network de-sign to another is charted. Several researchers haveaddressed the problem (Ballou, 1968; Sweeney andTatham, 1976; Wesolowsky and Truscott, 1975; VanRoy and Erlenkotter, 1982; Bowersox, 1972), but littleof this work has found practical application, probablybecause running times for optimal procedures, e.g., dy-namic programming, are long for even small problems.424 Ballou
The importance of dynamic location suggests that it
should be part of the scope of location analysis andthat practical methods for its treatment are needed.
Continuous vs. discrete models. The popular method
of analysis is to use discrete models, typically in theform of mathematical programming models. Locationsare selected from a speci ﬁed list of candidate sites. On
the other hand, continuous location models, variouslyknown as center of gravity, centroid, or ﬁrst moment
methods, determine the coordinate locations anywherewithin the demand region. This has appeal to practi-tioners who want the analysis to determine the loca-tions rather than to be limited to a potentially biasedset of candidate sites, as is the case with mathematicalprogramming. However, continuous location methodshave long been dismissed as a general approach to prac-tical problems, although there are limited cases wherethe method is appropriate. The reasons seem to be thelack of robustness (lack of multiple echelons, capac-ity constraints on facilities, customer service restric-tions, and a variety of cost con ﬁgurations) that can be
achieved in model design and still realize an optimalsolution in a reasonable time. Having said this, suchmodels still have a place in location analysis.
Continuous location models can be used as site sug-
gestors. They can identify locations for examinationby the more robust discrete models. Location analysiswould be enhanced if such models could be incorpo-rated into the computational processes of the discretemodels.
5. Method Comparison
Perhaps one of the most important unresolved issues insupply chain network design is the comparison of onelocation analytical approach to another. Over the years,analysts, especially model developers, have claimedsuperior performance for their approach. Without adoubt, recipients of the analytical results would liketo know which approach is “best.”Too often “best”
is argued on the basis of mathematical optimality forthe solved problem when such issues as (1) accuracyof problem representation, (2) time to collect and pre-pare data for analysis, (3) solution time, (4) presen-tation features, (5) transparency of the methodologyand results, (6) ﬂexibility, and (7) database/model in-
terface can be of equal or greater importance. Thereis no known comparison of commercial-grade locationmodels, although a few years ago Andersen Consulting
attempted but did not complete such a task. Complexityand fairness top the list of factors why further compar-ison efforts have not been tried. Model developers maycontinue to argue superiority on the basis of mathe-matical sophistication when end users of an analyticalapproach equally value other, subjective factors as well(Ballou and Masters, 1993, 1999). The differences needto be resolved.
6. Conclusions
Contemporary supply chain management encouragesplanning across the legal boundaries of supply channelmembers. This has the potential of leading to reducedcosts and/or improved customer service as compared toplanning strictly within those logistics activities underthe immediate control of the ﬁrm. Con ﬁguring the lo-
gistics network seems an obvious candidate for thisboundary-spanning planning. However, this system-wide planning will likely be limited to relatively fewechelons because (1) information sharing among chan-nel members will bring its attendant problems, (2) theimportance of the ﬁrm to its upstream and downstream
partners may not be great enough to encourage cooper-ative location planning, and (3) the identi ﬁcation of the
product over multiple echelons becomes blurred. Al-though location models and their associated analysescan handle many echelons of a network, the practicalscope of such analyses will be limited to relatively fewmembers of the channel, probably no more than oneupstream and one downstream member.
Although a typical location analysis supported by a
location model is probably adequate for most supplychannel con ﬁguration problems encountered, there re-
main important developmental issues that can increasethe accuracy, applicability, and scope of location anal-ysis. First, the scope of the analysis should be extendedto deal with the hierarchical nature of the location prob-lem. Second, standards need to be set on how costs, ca-pacities, product groupings, and customer service aredeﬁned and prepared for analysis. Third, the error as-
sociated with the degree of data aggregation associ-ated with product grouping, demand clustering, trans-port rate estimating, distance estimating, and inventorylevel estimating should be determined for the purposeof bene ﬁting from reduced problem size and complex-
ity while retaining reasonable accuracy in the problemdescription. Fourth, current commercial models forUnresolved Issues in Supply Chain Network Design 425
location analysis would bene ﬁt from extending their
scope by including pro ﬁt contribution, inventory con-
solidation effects, multi-stop transportation, selectedproduct sourcing, demand uncertainty, ﬂexible costing,
temporal effects, dynamic location effects, and contin-uous modeling types.
Another important unresolved issue is which model
solution approach is best? Users selecting a model wantto know. Model developers want to know. De ﬁning rea-
sonable ground rules and inviting location model devel-opers to participate in a fair test with impartial judgingwould provide valuable information to guide locationmodel use and development.
In many respects, current location analysis serves
us well and is likely to be adequate in the emerging en-vironment of broad channel planning promoted in sup-ply chain management. However, there remain manyresearch issues surrounding data representation, prob-lem scope, and model testing that can signi ﬁcantly im-
prove the practical application of location analysis andthe models used to support it.
References
Ballou RH. Dynamic warehouse location. Journal of Marketing Re-
search 1968;5(3):271 –276.
Ballou RH. Estimating and auditing aggregate inventory levels at
multiple stocking points. Journal of Operations Management
1981;1(3):143 –153.
Ballou RH. The accuracy in estimating truck class rates for logistical
planning. Transportation Research-A 1991;25A(6):327 –337.
Ballou RH. Measuring transport costing error in customer aggre-
gation for facility location. Transportation Journal 1994;33(3):
49–59.
Ballou RH. Evaluating inventory management performance using a
turnover curve. International Journal of Physical Distribution and
Logistics Management 2000;30(1):72 –85.
Ballou RH, Rahardja H, Sakai N. Selected country circuity factors.
Working Paper, Case Western Reserve University, 2000.
Ballou RH, Masters J. Commercial software for locating warehouses
and other facilities. Journal of Business Logistics 1993;14(2):71 –
107.
Ballou RH, Masters J. Facility location commercial software survey.
Journal of Business Logistics 1999;20(1):215 –233.
Bender PS. Logistic system design. In: Robeson JF, House RG, eds.
The Distribution Handbook . New York, NY: The Free Press, 1985:
ch. 9.
Bookbinder JH, Reese KE. Vehicle routing considerations in distri-
bution system design. European Journal of Operational Research
1988;37(2):204 –213.
Bowersox DJ. Planning physical distribution with dynamic simula-
tion. Journal of Marketing 1972;36(1):17 –25.
Bowersox DJ, Helferich OK, Gilmour P, Morgan FW, Marien E,Lawrence ML, Rogers R. Dynamic Simulation of Physical Dis-
tribution Systems . East Lansing, MI: Michigan State University,
1972.
Brandeau ML, Chiu SS. An overview of representative problems in
location research. Management Science 1989;35(6):645 –674.
Drezner Z. Facility Location . New York, NY: Springer-Verlag,
1995.
Geoffrion AM, Van Roy TJ. Common sense planning methods can
be hazardous to your corporate health. Sloan Management Review
1979;20(4):31 –42.
Ghosh A, McLafferty SL. Location Strategies for Retail and Service
Firms . Lexington, MA: D.C. Heath and Company, 1987.
Greenhut ML. Plant Location in Theory and Practice. Chapell Hill,
NC: University of North Carolina Press, 1956.
Heskett JL. Spatial and temporal aspects of physical distribution. In:
Bennett PD, ed. Marketing and Economic Development . Chicago:
American Marketing Association, 1965:679 –687.
Heskett JL. A missing link in physical distribution system design.
Journal of Marketing 1966;30(A):37 –41.
Ho PK, Perl J. Warehouse location under service-sensitive demand.
Journal of Business Logistics 1995;16(1):133 –162.
Hoover EM. Location Theory and the Shoe and Leather Industries .
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1957.
Isard W. Methods of Regional Analysis: An Introduction to Regional
Science . Cambridge: Technology Press of the Massachusetts In-
stitute of Technology and New York: Wiley, 1960.
Isard W. Location and Space Economy . Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press, 1968.
L¨osch A. Die R ¨aumliche Ordnung der Wirtscaft . Jena: Gustav Fischer
Verlag, 1940.
Palander T.F. Beitr ¨age zur Standortstheorie. Upsala: Almqvist &
Wiksell, 1935.
Perl J, Daskin MS. A uni ﬁed warehouse location-routing methodol-
ogy. Journal of Business Logistics 1984;5(1):92 –111.
Shycon H. How customer service impacts sales growth and ROI
and how distribution can help increase corporate success. In: An-
nual Proceedings of The National Council of Physical Distribu-tion Management (Now The Council of Logistics Management,
Chicago), vol. II, 1982:563 –579.
Sweeney D, Tatham RL. Am improved long-run model for mul-
tiple warehouse location. Management Science 1976;22(7):748 –
758.
Van Roy T, Erlenkotter D. A dual-based procedure for dynamic fa-
cility location. Management Science 1982;28(10):1091 –1105.
von Th ¨unen JH. Der Isolierte Staat in Beziehung auf Landwirtschaft
und National ¨okonomie, 2nd ed. Rostock, 1842; translated by
Wartenburg CM, as Von Th ¨unen ’s Isolated State , Hall P, ed.
Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1966.
Weber A. 1909. ¨Uber den Standort der Industrien . Mohr, Tubingen;
translated by Friedrich CJ as Alfred Weber ’s Theory of the
Location of Industries. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press,
1929.
Wesolowsky GO, Truscott WG. The multi-period location-allocation
problem with relocation of facilities. Management Science
1975;22:57 –65.
Ronald H. Ballou is Professor of Operations, Weath-
erhead School of Management, Case Western Reserve426 Ballou
University, Cleveland, Ohio, U.S.A. Dr. Ballou re-
ceived B.M.E., M.B.A., and Ph.D. degrees in theareas of engineering and business administration, ma-joring in business logistics, from The Ohio StateUniversity. He has published numerous articles in pro-fessional logistics journal and is the author of Busi-
ness Logistics Management (4th edition, Prentice Hall)and Basic Business Logistics (2nd edition, Prentice
Hall). He also has developed computer software (NET-WORK) for locating facilities in logistics networks,used widely by companies throughout the world. Pro-fessor Ballou has been a consultant to many com-panies, especially in the area of logistics networkdesign.