The International Journal of Human Resource
Management
ISSN: 0958-5192 (Print) 1466-4399 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rijh20
How HRM control aﬀects boundary-spanning
employees' behavioural strategies and
satisfaction: the moderating impact of cultural
performance orientation
Vincent Onyemah, Dominique Rouziès & Nikolaos G. Panagopoulos
To cite this article: Vincent Onyemah, Dominique Rouziès & Nikolaos G. Panagopoulos
(2010) How HRM control aﬀects boundary-spanning employees' behavioural strategies
and satisfaction: the moderating impact of cultural performance orientation, The
International Journal of Human Resource Management, 21:11, 1951-1975, DOI:
10.1080/09585192.2010.505096
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/09585192.2010.505096
Published online: 29 Sep 2010.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 1288
View related articles 
Citing articles: 4 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rijh20
How HRM control affects boundary-spanning employees’ behavioural
strategies and satisfaction: the moderating impact of cultural
performance orientation
Vincent Onyemaha, Dominique Rouzie `sb* and Nikolaos G. Panagopoulosc
aMarketing Department, Babson College, Babson Park, MA, USA;bHEC School of Management-
Paris (CREGHEC), Jouy-en-Josas, France;cAthens University of Economics
& Business, Athens, Greece
This study examines how cultural performance orientation moderates the inﬂuence of
human resource management (HRM) controls on boundary-spanning employees’behavioural strategies and satisfaction. Based on primary data obtained from 1049
salespeople in six countries (France, Ireland, Italy, Spain, United Kingdom, and the
United States of America) and secondary data on cultural performance orientation,multilevel regression analyses show that national culture has a strong effect on the wayboundary-spanning employees allocate their effort in response to HRM control.
In particular, our results suggest that the more behaviour controls are used with boundary-
spanning employees, the less attention they pay to customers and the more emphasis theyplace on their supervisors and non-selling tasks. Speciﬁcally, cultural performance
orientation is shown to moderate signiﬁcantly those relationships. Furthermore, results
indicate that cultural performance orientation heightens boundary-spanning employees’job satisfaction resulting from behaviour control. Preliminary explanations for thediffering impact of HRM control efﬁciency across cultures can be proposed.
Keywords: boundary-spanning employees; HRM control; national culture; perform-
ance orientation; sales force control systems; salespeople
Introduction
Global companies often want to install global human resource management policies and
practices across all business units. These help managers to align and control the behaviourof employees across all locations. Many global ﬁrms also rely intensively on theirsalespeople, who constitute a unique class of boundary spanning employees, to bridge thespace between companies and their customers, all of which may be located in differentcountries. This leads sales managers to install sales force control systems to guidesalespeople’s activities so they achieve strategic objectives.
Scholars, however, are ﬁnding that ﬁrms are under increasing pressure to align their
human resource management (HRM) practices with national culture differences (Black,
Gregerson, Mendenhall and Stroh 1999; Palich and Gomez-Mejia 1999; Sparrow 1999;Mendenhall and Oddou 2000; Bloom, Milkovich and Mitra 2003). The desire tostandardize management systems is blunted by the reality that cultural norms can imposeserious impediments to importing foreign practices. This is perhaps one of the drivers forthe increasing research on the impact of national culture on HRM practices (Bae et al.1998; Bloom, Chen and Lawler 2003; Gully, Phillips and Tarique 2003; Aycan 2005).
ISSN 0958-5192 print/ISSN 1466-4399 online
q2010 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/09585192.2010.505096http://www.informaworld.com
*Corresponding author. Email: rouzies@hec.frThe International Journal of Human Resource Management ,
Vol. 21, No. 11, September 2010, 1951–1975
Reviewing a wide range of disciplines, Chenhall (2003) concludes that most contingency-
based research about the inﬂuence of culture on HRM control is still exploratory andtypically focuses only on managerial-level employees. Furthermore, Liao (2006) pointsout the importance of investigating how ﬁrms strategically manage different occupational
groups of employees. Therefore, examining the impact of national culture on HRM
practices, focused below managerial level, offers the opportunity to extend ourunderstanding and assist executives in designing global management practices.
In this paper we examine the effect of HRM control systems on salespeople in
international environments. Speciﬁcally, we study how the implementation andeffectiveness of sales force control models are inﬂuenced by national culture. Thisstudy contributes to the ﬁeld in several ways. First, we extend the control literature byexamining the impact of HRM control on employees’ behavioural responses in aninternational environment. Prior research on HRM control, largely within HRM,management, and accounting, examined the inﬂuence of culture on HRM control, ignoringemployee behavioural responses, while much of the marketing control research examinedthe impact of HRM control on employee b ehavioural responses, ignoring the
cross-cultural aspect. We integrate the ﬁelds of HRM, management, accounting, andmarketing to develop a conceptual framework investigating the role of HRM control on
employee behavioural responses across cultures.
Second, our research uses a recently discovered cultural dimension, namely
performance orientation (House, Hanges, Javidan, Dorfman and Gupta 2004), that isintuitively appealing in the HRM control context. Performance orientation is the degree towhich a community encourages and rewards its members for innovation, excellence, andperformance improvement (House et al. 2004). In the HRM control arena, the importanceof cultural performance orientation is underscored by the fact that ﬁrms manage employeeperformance.
This leads to the third reason to examine this issue, namely that the performance of
salespeople (i.e., a major group of boundary-spanning employees) is critical to the successof ﬁrms (Aldrich and Herker 1977; Tushman and Scanlan 1981; Cross and Cummings2004). In many Business-to-Business (BtoB hereafter) sectors, salespeople are mostly
responsible for the ﬁrm’s revenue line of proﬁt and loss statements. Because boundary
spanning personnel are, by deﬁnition, at the interface between companies and customers,they face competing demands from their company, supervisor and customers. To the bestof our knowledge, the impact of HRM control on the way salespeople respond to thosedemands has never been studied empirically, let alone in a cross-cultural framework.Lloyd and Newell (2001) emphasize the paucity of research on the control of salespeopledespite the size of their occupational group. Research on this group of employees is alsoscarce in the HR literature.
Fourth, our study is the ﬁrst to investigate the effect of HRM control on salespeople’s
satisfaction in an international environment. Because turnover is recognized as a majorconcern for sales managers (Darmon 1990), salespeople’s satisfaction is crucial to ﬁrmsuccess. Moreover, although salespeople’s satisfaction with their job or supervisor hasbeen investigated (Cravens, Ingram, LaForge and Young 1993; Oliver and Anderson1994; Challagalla and Shervani 1996), few researchers deal with salespeople’s satisfaction
with job promotions despite its importance in turnover decisions.
The results of our research indicate that culture should be an important element in the
design of a sales force control system. We ﬁnd that a culture’s dominant performanceorientation moderates the relationship between HRM control and boundary-spanningemployee behavioural strategies and satisfaction. In particular, our results suggest thatV. Onyemah et al. 1952
cultural performance orientation has a strong impact on the types of: (1) behavioural
strategies used by boundary-spanning employees; and (2) satisfaction experienced byboundary-spanning employees, in response to HRM control. These are new insights that
can help executives better manage their international sales force.
Theoretical background
Overview of the theoretical modelThe basic premise of this study is that: (1) HRM control inﬂuences the behavioural
strategies and satisfaction of boundary spanners (i.e., salespeople); and (2) the nature of this
inﬂuence is contingent on a country’s performance orientation. This premise stems from thefact that more and more ﬁrms organize their sales forces into territories that are notconstrained by national boundaries. These environmental changes raise many questionsabout managing sales forces across countries (e.g., Birkinshaw, Toulan and Arnold 2001).
The model in Figure 1 offers a new, relatively unexplored view of culture as a
moderator of the relationship between HRM control and employee behavioural strategiesand satisfaction. The model includes four relationships. The ﬁrst relationship describes the
effect of HRM control on salespeople’s behavioural strategies. Speciﬁcally, our model
suggests that salespeople, faced by competing pressures (i.e., company, supervisors, andcustomers) make tradeoffs regarding the demands they address. We are guided by anumber of studies investigating the inﬂuence of HRM control on dimensions ofsalespeople call activity (i.e., Cravens et al. 1993; Oliver and Anderson 1994). The secondrelationship examines the effect of HRM control on salespeople’s satisfaction with theirsupervisor, job, and promotion possibilities. This relationship draws on insights from
Salesperson satisfaction
• Satisfaction with supervisor
• Job satisfaction
• Satisfaction with promotions
Covariates
• Selling experience
• Impact of company’s effort on sales
• Industrial sectorCultural Performance Orientation
Salesperson behavioural strategy
• Focus on the supervisor
• Focus on the administrative
   aspects of the job• Focus on the customerSales Force Management Control
Figure 1. Conceptual framework.The International Journal of Human Resource Management 1953
HRM control in marketing (e.g., Challagalla and Shervani 1996). Finally, the third and
fourth relationships represent the moderating effects of national culture on the twoaforementioned relationships, respectively. Note that our model controls for the impact of
companies’ effort on sales, the industrial sector, and the selling experience of salespeople.
Human resource management (HRM) control
In keeping with Lloyd and Newell’s research on pharmaceutical sales reps (2001), we take
as our point of departure the most widely used conceptualization of HRM control applied tosalespeople, namely Anderson and Oliver’s (1987), which is based on organizational,psychological and economic theories. A sales force management control is deﬁned as the‘organization’s set of procedures for monitoring, directing, evaluating, and compensating
its salespeople’ (Anderson and Oliver 1987, p. 76). We use their conceptualization of
control – a continuum anchored on two ideal (polar opposite) philosophies: outcome andbehaviour control. In outcome control environments, the achievement of results is largelythe responsibility of the salesperson who is free to select her/his methods for achievingresults. Thus, the salesperson is like an entrepreneur, bearing considerable risks, operatingwith much autonomy, being held accountable for outcomes (i.e., sales results) and receivingvariable compensation tied to the results achieved. In contrast, in behaviour controlenvironments, the main responsibility for results is on the company’s management.
Managers require salespeople to conform to a given process (e.g., selling technique) in the
belief that results will follow. For their obedience, salespeople are rewarded largely by ﬁxedsalary. In the next section, we initiate the development of our hypotheses. We are guided byseveral major theoretical approaches relevant to the sales force control problem, includingagency theory, transaction cost analysis and leader-member exchange (LMX) theory.
HRM control and salesperson behavioural strategies
Because they operate at the interface of ﬁrms and their customers, salespeople are often
facing simultaneous and competing pressures. As a result, salespeople must make decisions
regarding the way they allocate their effort across the competing demands of their
company, supervisor or customers. Most research in this area examines three behaviouralstrategies: call planning (e.g., Cravens et al. 1993), call activity (e.g., Oliver and Anderson1994) or call strategy (e.g., Oliver and Anderson 1994). None, however, examines the waysalespeople actually respond to the competing demands of companies, supervisors andcustomers. Our premise is that a salesperson’s decision to focus on administrative tasks,supervisors or customers depends on the type of HRM control s/he faces.
As noted earlier, conforming to prescribed selling procedures is the major component
of behaviour control. Reﬂecting this logic, agency theory suggests that when a principal
(i.e., the sales manager) chooses the behaviour control option, s/he purchases informationabout an agent’s behaviour (i.e., the salespersons) and rewards the desired behaviours(Eisenhardt 1985). Because an organization administers control mainly throughsupervisors (Challagalla and Shervani 1996), the salesperson is likely to devote moreeffort (than the outcome controlled salesperson) to better understand the expectations ofhis/her supervisor in order to succeed. This conjecture is further supported by the workof Becker (1992), Dirks and Ferrin (2002), Maertz, Griffeth, Campbell and Allen (2007),
and Reichers (1985). Their work implies that a subordinate (i.e., the salesperson)
differentiates relations with the immediate supervisor (i.e., the sales manager) fromrelations with the organization or its leaders. Thus, when individuals believe that feedbackV. Onyemah et al. 1954
will reveal how their behaviour is evaluated and enable them to perform better, they are
likely to seek feedback actively (Ashford and Cummings 1985). Yet, outcome controlledsalespeople are less likely than behaviour controlled salespeople to devote energy toward
their supervisors because on the one hand this information is available to them in their own
task performance and, on the other hand, outcome information (e.g., sales, quotaachievement) can be obtained from other sources than supervisors. As a result, we expectthe salesperson to focus more on his/her supervisor in a behaviour control system.
The fact that behaviour control minimizes the immediate pressure to sell predisposes
salespeople to invest more effort in non-selling and administrative tasks (Anderson andOliver 1987). This rationale is also supported by agency theoretic models of sales-forcecompensation (e.g., Joseph and Thevaranjan 1998) that suggest that if a ﬁrm can monitor
the actions of the agent (i.e., the salesperson), then the need for variable pay (i.e., a form of
outcome control) decreases. Thus, in a behaviour-based control system where the agent’sactions are monitored closely and deviant behaviour can be detected and discouraged,effort on non-selling and administrative tasks can be encouraged. Consequently, we expectbehaviour controlled salespeople to focus on those tasks more than their outcomecontrolled counterparts.
Furthermore, transaction cost analysis suggests that market contracting (i.e., outcome
control in our context) is generally more cost-efﬁcient than integrating transactions
(i.e., behaviour control in our context) (Williamson 1985). In such environments,
customers reward desired behaviours (Anderson and Oliver 1987) as salespeopleremuneration is often tied to sales results, thereby providing them with a greater incentive(compared to their counterparts under behaviour control) to focus on customers. Based onthe foregoing discussion, we hypothesize:
Hypothesis 1 : The more HRM control is behaviour-based,
.the more salespeople focus on their supervisors (H1a);
.the more salespeople focus on their administrative tasks (H1b);
.the less salespeople focus on their customers (H1c).
HRM control and salesperson’s satisfaction
For many BtoB companies, one of the most pressing issues facing sales managers concerns
the turnover of salespeople as it is associated with high opportunity, recruitment andtraining costs. It is therefore not surprising that many practitioners are preoccupiedby salespeople’s satisfaction. In keeping with Challagalla and Shervani (1996), Oliverand Anderson (1994), and Piercy, Cravens, Lane and Vorhies (2006), we propose thatbehaviour-based control systems engender greater satisfaction with the supervisor and the
job because of the improved salesperson’s competencies and growth potentials resulting
from the coaching provided by supervisors in such systems.
This is also consistent with LMX theory (Dansereau, Graen and Haga 1975) that posits
that supervisors develop speciﬁc relationships with each of their subordinates. High-qualityLMX relationships involve mutual trust, inﬂuence, obligation, consideration and frequentcommunication, among other characteristics. Instead, low-quality LMX relationshipsentail formal and contractual relationships often limited to economic exchange (Graen andUhl-Bien 1995; Howell and Hall-Merenda 1999 among others). When supervisors form
high-quality LMX relationships, LMX theory suggests that subordinates are more satisﬁed
with their supervisors (Gerstner and Day 1997), their jobs (Graen, Novak and SommerKamp 1982; Seers and Graen 1984; Major, Kozlowski, Chao and Gardner 1995), theirThe International Journal of Human Resource Management 1955
career advancement and salary increases (Wakabayashi and Graen 1984; Wakabayashi,
Graen, Graen and Graen 1988; Erdogan and Enders 2007). Interestingly, behaviour ratherthan outcome controls seem to provide more fertile grounds for high-quality LMX
relationships to develop. Speciﬁcally, conceptual deﬁnitions of behaviour controls
emphasize the importance of supervisors who monitor, direct, and evaluate the actions ofsalespeople. In contrast, the market rather than the supervisor pressures and guides theactions of the outcome controlled salesperson (Anderson and Oliver 1987). In other words,supervisors and salespeople are more likely to develop exchange relationships in the formercase rather than in the latter. It is our contention therefore that behaviour control systems,characterized by higher levels of management involvement, engender higher-quality LMXrelationships than outcome control systems, which are characterized by minimal contacts
with supervisors. These insights suggest that behaviour controlled salespeople are likely to
be more satisﬁed (than their outcome controlled counterparts) with their supervisor, job andpromotion possibilities. Thus, we hypothesize:
Hypothesis 2 : The more HRM control is behaviour-based, the higher the salespersons’
satisfaction with their:
.supervisor (H2a);
.job (H2b);
.promotion possibilities (H2c).
Cultural performance orientation
Because salespeople write the top line of ﬁrms’ income statements (Zoltners, Sinha and
Zoltners 2001; Colletti and Fiss 2006), management pays close attention to theirperformance (Rich, Bommer, MacKenzie, Podsakoff and Johnson 1999). Consequently, thecultural dimension that is most germane to this group of boundary spanners concernsperformance orientation. Identiﬁed by the Global Leadership and Organizational BehaviourEffectiveness (GLOBE) project, cultural performance orientation reﬂects the degree towhich a collective encourages and rewards group members for performance improvement
and excellence (House et al. 2004). The GLOBE research programme (House et al. 1999;
House et al. 2004; Chhokar, Brodbeck and House 2007), based on the study of 62 societies,and is one of the most comprehensive studies conceptualizing and measuring culture. It isalso the most recent study of culture and as such it addresses several conceptual andmethodological limitations of prior research (Fu et al. 2004). As a result, the performanceorientation dimension of national culture seems particularly relevant to our study.
Furthermore, performance orientation is associated with internal locus of control
(House et al. 2004). The internal locus of control (i.e., a belief in individual responsibility)
is related to societal values such as ambition, drive, thirst for learning and improvement,
and high standards of performance (McClelland, Atkinson, Clark and Lowell 1953;Hofstede and Bond 1988), variables that also characterize societies that score highly onperformance orientation. In such societies, when behaviour control is used, we argue thatthe sales manager’s role will become more salient because s/he speciﬁes the desiredbehaviour and, in keeping with agency and LMX theoretic reasoning, s/he purchasesinformation about it, provides feedback and rewards it. Thus, behaviour controlledsalespeople, driven by the desire to better succeed, are even likelier to focus on their
supervisor in high performance orientation cultures.
Accordingly, the drive to achieve higher performance, and hence the reward and
recognition tied to it, is not likely to compel salespeople operating in high culturalV. Onyemah et al. 1956
performance orientation to focus on non-selling and administrative tasks because they
would not identify them as sources of success. Thus, the positive inﬂuence of behaviourcontrol on salespeople’s focus on administrative tasks will be weaker in societies that
score highly on performance orientation.
As noted earlier, a rationale consistent with transaction cost analysis, suggests that
outcome control systems delegate salespeople’s reward judgments to a third party – thecustomer base. While behaviour controlled salespeople focus less on customers thantheir outcome controlled counterparts, we argue that in high performance orientationcultures, they will devote more energy to succeed. In other words, customers should alsoappear as instrumental to their success. Accordingly, high performance orientationcultures should lower the negative effect of behaviour control on salespeople’s focus on
customers.
Therefore, we hypothesize:
Hypothesis 3 : The higher the level of cultural performance orientation,
.the more positive the relationship between behaviour control and the
salespersons’ focus on their supervisor (H3a);
.the less positive the relationship between behaviour control and the
salespersons’ focus on administrative tasks (H3b);
.the less negative the relationship between behaviour control and the
salespersons’ focus on customers (H3c).
While LMX theory and empirical research suggests that high quality LMX
relationships provide more satisfaction with the supervisor, job and promotions
(Graen et al. 1982; Seers and Graen 1984; Wakabayashi and Graen 1984; Wakabayashiet al. 1988; Major et al. 1995; Erdogan and Enders 2007), we argue that thoserelationships should be even more satisfying in cultures where performance improvementand excellence are encouraged. Thus, individuals operating in those cultural
environments are more actively seeking higher performance, thereby increasing thelikelihood of entering high LMX relationships. On the basis of that preceding discussion,since we established earlier that behaviour-based control systems are promoting LMX
relationships, we predict as follows:
Hypothesis 4 : The higher the level of cultural performance orientation,
.the more positive the relationship between behaviour control and the
salespersons’ satisfaction with their supervisor (H4a);
.the more positive the relationship between behaviour control and the
salespersons’ job satisfaction (H4b);
.the more positive the relationship between behaviour control and the
salespersons’ satisfaction with promotion possibilities (H4c).
Covariates
The sales force management literature suggests that the attitudes and behaviours of
salespeople are inﬂuenced by factors such as selling experience, industrial sector and theextent to which company efforts impact sales outcomes (e.g., Coughlan and Sen 1989;John and Weitz 1989; Rouzie `s and Macquin 2002). Thus, in our analyses, we include three
covariates: (a) selling experience; (b) industrial sector; and (c) impact of company efforton sales.The International Journal of Human Resource Management 1957
Data collection and sample
Our primary data came from salespeople working in six countries (France, Ireland, Italy,
Spain, United Kingdom and the United States of America) and four industrial sectors(healthcare and pharmaceutical, information systems and technology, fast movingconsumer goods, and industrial goods). Companies the salespeople work for werecontacted through participants at executive education seminars in two internationalbusiness schools. For providing the contact details of their salespeople, the executiveswere promised a post-study report. Prior to mailing the questionnaire to salespeople, we
asked a senior executive in each ﬁrm to inform their salespeople about the survey.
We created a ﬁrst version of the questionnaire in English. We developed three
alternative versions (Spanish, Italian and French) using the standard back translationtechnique. First- and second-wave mailings yielded 1049 usable questionnaires,representing a 50% response rate. The number of responses per country was: France (90),Ireland (67), Italy (95), Spain (274), United Kingdom (57) and the United States of America(466). We excluded 20 questionnaires because they had missing responses. We alsoexcluded respondents from Belgium because only 10 questionnaires were returned. Analysis
of non-response bias (Armstrong and Overton 1977) revealed no signiﬁcant differences
between early and late respondents. On average, respondents had eleven years of sellingexperience.
Measures and psychometric properties
Independent variables: control elements as perceived by salespeople
The objective here is to establish salespeople’s perceptions of the control elements they
experience. Some organizations might have a corporate level control philosophy.However, in practice, sales managers often adapt this overarching control philosophy tothe heterogeneous circumstances of salespeople. A number of researchers have identiﬁedvarious elements that constitute a sales force control system (Table 1).
Empirical studies of sales force controls often measure the constitutive elements as
perceived by the individual salesperson (e.g., Cravens et al. 1993; Oliver and Anderson
1994) because the best informants about sales force controls (as is) are salespeople(e.g., Jaworski and MacInnis 1989; Kohli 1989). We generated several initial itemscorresponding to each element of a sales force management control. Preliminary versionsof these items were administered to convenience samples of salespeople and salesmanagers. Their feedback led to further revisions before arriving at the ﬁnal set of items(see Appendix). Except for the compensation scheme (i.e., the proportion of salary in totalcompensation), each element was measured with multiple items: focus of performance
criteria (ﬁve items); number of performance criteria (four items); degree of management
intervention (four items); frequency of contact (four items); degree of managementmonitoring (six items), amount of coaching offered (ﬁve items); and transparency ofevaluation criteria (ﬁve items). Since each item was anchored on a 7-point scale, theproportion of salary in compensation was transformed into a 7-point scale.
Dependent variables: salesperson behavioural strategies and satisfaction
The three facets of behavioural strategies (i.e., focus on the supervisor, the customer and
the administrative aspects of the job) were each measured by the percentage of time the
salesperson devotes to supervisors, customers and administrative tasks respectively.Satisfaction with job and satisfaction with supervisor were each measured with three itemsV. Onyemah et al. 1958
Table 1. Elements of outcome- and behavior-based controls.
Continuum
Outcome-based control Behaviour-based control
1. Focus of performance criteria. Does management value how sales
results are achieved (the effort expended) or simply the results
themselves (the outcomes)?Managers pay particular attention to
bottom-line results.Managers pay particular attention to the
methods used to achieve outcomes.
2. Number of performance criteria. Does management judge
salespeople using only two or three factors, or does it look at a dozen or
more metrics?Management evaluates a sales-
person’s performance according to a
few observable metrics, primarily
market-related such as sales volume.Management evaluates a salesperson’s per-
formance subjectively, using many criteria.
3. Degree of management intervention. Who makes the ﬁnal decision
on important issues related to sales assignments, the salesperson or the
manager?Managers typically offer relatively
little supervision. Salespeople make
ﬁnal decisions.Managers offer relatively heavy supervision
and make ﬁnal decisions.
4. Frequency of contact. Are interactions between salespeople and
management easy to enact?Managers and salespeople have little
to no contact.Managers and salespeople are frequently and
extensively in contact.
5. Degree of management monitoring. Does management show serious
interest in salespeople’s call and activity reports, or are these just abureaucratic requirement?Management rarely monitors its sales
staff.Management constantly monitors its sales
staff.
6. Amount of coaching offered. Does management suggest ways that
salespeople can improve their selling skills and abilities?Managers offer little to no coaching. Managers offer frequent, heavy coaching.
7. Transparency of evaluation criteria. How objective, clear and
precise are evaluations at the company?Evaluation criteria are very transpar-
ent.Evaluation criteria are opaque.
8. Compensation scheme. Is the paycheck based largely on variable
compensation triggered by outcomes? Or does it have a large salary
component with a performance bonus driven by management’sjudgements?A salesperson’s compensation is
mostly variable, keyed to results.A salesperson’s compensation is mostly ﬁxed,
keyed to salary or management’s evaluations.
Continuum
Sources: Adapted from Anderson and Oliver 1987; Cravens et al. 1993; Oliver and Anderson 1994; Krafft 1999; Anderson and Onyemah 2006.The International Journal of Human Resource Management 1959
(Appendix) while satisfaction with promotion possibilities was measured with two items
(Churchill, Ford and Walker 1974).
The coefﬁcient alphas obtained for the multi-item scales suggest unidimensionality
and are consistent with expectations derived from theory: focus of performance criteria(0.81); number of performance criteria (0.80); degree of management intervention (0.69);frequency of contact (0.82); degree of management monitoring (0.83); amount of coachingoffered (0.80); transparency of evaluation criteria (0.86); satisfaction with job (0.84); andsatisfaction with supervisor (0.79). Subsequently, a conﬁrmatory factor analysis was
conducted using LISREL 8. The analysis yielded overall ﬁt statistics that are within
acceptable limits: root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA) was 0.0638,conﬁdence interval (CI 90%) ranged from 0.0615 to 0.0662, goodness of ﬁt index (GFI),adjusted goodness of ﬁt index (AGFI), comparative ﬁt index (CFI) and non-normed ﬁtindex (NNFI) reached 0.91, 0.90, 0.87 and 0.86 respectively (Diamantopoulos andSiguaw 2000). Overall, these statistics suggest that our multi-item measures are
unidimensional and possess adequate reliability.
The multi-country nature of our sample demands that we conduct a multi-group
conﬁrmatory factor analysis (Bollen 1989; Horn 1991; Steenkamp and Baumgartner 1998)to examine the: (1) equivalence of factor-structures, (2) equivalence of coefﬁcients linkingthe latent to the observed variables, and (3) equivalence of measurement error variancesacross countries (France, Ireland, Italy, Spain, United Kingdom and the United States of
America). The results indicate equivalent factor structure across countries
(RMSEA ¼0.057; CI 90% ranges from 0.055 to 0.059; CFI ¼0.87; NNFI ¼0.86)
which satisﬁes the ﬁrst objective. Second, we test whether the coefﬁcients linking thelatent to the observed variables are the same in all countries. The results indicate anadequate ﬁt (RMSEA ¼0.060; CI 90% ranges from 0.058 to 0.062; CFI ¼0.86;
NNFI ¼0.84), and that the coefﬁcients linking the latent to the observed variables are
the same in all countries. For the third objective, the coefﬁcients linking the latent to the
observed variables and the measurement error variances are both constrained to beinvariant across countries. The resulting ﬁt statistics are within acceptable limits(RMSEA ¼0.063; CI 90 percent ranges from 0.061 to 0.065; CFI ¼0.85; NNFI ¼0.84).
The foregoing results suggest measurement invariance of our variables across thecountries.
Since each salesperson experiences a control that is the totality of its eight elements, a
formative indicator was used to establish the degree of behaviour control. Consistent withOliver and Anderson (1994) and Krafft (1999), the scores on the eight elements wereadded and averaged to form an index of the degree of behaviour control (versus outcomecontrol represented by lower scores). For example, an average score of ‘7’ reﬂects a purebehaviour control (BC) system while an average score of ‘1’ reﬂects a pure outcome
control (OC) system. Average scores that fall between ‘1’ and ‘7’ reﬂect hybrid controls.
Finally, the data on performance orientation were obtained from the GLOBE Research
Programme (House et al. 2004). Performance orientation measures a society’s preferencefor excellence and performance improvement (coefﬁcient alpha: 0.90). The scales andmeasures reported in the GLOBE project possess adequate psychometric properties(Javidan, House, Dorfman, Hanges and Sully de Luque 2006). With regards to the
covariates: selling experience was measured in years; relative impact of company’s effort
on sales results was measured by asking the respondents to split 100 points between theimpact of their effort and that of the company (Appendix). Dummy variables were createdfor three of the four sectors. The reference sector is ‘healthcare and pharmaceutical’.V. Onyemah et al. 1960
The means, standard deviations and bivariate correlations of all the variables used in this
research are presented in Table 2.
Model speciﬁcation and estimation
Estimation procedures
Based on the hypotheses previously proposed and the nature of our data, our
conceptualization involves two levels of analysis (i.e., individuals are nested in countries),as follows. For the salesperson behavioural strategy model, we specify:
Level 1:
STRATEGY
ij¼b0jþb1jCONTROL ijþb2jEXPERIENCE ijþb3jEFFORT ij
þb4jSECTOR ijþrij ð1Þ
Level 2:
b0j¼g00þg01P_ORIENTATION jþy0j ð2Þ
b1j¼g10þg11P_ORIENTATION jþy1j ð3Þ
where:
Subscript i: salespersonSubscript j: countrySTRATEGY: Salesperson behavioural strategy (i.e., focus on the supervisor, the customeror the administrative aspects of the job)CONTROL: Degree of behaviour control experienced by the salespersonEXPERIENCE: Salesperson selling experienceEFFORT: Impact of company’s effort on sales results
SECTOR: Industrial sector
P_ORIENTATION: Cultural performance orientation
Equation 1 speciﬁes the salesperson-level model while Equation 2 speciﬁes the
country-level model. We assume the error term r
ijto be centred and normally distributed.
Moreover, we assume the random effects yqj(q¼0, 1) to be centred, multivariate
normally distributed over countries and to be the unique effect of country j on theparameters
bqjwhile controlling for the country-level predictor variables. Similarly, for
the salesperson satisfaction model, we specify:
Level 1:
SATISFACTION ij¼b0jþb1jCONTROL ijþb2jEXPERIENCE ijþb3jEFFORT ij
þb4jSECTORij þrij ð4Þ
Level 2:
b0j¼g00þg01P_ORIENTATION jþy0j ð5Þ
b1j¼g10þg11P_ORIENTATION jþy1j ð6ÞThe International Journal of Human Resource Management 1961
Table 2. Summary statistics.
Variable Mean SD 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
1. Sales force
management control4.03 0.58 1.00
2. Job satisfaction 5.46 1.05 .23 *** 1.00
3. Satisfaction with
promotion4.00 1.57 .31 *** .34*** 1.00
4. Satisfaction with
supervisor4.83 1.29 .40 *** .43*** .46*** 1.00
5. Performance
orientation5.98 .17 .07 * .06 .05 .12 *** 1.00
6. Salesperson’s focus
on supervisor.06 .07 .23 *** .10*** .17*** .21*** .21*** 1.00
7. Salesperson’s focus
on customer.77 .20 2.25***2.08* 2.08*2.13***2.02 2.64*** 1.00
8. Salesperson’s focus
on the administrativeaspects of the job.13 .13 .17 ***2756£10
25766£1025.01 840 £1025.38***2.84*** 1.00
9. Salesperson’s selling
experience11.00 8.39 .02 .16 *** 2.07* .03 2.21***2.03 2.06* .06*1.00
10. Impact of company
effort on sales37.20 18.55 .11 ***2.04 2.02 .03 2.25***2.01 2.09** .08* .13*** 1.00
11. Dummy information
system andtechnology.32 .47 2.32***2.16*** 2.16***2.19***2.24***2.07* .09**2.07*2.25*** 927£10
251.00
12. Dummy fast moving
consumer goods.17 .37 .04 .06 2.03 .03 2.46***2.09**2.05 .02 .40 *** .28***2.31*** 1.00
13. Dummy industrial
goods.09 .29 .11 ***2788£1025.06 2.06 2.32***2.11*** .09**2.06 .12 *** .02 2.22***2.14*** 1.00
Note: N ¼1049 for individual-level variables; N ¼6 for the country-level variable (i.e., performance orientation). ***p,.001 **p,.01*p,.05.V. Onyemah et al. 1962
where:
Subscript i: salesperson
Subscript j: countrySATISFACTION: Salesperson’s satisfaction (i.e., satisfaction with job, supervisor andpromotion possibilities)CONTROL: Degree of behaviour control experienced by the salespersonEXPERIENCE: Salesperson selling experienceEFFORT: Impact of company’s effort on sales results
SECTOR: Industrial sector
P_ORIENTATION: Cultural performance orientation
We used hierarchical linear modelling (HLM) (Raudenbush and Bryk 2002) to test our
hypotheses because our data are multilevel. Thus, we group-centred the salespeople-level
predictors within countries and grand-mean-centred the country-level predictors. HLM
uses iterative maximum likelihood estimation to simultaneously estimate the relationshipsof variables at several levels.
Results
Table 3 presents the results for the HLM models of salespeople’s behavioural strategies
while Table 4 shows the results for the HLM models of salespeople’s satisfaction.
Salespeople’s behavioural strategies
Hypothesis 1 posits that the more the sales force control is behaviour-based, the more
salespeople focus on their supervisor (H1a), administrative tasks (H1b), and the lesssalespeople focus on their customers (H1c). Consistent with this hypothesis, the resultsdepict: (1) the positive effects of behaviour controls on salespeople’s focus on supervisors(b¼.02,p,.001) and administrative tasks ( b¼.04,p,.001); and (2) the negative
effects of behaviour controls on salespeople’s focus on customers ( b¼2.09,p,.001).
In addition, we hypothesized that the effects of behaviour controls on salespeople’s focus on
supervisors will be stronger in countries characterized by a high level of cultural
performance orientation (H3a). As anticipated, this interaction effect is signiﬁcant ( g¼.05,
p,.05). We also predicted that the effects of behaviour controls on salespeople’s focus on
the administrative aspects of their job will be weaker in countries characterized by a highlevel of cultural performance orientation (H3b). As expected, this interaction effect issigniﬁcant ( g¼2.12,p,.01). Next, H3c predicts that the effects of behaviour controls on
salespeople’s focus on customers will be weaker in countries characterized by a high level ofcultural performance orientation. In line with this hypothesis, the results provide evidence
for a signiﬁcant interaction effect ( g¼.13,p,.05).
Salespeople’s satisfaction
Hypothesis 2 suggests that the more the sales force control is behaviour-based, the higher
is salespeople’s satisfaction with their supervisor (H2a), job (H2b), and promotionpossibilities (H2c). The results support this hypothesis ( b¼.78, p,.001 for H2a;
b¼.40,p,.001 for H2b; b¼.88,p,.001 for H2c). In Hypothesis 4, the effect of
behaviour-based sales force control on salespeople’s satisfaction with their supervisor
(H4a), with the job (H4b), and with promotion possibilities (H4c) is expected to bestronger in countries characterized with a high level of performance orientation. H4a isThe International Journal of Human Resource Management 1963
Table 3. Effect of HRM control on boundary-spanning employees’ behavioural strategies: the moderating impact of performance orientation.
Salesperson focus on supervisorSalesperson focus on administrative
aspects of the job Salesperson focus on customer
Hypothesized
effectUnstandardized
coefﬁcientHypothesized
effectUnstandardized
coefﬁcientHypothesized
effectUnstandardized
coefﬁcient
Intercept .06 ** .17*** .77***
Sales force management control þ(H1a) .02 *** þ(H1b) .04 *** - (H1c) -.09 ***
Performance orientation .05 -.12 0.11
Moderating effect of country
characteristics
Sales force management control £
performance orientationþ(H3a) .05 * - (H3b) 2.12** þ(H3c) 0.13 *
Covariates
Salespers. selling experience 294 £10261029£1026* 2140£1025
Impact of comp. effort on sales 65 £1026370£1026250£1025
Dummy information system and
technology2307£10252.04*** .02
Dummy fast moving cons. doods 2538£10252.04 2.02
Dummy industrial goods 21973£10252.07*** 0.08*
Notes: N ¼1049 for individual-level variables; N ¼6 for the country-level variable (i.e., performance orientation). ***p,.001 **p,.01*p,.05.V. Onyemah et al. 1964
Table 4. Effect of HRM control on boundary-spanning employees’ satisfaction: the moderating impact of performance orientation.
Salesperson satisfaction with
supervisorSalesperson satisfaction with the
jobSalesperson satisfaction with
promotions
Hypothesized
effectUnstandardized
coefﬁcientHypothesized
effectUnstandardized
coefﬁcientHypothesized
effectUnstandardized
coefﬁcient
Intercept 4.44 *** 5.22*** 3.49***
Sales force management control þ(H2a) .78 *** þ(H2b) .40 *** þ(H2c) .88 ***
Performance orientation .55 .16 2.13
Moderating effect of country characteristics
Sales force management control £
performance orientationþ(H4a) 1.01 ** þ(H4b) 2.07 þ(H4c) 21.19*
Covariates
Salespers. selling experience 4653 £1026.02*** 2.02**
Impact of comp. effort on sales 1598 £10262358£1025* 2335£1025
Dummy information system and technology .20 .11 .31
Dummy fast moving cons. goods .32 .21 .47
Dummy industrial goods 2.08 .01 .56
Notes: N ¼1049 for individual-level variables; N ¼6 for the country-level variable (i.e., performance orientation). ***p,.001 **p,.01*p,.05.The International Journal of Human Resource Management 1965
supported ( g¼1.01, p,.001) whereas H4b is not supported ( g¼2.07, p..05).
In contrast, the results corresponding to the test of H4c are contrary to our prediction(g¼21.19, p,.01).
Discussion
Salespeople are boundary-spanning employees whose performance is critical to ﬁrms’
success. In many BtoB sectors, salespeople play another crucial role – that of being theshortest link between ﬁrms and their customers. Importantly, cultural performanceorientation seems to be a particularly relevant issue in sales force management since one ofthe most pressing issues concerns their performance. Needless to say, questions related totheir HRM control are pertinent, even more so in international contexts. This pertinence,
however, is not reﬂected by previous theoretical and empirical research. The importance
of the foregoing is underscored by trends that push ﬁrms to become more global.The framework we present draws on insights from HRM, accounting, marketing andmanagement literature to examine both salespeople’s behavioural strategies and satisfactionin response to HRM control. Based on existing theory, we developed and tested a number ofhypotheses about how cultural performance orientation inﬂuences HRM control effect onsalespeople’s foci and satisfaction.
HRM control and salespeople’s behavioural strategies
The results of this research suggest that cultural performance orientation serves as a
catalyst when salespeople, in response to behaviour controls, focus on supervisors. This isnot surprising given Oliver and Anderson’s (1994) ﬁndings that behaviour controlsenhance salespeople’s acceptance of authority/direction. Thus, behaviour controls seem topush salespeople to focus on their supervisor, which is natural since supervisors, notcustomers, evaluate and reward them. This is also consistent with the LMX perspectivethat attributes members’ outcomes to the quality of their relationships with theirsupervisors (Sparrowe and Liden 2005). In other words, the more salespeople are
behaviour controlled, the more they will try to create a good relationship with their
supervisor, even more so when they are more concerned about their performance – ascultural performance orientation induces them to be. All in all, we suspect that behaviourcontrolled salespeople are more likely to manage their supervisor, even more so incountries that are rated highly on performance orientation.
Conversely, cultural performance orientation dampens the negative impact of
behaviour controls on salespeople’s customer focus. Cravens and his colleagues (1993)suggest that behaviour controls support salespeople’s customer orientation. To reconcile
this apparent contradiction, we must take into account the fact that Cravens et al. (1993)
measure how managers perceive salespeople (generally working in the ﬁeld, far fromsupervision) handle their customers, not how salespeople actually handle their customers.
In contrast, our research sheds light on salespeople’s account of their actual behaviour in
response to the degree of behaviour controls experienced. Then, it comes as no surprisethat salespeople under behaviour controls emphasize their customers less, as customersneither evaluate nor reward them. On the other hand, salespeople under outcome controlsdepend on their customer relationships to achieve their selling objectives, and
consequently focus on their customers. In other words, salespeople under outcome
controls focus on the voice of the market because it is the market, not the supervisor thatdecides their fate. This is especially true in organizations where customers are ‘kings’V. Onyemah et al. 1966
(Anderson and Onyemah 2006). This is reinforced by cultural performance orientation that
induces salespeople to be even more concerned with their performance.
The same explanatory mechanism applies to the tendency of salespeople under
behaviour controls to focus on administrative tasks. Those results are supported by Cravens
et al. (1993). We surmise that cultural performance orientation weakens this positiverelationship since administrative tasks are not directly linked to salespeople’s performance.In other words, salespeople, in performance oriented societies, are less likely to performadministrative tasks in response to behaviour control policies. This is because administrativetasks are considered as impediments to the achievement of their sales objectives.
The results of this research offer insights on HRM control of sales forces operating
globally. They support the recent arguments of researchers regarding the ‘national insti-
tutional embeddedness of ﬁrms’ as a major factor inﬂuencing HRM practices
(Gooderham, Nordhaug and Ringdal 1999), speciﬁcally in the sales force context(e.g., Segalla, Rouzie `s, Besson and Weitz 2006). However, we draw attention to the
possibility that this relationship may not be as simple as originally assumed. Thus, thisstudy suggests that cultural performance orientation moderates the relationship betweenthe HRM control system in place and the behavioural strategies exhibited by salespeople.
HRM control and salespeople’s satisfaction
For many BtoB companies, the turnover of salespeople represents a major concern, since it
is associated with high opportunity costs, recruitment costs and training expenses. Because
salespeople’s satisfaction is expected to lower salespeople turnover (Churchill, Ford,Walker, Johnston and Marshall 2006), our study sheds some light on different aspects ofsalespeople’s satisfaction.
Our contention is that compared to their counterparts under outcome controls,
salespeople who face behaviour controls are more likely to be satisﬁed (i.e., with theirsupervisor, job and promotion possibilities). This ﬁnding is consistent with Oliver andAnderson’s (1994) results. Moreover, our research shows that cultural performance
orientation increases the ability of behaviour control to engender greater salespeople’s
satisfaction with their supervisor. Thus, we suspect that salespeople under behaviourcontrols are more likely to be satisﬁed with their supervisor, even more so in countries thatare rated highly on performance orientation. This is not surprising given the foregoingdiscussion on the way behaviour controls enhance salespeople’s focus on their supervisor.In keeping with the LMX (leader-member exchange) perspective that attributes members’outcomes to the quality of their relationships with their supervisor (Sparrowe and Liden2005) we infer that, relative to outcome controls, behaviour controls are more likely to
create a closer bond between salespeople and sales supervisors. Consequently, as
salespeople are more concerned about their performance (i.e., as cultural performanceorientation induces them to be), salespeople’s satisfaction with their supervisor is likely tobe even higher in response to behaviour controls. Thus, it is plausible that salespeople whoface behaviour controls are more likely to manage their supervisors and be satisﬁed withher/him, even more so in countries with high levels of performance orientation.
Contrary to our prediction, our ﬁndings indicate that cultural performance orientation
weakens the positive relationship between behaviour controls and salespeople’s
satisfaction with promotion possibilities. One might speculate that cultural performance
orientation supports merit-based promotion, thereby reducing internal promotionpossibilities. This is consistent with Rouzie `s, Segalla and Weitz’s (2003) ﬁnding thatThe International Journal of Human Resource Management 1967
Latin managers are less willing to select external promotion candidates, as Latin countries,
compared with Anglo Saxon countries, score low on cultural performance orientation.
Finally, the ﬁnding that more experienced salespeople are more satisﬁed with their job
but less with their promotions, supports prior work by Avlonitis and Panagopoulos (2007),
Cron and Slocum (1986) and Cron, Dubinsky and Michaels (1988). Similarly, the ﬁndingthat they focus more on administrative tasks might be explained by the fact that moretenured salespeople tend to work harder (Cron and Slocum 1986; Cron et al. 1988).A seemingly intriguing ﬁnding is that the relative impact of company’s effort on sales has anegative effect on a salesperson’s satisfaction with the job. However, a larger impact ofcompany’s effort implies a smaller impact of salespeople’s effort on sales. Since most salesorganizations set sales goals to salespeople, we surmise that salespeople feel less satisﬁed
with their job because they have little control on the attainment of assigned sales objectives.
As Zoltners and colleagues note: ‘Salespeople are responsible only for their own efforts, butthey are accountable for the company’s efforts’ (2001, p. 256). In addition, the ﬁnding thatsalespeople who sell information systems and technology, compared to salespeople whosell pharmaceutical and healthcare services/products, spend less time on administrativeactivities is consistent with the work of Churchill et al. (2006, p. 50) who speculate that theefﬁciencies gained from advances in communication technology help offset the sheernumber of additional activities salespeople perform today. Finally, we found that,
compared to salespeople in the pharmaceutical and healthcare sector, salespeople in the
industrial goods sector tend to focus more on customers. This ﬁnding is not surprising sincethose customers are likely to be larger and to engage in extensive decision-makingprocesses (Churchill et al. 2006, p. 50), thereby requiring more time.
Limitations
Our study has limitations that should be addressed in future research. First, we sampled
mainly BtoB salespeople. Whether our results are generalizable to other employmentgroups remains to be demonstrated. Indeed, we hope future research will investigate our
model using samples from a variety of boundary-spanning populations.
Also, some companies adopt cultural control, that is, a pattern of shared values and beliefs
that guide norms of behaviour within a sales organization (Jaworski, Stathakopoulos andKrishnan 1993). While the sales force literature include both formal (outcome, behaviour,process, activity) and informal (cultural, professional) controls (Baldauf, Cravens and Piercy2005), the vast majority of research to date shows more empirical support for formal controls.Furthermore, the behaviour/outcome control framework is the dominant HRM control theoryapplied to sales force management (Leigh, Pullins and Comer 2001). The fact that the results
of our study do not generalize to informal types of control represents a limitation.
Another limitation of our study is that it investigates one single cultural dimension
(i.e., performance orientation), albeit the most pertinent for salespeople. Further researchshould examine other cultural dimensions. Finally, one should not generalize results basedon investigations restricted to the US and some Western European countries, especiallysince a sizeable portion of international business growth takes place in emerging economies(e.g., China, India). Future research should set out to investigate other environments.
Managerial implications
Two implications of our ﬁndings stand out. The ﬁrst concerns the typical actions of
salespeople working under a regime of behaviour control. In theory, if a salesperson followsV. Onyemah et al. 1968
a well designed selling process (especially one that has been shown to be successful) the sale
will eventually be made. In practice, however, salespeople can focus on variousconstituencies. We ﬁnd that salespeople working under a behaviour control system tend tofocus more on their supervisors than on their customers. In order to succeed in a ﬁrm where
one’s behaviour is critical to internal success it becomes important to focus on the
supervisor, who is typically a trainer and/or evaluator. In such settings, career success andpromotion come not only from achieving good sales results but also from being obedient tosupervisors and following company-recommended procedures. However, research showsthat behaviour control leads to better performance in many situations, such as stable andprogrammable task environments (e.g., Snell and Youndt 1995; Liao 2005, 2006). But inmarketplaces characterized by intense competition, paying little or no attention tocustomers can lead to a loss of sales to competitors.
Customer orientation is signiﬁcant because salespeople, as boundary spanners, are
more exposed to changing demands from an evolving task environment. Therefore, even iflarge parts of the ﬁrm operate under conditions that favour behaviour controls, boundaryspanners – more likely to operate in microenvironments laden with uncertainties andcompeting demands – will need a control system adapted to their unique situations. Onemight be tempted to opt for output control, but this might not be the remedy especially in
the long run because it may not yield higher performance (e.g., Weitzel and Jonsson 1989;
Sutton 1990; Rowe and Wright 1997; Liao 2006).
The second key implication stems from an important demographic factor that will
heighten the need to increase employee satisfaction. Baby boomers are retiring at various butunrelenting paces in developed economies. This is leading to the threat of a labour shortageduring the upcoming decade. With new external talent in short supply, ﬁrms must improveemployee satisfaction in order to hold on to their best employees. Therefore a salesperson’ssatisfaction becomes an important element for sales executives to consider. We ﬁnd thatsalespeople are more satisﬁed with their supervisors when they are managed by a behaviourcontrol system. According to our study, this satisfaction is further enhanced when salespersonnel live in a culture with strong cultural performance orientation. So a key to retainingand keeping salespeople happy appears to be a control system that is behaviour-based.
Whether they adopt behaviour or outcome controls, sales managers in international
companies face a dilemma. If they rely on behaviour controls, customer focus might becompromised. On the other hand, if they implement outcome controls, salespeople willdevelop less satisfying relationships with their supervisors and perhaps become lesscommitted to the ﬁrm. Both of these effects are more pronounced in cultures with highlevels of performance orientation. Needless to say, few sales managers would voluntarilytrade a loss of customer focus for more satisﬁed salespeople.
The solution is likely to be found somewhere between the two pure types, namely in a
mixed sales management system that blends elements of behaviour and outcome controls(Baldauf et al. 2005). Because of the idiosyncrasies of boundary-spanning jobs such as selling,we advise sales managers to consider using mixed control systems for their sales organi-zations. While the quest for the right blend of control elements poses signiﬁcant challenges,the beneﬁts can be substantial since mixed control systems, when properly designed andimplemented, address a wider array of problems (e.g., Merchant 1985; Gooderham, Parry and
Ringdal 2008). The reward for getting the right balance between behaviour and outcome could
be more satisﬁed and productive salespeople and an improved bottom line.
A major policy implication relates to cross-border mergers and acquisitions. Going by
the ﬁndings reported in this paper, the success of cross-border mergers and acquisitionsmight depend on the extent to which the HRM controls adopted for boundary spannersThe International Journal of Human Resource Management 1969
(especially salespeople) respond favourably to the prevailing cultural performance
orientation. In the same vein, expatriate sales executives responsible for implementinghome-ofﬁce HRM controls, should be sensitive to the signiﬁcant impact of cultural
performance orientation on the responsiveness of their salespeople with respect to the time
devoted to customers, administrative assignments, and supervisors.
It is not enough for organizations to align HRM controls with strategic objectives
(e.g., Baird and Meshoulam 1988). To improve the effectiveness of their HRM controls,organizations should equally strive to bring their HRM controls into alignment with thecultural performance orientation of the countries where they operate. Furthermore, giventhat cultural performance orientation is ﬁxed (i.e., not managerially actionable),organizations are left with making reasonable adjustments to their HRM control for
boundary spanning employees (e.g., the mixed control systems mentioned earlier). These
adjustments could have a positive impact on the ﬁrm’s market value (e.g., Becker andGerhart 1996), even more so if the focal employee group comprises salespeople sincethese boundary spanners are principally responsible for the ﬁrm’s revenue.
Acknowledgement
This paper is dedicated to the memory of Erin Anderson who provided moral, technical and ﬁnancial
support for the ﬁeld work.
References
Aldrich, H., and Herker, D. (1977), ‘Boundary Spanning Roles and Organization Structure,’
Academy of Management Review , 2, 2, 217–230.
Anderson, E., and Oliver, R.L. (1987), ‘Perspectives on Behavior-based Versus Outcome-based
Sales Force Control Systems,’ Journal of Marketing , 51, 76–88.
Anderson, E., and Onyemah, V. (2006), ‘How Right Should the Customer Be?’ Harvard Business
Review , 84, 7/8, 58–67.
Armstrong, J.S., and Overton, T.S. (1977), ‘Estimating Nonresponse Bias in Mail Surveys,’
Journal of Marketing Research , 16, 3, 396–402.
Ashford, S.J., and Cummings, L.L. (1985), ‘Proactive Feedback Seeking: The Instrumental Use of
the Information Environment,’ Journal of Occupational Psychology , 58, 1, 67–79.
Avlonitis, G.J., and Panagopoulos, N.G. (2007), ‘Exploring the Inﬂuence of Sales Management
Practices on the Industrial Salesperson: A Multi-source Hierarchical Linear Approach,’
Journal of Business Research , 60, 7, 765–775.
Aycan, Z. (2005), ‘The Interplay between Cultural and Institutional/Structural Contingencies in
Human Resource Management Practices,’ International Journal of Human Resource
Management , 16, 7, 1083–1119.
Bae, J., Chen, S., and Lawler, J.J. (1998), ‘Variations in Human Resource Management in Asian
Countries: MNC Home-country and Host-country Effects,’ International Journal of Human
Resource Management , 9, 653–670.
Baird, L., and Meshoulam, I. (1988), ‘Managing Two Fits of Strategic Human Resource
Management,’ Academy of Management Review , 13, 1, 116–128.
Baldauf, A., Cravens, D.W., and Piercy, N.F. (2005), ‘Sales Management Control Research-
synthesis and an Agenda for Future Research,’ Journal of Personal Selling & Sales
Management , 25, 1, 7–26.
Becker, B., and Gerhart, B. (1996), ‘The Impact of Human Resource Management on Organizational
Performance: Progress and Prospects,’ Academy of Management Journal , 39, 4, 779–801.
Becker, T.E. (1992), ‘Foci and Bases of Commitment: Are they Distinctions Worth Making?’
Academy of Management Journal , 35, 1, 232–244.
Birkinshaw, J., Toulan, O., and Arnold, D. (2001), ‘Global Account Management in Multinational
Corporations: Theory and Evidence,’ Journal of International Business Studies , 32, 2, 231–248.
Black, J., Gregerson, H., Mendenhall, M., and Stroh, L. (1999), Globalizing People Through
International Assignments , Reading, MA: Addison Wesley.V. Onyemah et al. 1970
Bloom, M., Milkovich, G.T., and Mitra, A. (2003), ‘International Compensation:Learning from how
Managers Respond to Variations in Local Host Contexts,’ International Journal of Human
Resource Management , 14, 1350–1367.
Bollen, K.A. (1989), Structural Equations with Latent Variables , New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Challagalla, G.N., and Shervani, T.A. (1996), ‘Dimensions and Types of Supervisory Control:
Effects on Salesperson Performance and Satisfaction,’ Journal of Marketing , 60, 1, 89–105.
Chenhall, R.H. (2003), ‘Management Control Systems Design within its Organizational Context:
Findings from Contingency-based Research and Directions for the Future,’ Accounting,
Organizations and Society , 28, 127–168.
Chhokar, J.S., Brodbeck, F.C., and House, R.J. (2007), Culture and Leadership Across the World:
The GLOBE Book of In-Depth Studies of 25 Societies , Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Churchill, G.A., Ford, N.M., and Walker, O.C. (1974), ‘Measuring the Job Satisfaction of Industrial
Salesmen,’ Journal of Marketing Research , 11, 254–260.
Churchill, G.A., Ford, N.M., Walker, O.C., Johnston, M.W., and Marshall, G.W. (2006), Sales Force
Management , New York: McGraw-Hill Irwin.
Colletti, J.A., and Fiss, M.S. (2006), ‘The Ultimate Accountable Job: Leading Today’s Sales
Organization,’ Harvard Business Review , 84, 7/8, 124–131.
Coughlan, A., and Sen, S.K. (1989), ‘Sales Force Compensation: Theory and Managerial
Implications,’ Marketing Science , 8, 4, 324–342.
Cravens, D.W., Ingram, T.N., LaForge, R.W., and Young, C.E. (1993), ‘Behavior-based and
Outcome-based Control Systems,’ Journal of Marketing , 57, 47–59.
Cron, W.L., Dubinsky, D.J., and Michaels, R.E. (1988), ‘The Inﬂuence of Career Stages on
Components of Salesperson Motivation,’ Journal of Marketing , 52, 1, 78–92.
Cron, W.L., and Slocum, J.W. (1986), ‘The Inﬂuence of Career Stages on Salespeople’s Job
Attitudes, Work Perceptions and Performance,’ Journal of Marketing Research , 23, 2, 119–129.
Cross, R., and Cummings, J.N. (2004), ‘Tie and Network Correlates of Individual Performance in
Knowledge-intensive Work,’ Academy of Management Journal , 47, 928–937.
Dansereau, F. Jr., Graen, G.W., and Haga, W.J. (1975), ‘A Vertical Dyad Linkage Approach to
Leadership within Formal Organizations. A Longitudinal Investigation of the Role MakingProcess,’ Organizational Behavior & Human Performance , 13, 1, 46–78.
Darmon, R.Y. (1990), ‘Identifying Sources of Turnover Costs: A Segmental Approach,’ Journal of
Marketing , 54, 46–56.
Diamantopoulos, A., and Siguaw, J.A. (2000), Introducing LISREL , Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Dirks, K.T., and Ferrin, D.L. (2002), ‘Trust in Leadership: Meta-Analytic Findings and Implications
for Research and Practice,’ Journal of Applied Psychology , 87, 4, 611–628.
Eisenhardt, K.M. (1985), ‘Control: Organizational and Economic Approaches,’ Management
Science , 31, 134–149.
Erdogan, B., and Enders, J. (2007), ‘Support from the Top: Supervisors’ Perceived Organizational
Support as a Moderator of Leader-member Exchange to Satisfaction and PerformanceRelationships,’ Journal of Applied Psychology , 92, 2, 321–330.
Fu, P.P., Kennedy, J., Tata, J., Yukl, G., Bond, M.H., Peng, T., Srinivas, E.S., Howell, J.P., Prieto, L.,
Koopman, P., Boonstra, J.J., Pasa, S., Lacassagne, M., Higashide, H., and Cheosakul, A. (2004),‘The Impact of Societal Cultural Values and Individual Social Beliefs on the PerceivedEffectiveness of Managerial Inﬂuence Strategies: A Meso Approach,’ Journal of International
Business Studies , 35, 4, 284–305.
Gerstner, C.R., and Day, D.V. (1997), ‘Meta-analytic Review of Leader-member Exchange Theory:
Correlates and Construct Issues,’ Journal of Applied Psychology , 82, 6, 827–844.
Gooderham, P.N., Nordhaug, O., and Ringdal, K. (1999), ‘Institutional and Rational Determinants of
Organizational Practices: Human Resource Management in European Firms,’ Administrative
Science Quarterly , 44, 507–531.
Gooderham, P., Parry, E., and Ringdal, K. (2008), ‘The Impact of Bundles of Strategic Human
Resource Management Practices on the Performance of European Firms,’ International Journal
of Human Resource Management , 19, 11, 2041–2056.
Graen, G.B., and Uhl-Bien, M. (1995), ‘Development of Leader-member Exchange (LMX)
Theory of Leadership Over 25 Years: Applying a Multi-level Multi-domain Perspective,’Leadership Quarterly , 6, 219–247.The International Journal of Human Resource Management 1971
Graen, G.B., Novak, M., and Sommerkamp, P. (1982), ‘The Effect of Leader-member Exchange
and Job Design on Productivity and Satisfaction: Testing a Dual Attachment Model,’Organizational Behavior and Human Performance , 30, 109–131.
Gully, S.M., Phillips, J.M., and Tarique, I. (2003), ‘Collectivism and Goal Orientation as Mediators
of the Effect of National Identity on Merit Pay Decisions,’ International Journal of Human
Resource Management , 14, 1368–1390.
Hofstede, G., and Bond, M. (1988), ‘The Confucius Connection: From Cultural Roots to Economic
Growth,’ Organizational Dynamics , 16, 4, 4–21.
Horn, J.L. (1991), ‘Comments on “Issues in Factorial Invariance”,’ in Best Methods for the Analysis
of Change , eds. L.M. Collins and J.L. Horn, Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association, pp. 114–125.
House, R.J., Hanges, P.J., Javidan, M., Dorfman, P.W., and Gupta, V. (2004), Culture, Leadership,
and Organizations: The GLOBE Study of 62 Societies , Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
House, R.J., Hanges, P.J., Ruiz-Quintanilla, S.A., Dorfman, P.W., Javidan, M., Dickson, M., and
Gupta, V. (1999), ‘Cultural Inﬂuences on Leadership and Organizations,’ in Advances in Global
Leadership , 1, eds. W.H. Mobley, M.J. Gessner and V. Arnold, Stanford, CT: JAI Press,
pp. 171–233.
Howell, J.M., and Hall-Merenda, K.E. (1999), ‘The Ties That Bind: The Impact of Leader-member
Exchange, Transformational and Transactional Leadership, and Distance on Predicting FollowerPerformance,’ Journal of Applied Psychology , 84, 5, 680–694.
Javidan, M., House, R.J., Dorfman, P.W., Hanges, P.J., and Sully de Luque, M. (2006),
‘Conceptualizing and Measuring Cultures and their Consequences: A Comparative Review of
GLOBE’s and Hofstede’s Approaches,’ Journal of International Business Studies , 37, 897–914.
Jaworski, B.J., and MacInnis, D.J. (1989), ‘Marketing Jobs and Marketing Controls: Toward a
Framework,’ Journal of Marketing Research , 26, 4, 406–419.
Jaworski, B.J., Stathakopoulos, V., and Krishnan, H.S. (1993), ‘Control Combinations in Marketing:
Conceptual Framework and Empirical Evidence,’ Journal of Marketing , 57 (January), 57–69.
John, G., and Weitz, B.A. (1989), ‘Sales Force Compensation: An Empirical Investigation of Factors
Related to Use of Salary Versus Incentive Compensation,’ Journal of Marketing Research , 26, 1,
1–14.
Joseph, K., and Thevaranjan, A. (1998), ‘Monitoring and Incentives in Sales Organizations: An
Agency-theoretic Perspective,’ Marketing Science , 17, 2, 107–124.
Kohli, A.K. (1989), ‘Effects of Supervisory Behavior: The Role of Individual Differences Among
Salespeople,’ Journal of Marketing , 53, 4, 40–50.
Krafft, M. (1999), ‘An Empirical Investigation of the Antecedents of Sales Force Control Systems,’
Journal of Marketing , 63, 3, 120–134.
Leigh, T.W., Pullins, E.B., and Comer, L.B. (2001), ‘The Top Ten Sales Articles of the
20th Century,’ Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management , 21, 3, 217–227.
Liao, Y. (2005), ‘Business Strategy and Performance: The Role of Human Resource Management
Control,’ Personnel Review , 34, 3, 294–305.
Liao, Y. (2006), ‘Human Resource Management Control System and Firm Performance:
A Contingency Model of Corporate Control,’ International Journal of Human Resource
Management , 17, 4, 716–733.
Lloyd, C., and Newell, H. (2001), ‘Capture and Transfer: Improving the Performance of the
Pharmaceutical SalesRep,’ International Journal of Human Resource Management , 12, 3, 464–483.
Maertz, C.P. Jr., Griffeth, R.W., Campbell, N.S., and Allen, D.G. (2007), ‘The Effects of Perceived
Organizational Support and Perceived Supervisor Support on Employee Turnover,’ Journal of
Organizational Behavior , 28, 8, 1059–1075.
Major, D.A., Kozlowski, S.W.J., Chao, G.T., and Gardner, P.D. (1995), ‘A Longitudinal
Investigation of Newcomer Expectations, Early Socialization Outcomes, and the ModeratingEffects of Role Development Factors,’ Journal of Applied Psychology , 80, 3, 418–431.
McClelland, D.C., Atkinson, J.W., Clark, R.A., and Lowell, E.L. (1953), Achievement Motive ,
New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, Inc.
Mendenhall, M., and Oddou, G. (2000), Readings and Cases in International Human Resource
Management (3rd ed.), Cincinnati, OH: Southwestern.
Merchant, K.A. (1985), Control in Business Organizations , Boston, MA: Pitman.
Oliver, R.L., and Anderson, E. (1994), ‘An Empirical Test of the Consequences of Behavior – and
Outcome-based Sales Control Systems,’ Journal of Marketing , 58, 53–67.V. Onyemah et al. 1972
Palich, L.E., and Gomez-Mejia, L.R. (1999), ‘A Theory of Global Strategy and Firm Efﬁciencies:
Considering the Effects of Cultural Diversity,’ Journal of Management , 25, 587–606.
Piercy, N.F., Cravens, D.W., Lane, N., and Vorhies, D.W. (2006), ‘Driving Organizational Citizenship
Behaviors and Salesperson In-role Behavior Performance: the Role of Management Control and
Perceived Organizational Support,’ Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , 34, 2, 244–262.
Raudenbush, SW., and Bryk, A.S. (2002), Hierarchical Linear Models: Applications and Data
Analysis Methods (2nd ed.), Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Reichers, A.E. (1985), ‘A Review and Reconceptualization of Organizational Commitment,’
Academy of Management Review , 10, 3, 465–476.
Rich, G.A., Bommer, W.H., MacKenzie, S.B., Podsakoff, P.M., and Johnson, J.L. (1999),
‘Apples and Apples or Apples and Oranges? A Meta-analysis of Objective and Subjective
Measures of Sales Performance,’ Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management , 19, 4,
41–52.
Rouzie `s, D., and Macquin, A. (2002), ‘An Exploratory Investigation of the Impact of Culture on
Sales Force Management Control Systems in Europe,’ Journal of Personal Selling & Sales
Management , 23, 1, 61–72.
Rouzie `s, D., Segalla, M., and Weitz, B.A. (2003), ‘Cultural Impact on European Stafﬁng Policies in
Sales Management,’ International Journal of Research in Marketing , 20, 67–85.
Rowe, W.G., and Wright, P.M. (1997), ‘Related and Unrelated Diversiﬁcation and their Effect on
Human Resource Management Controls,’ Strategic Management Journal , 18, 4, 329–338.
Seers, A., and Graen, G.B. (1984), ‘The Dual Attachment Concept: A Longitudinal Investigation of
the Combination of Task Characteristics and Leader-member Exchange,’ Organizational
Behavior & Human Performance , 33, 3, 283–306.
Segalla, M., Rouzie `s, D., Besson, M., and Weitz, B.A. (2006), ‘A Cross-national Investigation
of Incentive Sales Compensation,’ International Journal of Research in Marketing , 23,
419–433.
Snell, S.A., and Youndt, M.A. (1995), ‘Human Resource Management and Firm Performance:
Testing a Contingency Model of Executive Controls,’ Journal of Management , 21, 4, 11–37.
Sparrow, P.R. (1999), ‘International Reward Systems: To Converge or Not to Converge,’ in
International HRM in Europe , eds. C. Brewster and H. Harris, London: Routledge, pp. 103–118.
Sparrowe, R.T., and Liden, R.C. (2005), ‘Two Routes to Inﬂuence: Integrating Leader-
member Exchange and Social Network Perspectives,’ Administrative Science Quarterly , 50,
505–535.
Steenkamp, J.E.M., and Baumgartner, H. (1998), ‘Assessing Measurement Invariance in
Cross-national Consumer Research,’ Journal of Marketing Research , 25, 3, 78–90.
Sutton, R.I. (1990), ‘Organizational Decline Processes: A Social Psychological Perspective,’
inResearch in Organizational Behavior , vol. 12., eds. L.L. Cummings and B.M. Staw,
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, pp. 205–255.
Tushman, M.L., and Scanlan, T.J. (1981), ‘Boundary Spanning Individuals: Their Role in
Information Transfer and their Antecedents,’ Academy of Management Journal , 24, 289–305.
Wakabayashi, M., and Graen, G.B. (1984), ‘The Japanese Career Progress Study: A 7-Year Follow-
Up,’ Journal of Applied Psychology , 69, 4, 603–614.
Wakabayashi, M., Graen, G., Graen, M., and Graen, M. (1988), ‘Japanese Management Progress:
Mobility Into Middle Management,’ Journal of Applied Psychology , 73, 2, 217–227.
Williamson, O.E. (1985), The Economic Institutions of Capitalism , New York: Free Press.
Weitzel, W., and Jonsson, F. (1989), ‘Decline in Organizations: A Literature Integration and
Extension,’ Administrative Science Quarterly , 91, 91–109.
Zoltners, A.A., Sinha, P., and Zoltners, G.A. (2001), The Complete Guide to Accelerating Sales
Force Performance , New York: AMACOM, American Management Association.
Appendix
Scale items
Focus of performance criteria .
1. I think that what really matters most to management is the results I achieve, rather than how
I achieve them (R *).
2. I think management does not care a great deal about my input into the job, instead they focus on
my output (R *).The International Journal of Human Resource Management 1973
3. In my opinion, management puts a lot of emphasis on the outcome of my effort, but puts little
weight on the effort itself (R *).
4. Only my tangible results matter to my management (R *).
5. No matter how well I behave and how well I struggle to achieve results, at the end of the day my
promotion and career progress depend mostly on my bottom line (R *).
6. Anchor: 1 (completely disagree) to 7 (completely agree).
Number of performance criteria .
1. When management rates my performance, they take many things into consideration.
2. I think management considers only a handful of things when determining my performance
evaluation (R *).
3. To get a favourable performance evaluation I only need to pay attention to a few factors (R *).
4. In my opinion, there are just a couple of requirements I need to meet to get a good performance
evaluation (R *).
Anchor: 1 (completely disagree) to 7 (completely agree).
Degree of management intervention .
1. Management grants me a great deal of autonomy (R *).
2. Management allows me to do almost as I please (R *).
3. I make the ﬁnal decision on practically everything that has to do with my selling assignment (R *).
4. Management allows me freedom to organize my work (R *).
Anchor: 1 (completely disagree) to 7 (completely agree).
Frequency of contact .
1. I don’t get day-to-day contact with management (R *).
2. I have many opportunities to interact with management.
3. I’m isolated from management (R *).
4. Management doesn’t spend time with me (R *).
Anchor: 1 (completely disagree) to 7 (completely agree).
Degree of management monitoring .
1. Management tracks my activities.
2. Management keeps a close watch on how I spend my time.
3. Management takes my call and activity reports seriously.4. Management carries out a detailed examination of my call and activity reports.5. Management here stays informed of my activities.
6. Management checks to see if I’m following its instructions.
Anchor: 1 (completely disagree) to 7 (completely agree).
Amount of coaching offered .
1. I receive a lot of coaching from my boss or those I report to.
2. Management provides a lot of on-the-job suggestions and tips on ways they think I can improve
my selling skills and abilities.
3. There are senior salespeople designated by management who offer me a lot of coaching.4. Management makes sure I know how to carry out my assigned tasks.5. Management gives me training intended to improve my productivity.
Anchor: 1 (completely disagree) to 7 (completely agree).
Transparency of evaluation criteria .
How would you describe the criteria management seems to use in evaluating your performance?
1. Not at all clear ... ... ... Very clear (R *).
2. Very imprecise ... ... ... Very precise (R *).
3. Very vague ... ... ... Not at all vague (R *).V. Onyemah et al. 1974
4. Subjective ... ... ... Objective (R *).
5. Very partial ... ... ... Highly impartial (R *).
Compensation scheme: Proportion of salary in compensation.
Satisfaction with job. (Churchill, Ford and Walker 1974).
1. My work gives me a sense of accomplishment
2. My job is exciting
3. My work is satisfyingAnchor: 1 (completely disagree) to 7 (completely agree).
Satisfaction with supervisor. (Churchill, Ford and Walker 1974).
1. Management has always been fair in dealings with me
2. Management gives me credit and praise for work well done
3. Management lives up to its promises to meAnchor: 1 (completely disagree) to 7 (completely agree).
Satisfaction with promotion possibilities. (Churchill, Ford and Walker 1974).
1. My opportunities for advancement are limited (R *).
2. I have a good chance for promotion
Anchor: 1 (completely disagree) to 7 (completely agree).
Selling experience: number of years of general selling experience
Impact of company’s effort on sales: How much do you think your effort impacts? Indicate this by
splitting 100 points between the following two inﬂuences:
(a) My efforts (calls, ability, skill, service, etc.) – – –
(b) Company activities (advertising, promotion,
product quality, order processing and dispatch, etc.) – – –
Total 100The International Journal of Human Resource Management 1975
