 for a complete list of items). 
In addition, the survey asked questions about the participants ’ pro-
fessional, educational, and socio-economic backgrounds. Specifically, 
the researchers sought out such information about the participants as 
gender, age, level of education and major, type of employer, industry, 
and working experience in public relations. To ensure that the instru -
ment is appropriately localized and contextualized, the researchers 
consulted with three Zimbabwean PR practitioners to check terminology 
related to job titles, professional organizations, education levels, etc. 
The instrument was in English as it is one of the official languages 
spoken throughout Zimbabwe and used in education and business. 
3.3. Data Analysis 
To answer the first research question, principal component analysis 
(PCA) was performed on 21 survey items that represented various public 
relations activities associated with three types of public relations roles. 
PCA was used because it explores the overall variability of the data and 
helps generate a minimum number of components that account for the 
maximum number of variance in the data (Tabachnik & Fidell, 2007 ). To 
answer the second research question, composite variables of public re-
lations roles (technician, manager, strategist) were created to run a 
correlation analysis and calculate the Pearson product-moment corre -
lation coefficient. In addition, preliminary analyses were performed to 
ensure there was no violation of the assumptions of normality, linearity, 
and homoscedasticity. The results of the analyses are reported in the 
next section. 
4.Results 
4.1. Demographic Characteristics of the Sample 
The sample under study consisted of individuals with diverse 
educational and professional backgrounds. The sample ’s composition 
was consistent with previous research suggesting that various educa -
tional paths and experiences can lead to a career in public relations 
(Oksiutycz & Nhedzi, 2018 ). Over