Achieving strategic renewal: the multi-level inﬂuences of top
and middle managers’ boundary-spanning
Lotte Glaser •Sebastian P. L. Fourne ´•
Tom Elfring
Accepted: 12 December 2014 / Published online: 7 February 2015
/C211The Author(s) 2015. This article is published with open access at Springerlink.com
Abstract Drawing on corporate entrepreneurship
(CE) and social network research, this study focuses
on strategic renewal as a form of CE and examines the
impact of boundary-spanning at top and middle man-
agement levels on business u nits’ exploratory innova-
tion. Analyses of multi-source and multi-level data,
collected from 72 top managers (TMs) and 397 middle
managers (MMs) operating in 34 units of a multi-
national organization, indicate that TMs’ boundary-
spanning is positively related to units’ exploratory
innovation, but also has a cascading effect on MMs by
increasing their perceiv ed role conﬂict. MMs’ role
conﬂict is negatively related to units’ exploratory
innovation and thus offsets some of the beneﬁts gained
through TMs’ boundary-spanning activities. Taking aconﬁgurational perspectiv e on social exchanges at
multiple levels, we show that role conﬂict is reduced
by overlapping boundary-spanning ties among TMs and
MMs. Surprisingly, MMs’ boundary-spanning does not
relate to exploratory innovation. Our study shows that
with regard to boundary-spanning, a top-down approach
to CE as strategic renewal may be most effective
because TMs play a key role in driving exploratory
innovation. However, TMs need to be aware of the
cascading social liabilities o f their boundary-spanning
behavior and ensure MMs develop similar networks. We
advance ongoing debates in studies about CE and social
networks by providing empir ically validated insights
into who drives strategic renewal and by uncovering the
beneﬁts and costs of social exchanges for strategic
renewal. Furthermore, we uncover potential causes of
mixed ﬁndings in network theory research and highlight
a remedy to social liabilities.
Keywords Corporate entrepreneurship /C1Strategic
renewal /C1Exploratory innovation /C1Boundary-
spanning /C1Role conﬂict /C1Middle managers
JEL Classiﬁcations L22 /C1L26
1 Introduction
Research has emphasized that large organizations
have to embrace corporate entrepreneurship (CE) to
cope with today’s competitive and uncertain businessL. Glaser ( &)
Department of Strategic Management and
Entrepreneurship, Rotterdam School of Management,
Erasmus University, Burg. Oudlaan 50 (Ofﬁce T7-44),
3062 PA Rotterdam, The Netherlands
e-mail: glaser@rsm.nl
S. P. L. Fourne ´
Institute of Management Accounting and Control (IMC),
WHU - Otto Beisheim School of Management, Burgplatz
2 (Ofﬁce D-212), 56179 Vallendar, Germany
e-mail: sebastian.fourne@whu.edu
T. Elfring
Faculty of Economics and Business Administration, VU
University Amsterdam, De Boelelaan 1105 (Ofﬁce 3A-
28), 1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands
e-mail: t.elfring@vu.nl
123Small Bus Econ (2015) 45:305–327
DOI 10.1007/s11187-015-9633-5environments (Dess et al. 2003 ; Ireland et al. 2009 ;
Morris et al. 2010 ). The concept of CE describes ‘‘the
process whereby an individual or a group of individ-uals, in association with an established organization,
create a new organization, or instigate renewal or
innovation within that organization’’ (Sharma andChrisman 1999 : 18). Promoting CE is important
because it helps organizations to regenerate compet-
itive advantages through product and process innova-tions, developing markets, and fostering strategic
renewal (Ireland et al. 2006 ). Indeed, strategic renewal
is a form of CE that allows the ﬁrm to capture newproduct–market opportunities (e.g., Dess et al. 2003 ;
Guth and Ginsberg 1990 ; Hitt et al. 1999 ; Covin and
Miles 2006 ).
Despite the importance of strategic renewal, schol-
ars have also noted that achieving it presents a
challenge as business unit managers struggle in theshift from deploying existing competencies to devel-
oping new ones (Floyd and Lane 2000 ). Indeed, it is
particularly challenging for organizational units andtheir managers ‘‘to abandon past successful behaviors
and explore’’ (McNamara and Baden-Fuller 1999 :
292). Exploration involves the search for new orga-nizational routines and the discovery of new
approaches to technologies and product–market com-
binations (McGrath 2001 ). Accordingly, prior
research suggests that units’ exploratory innovation
is the key underlying activity of strategic renewal
(e.g., Jansen et al. 2006 ; Ren and Guo 2011 ). Units that
do not master exploration will not be able to rethink
and reinvigorate their competitive position (Dess et al.
2003 ), e.g., by meeting the needs of emerging
customers and markets (Benner and Tushman 2003 ;
Danneels 2002 ). In explaining unit exploratory inno-
vation, two main debates have emerged. The ﬁrstconcerns, who is driving renewal activities of business
units—top managers (TMs) or middle managers
(MMs), i.e., whether a top-down or rather a bottom-up approach is more effective (cf. Burgelman 1983 ;
Kuratko et al. 2005 ; Ren and Guo 2011 ). The second
concerns the role of social exchanges, i.e., boundary-
spanning of different actors in the hierarchy for the
manifestation of CE as strategic renewal (Dess et al.2003 ; Kleinbaum and Tushman 2007 ). Taking the
notion of social exchanges of TMs and MMs a step
further, we also make the argument and show why amulti-level perspective on network conﬁgurations in
CE research is even more insightful—especially whenconsidering also social liabilities and associated
remedies—than single-level perspectives.
Prior research acknowledges the fact that managers
play different roles based on their position within the
managerial hierarchy and that, as such TMs and MMs
are distinct both in terms of their activities and of theeffects these activities have on organizational out-
comes (Floyd and Lane 2000 ). One important differ-
ence between TMs and MMs is that the roles of TMsare predominantly decision-making roles (Carpenter
et al. 2004 ), whereas the roles of MMs focus on
communicating information between operations andtop-level management, developing tactical objectives,
and executing strategies (Kuratko et al. 2005 ; Huy
2001 ). The controversy lies in some studies pointing to
MMs as the main drivers of entrepreneurial initiatives,
while others stress the important role of TMs (Hornsby
et al. 2009 ; Raes et al. 2011 ). The characteristics and
distinct roles of top and middle management provide
reasons to show how each of these two groups may be
a central player in CE activities (Wooldridge et al.2008 ). However, most likely, it is not one or the other,
but the joint involvement that determines their impact
on unit renewal activities (Fourne ´2014 ).
Recent research has suggested that managers’
network relationships and social exchanges across
the organization inﬂuence their involvement in CEactivity (Hayter 2013 ; Kelley et al. 2009 ; Pappas and
Wooldridge 2007 ). While boundary-spanning within
MNEs can drive strategic renewal of business units(Fourne ´et al. 2014 ), researchers have also shown that
managers who span boundaries are particularly sus-
ceptible to stress (Podolny and Baron 1997 ) and may
even restrict the ﬂow of knowledge throughout
organizations (Cross et al. 2002 ; Gould and Fernandez
1989 ; Tortoriello et al. 2012 ). In fact, studies that link
boundary-spanning activities to exploration-related
outcomes found non-signiﬁcant (Atuahene-Gima and
Murray 2007 ; Perry-Smith 2006 ), inverted U-shaped
(McFadyen and Cannella 2004 ), and negative rela-
tionships (Bogenrieder and Nooteboom 2004 ). These
inconclusive results may be ascribed to a variation in
individuals’ boundary-spanning effectiveness—as
TMs and MMs differ in terms of authority, resourceaccess, and personal interests (Wooldridge et al.
2008 ). Nevertheless, most boundary-spanning
research views managers as a homogeneous group.Accordingly, it does not take into account the
individual nature and variety of boundary-spanning306 L. Glaser et al.
123activities on the part of managers at different hierar-
chical levels. Therefore, it remains unclear how
individual differences determine when boundary-spanning will foster or inhibit the unit’s renewal
activities.
The main objective of this study, therefore, is to
contribute with a granular understanding of why and
how the hierarchical differences inﬂuence managers’
capability to foster strategic renewal in their businessunits. As studies adopting a multi-actor perspective are
scarce in CE research, yet hold their promise, Hornsby
et al. ( 2009 : 11) recommend adopting such a perspec-
tive. By assuming heterogeneity in boundary-span-
ning across top management and middle management
levels, we aim to reconcile the mixed ﬁndings andelucidate when boundary-spanning fosters exploratory
innovation. Distinguishing between the roles of TMs
and MMs makes it possible to examine the relation-ship between boundary-spanning and exploratory
innovation at different levels of the organizational
hierarchy and show who drives CE activity in form ofstrategic renewal—in this case within units exposed to
changes in technology, market structure and the
regulatory setting. With our multi-actor approach,we also advance the debate about a top-down (Horns-
by et al. 2009 ) versus bottom-up approach to CE (Ren
and Guo 2011 ).
More broadly, we respond to calls for more
research into the role of personal and organizational
networks in CE (e.g., Hornsby et al. 2013 ; Kelley et al.
2009 ) and make two additional contributions.
First, we theorize and conﬁrm that boundary-
spanning by actors at one level in the organizationhas cascading effects on managers at adjacent levels.
Thereby, intriguingly, our study reveals a direct
positive inﬂuence of TM’ boundary-spanning on theirunit’s strategic renewal activities that is offset by
causing role conﬂict among their MMs, which in turn
inhibits unit renewal activities. Hence, this researchextends the debate on the positive and negative effects
of managers’ diversity of ties for inter-unit informa-
tion search and utilization in renewal activities (cf.
Hansen 1999 ), by uncovering the social liabilities of
TMs’ boundary-spanning.
Second, while past research has considered TMs’ or
MMs’ positions in a single network, this paper
develops a multi-level research model and demon-strates that network conﬁgurations may provide a
remedy to problems in fostering CE by means of TMs’boundary-spanning. Our ﬁndings demonstrate that
overlap of a TM’s network with the one of MMs—i.e.,
some redundancies in unit TM and MM networks—reduces role conﬂict of MMs. By assessing the impact
of relative ﬁt of networking activities in terms of
overlapping ties, this study contributes to networktheory and CE literature by revealing how different
actors’ networks can have a joint inﬂuence on strategic
renewal and mitigate the downsides of unilateral TMnetworking.
2 Conceptual background
2.1 Boundary-spanning and strategic renewalThe literature on CE has introduced multiple forms of
CE that all aim to capture processes of establishedorganizations geared toward instigating renewal or
innovation (Sharma and Chrisman 1999 ). This paper
focuses on strategic renewal as a form of CE (cf. Desset al. 2003 ) and aims to explain variation in units’
exploratory innovation as the key underlying activity
of strategic renewal (McNamara and Baden-Fuller1999 ; Ren and Guo 2011 ). Exploratory innovation is
deﬁned as experimenting with new product–market
combinations and requires building new skills andcapabilities (Belderbos et al. 2010 ; Benner and
Tushman 2003 ). Management research considers
exploratory innovation vital to the performance andsurvival of organizations in changing environments
(e.g., Govindarajan et al. 2011 ; Phelps 2010 ) through
strategic repositioning and capability development,which are core pillars of CE as strategic renewal
(Ireland et al. 2009 ).
Although exploratory innovation has been studied
predominantly at the level of organizations (cf. Jansen
et al. 2012 ), the notion that its roots are to be found at
lower levels in the ﬁrm has recently gained momentumin reviews and empirical research (e.g., Birkinshaw
and Gupta 2013 ; Jansen et al. 2012 ). CE literature has
long acknowledged that managers fulﬁll different
roles, based on their position within the organizational
hierarchy and that, as such, TMs and MMs are distinct,
both in terms of their entrepreneurial activities and of
the effects these activities have on organizational
outcomes (Hornsby et al. 2009 ; Ireland et al. 2009 ;
Kuratko et al. 2005 ). This underlines the important
role of MMs promoting and implementing CE,Achieving strategic renewal 307
123because they connect the operational and strategic
elements of a ﬁrm’s activities (Hornsby et al. 2002 ;
Ren and Guo 2011 ). However, research in this domain
also conﬁrms that TMs may be better positioned to
leverage organizational capabilities and resources for
entrepreneurial action (Hornsby et al. 2009 ; Srivastava
and Lee 2005 ). Despite these differences in actors’
positions and power, rarely do empirical studies adopt
a multi-actor perspective, although its explanatorypotential is promising (Hornsby et al. 2009 ).
Prior research has posited that structural positions
matter for involvement in renewal activities (Ren andGuo 2011 ) and therefore the pursuit of exploratory
innovation comes with challenges particularly for
TMs and MMs who differ in terms of authority andresource access (Floyd and Lane 2000 ; Wooldridge
et al. 2008 ). To better understand the disparity across
actor groups, CE and MM studies have suggested thatintra-ﬁrm network relationships inﬂuence manage-
ment involvement and success in corporate entrepre-
neurial activities (Hayton 2005 ; Hornsby et al. 2013 ;
Kuratko et al. 2005 ; Pappas and Wooldridge 2007 ).
Accordingly, this study examines the variety associ-
ated with different actors involved in corporateentrepreneurial processes from a network perspective.
According to the social network perspective, man-
agers who span boundaries beneﬁt from timely accessto diverse information and enhanced power to enact
strategic change (e.g., Burt 2004 ; Shi et al. 2009 ).
Indeed, recent research on MNEs indicates thatmanagers’ boundary-spanning activities matter with
regard to strategic renewal of business units (Fourne ´
et al. 2014 ; Wooldridge et al. 2008 ). Boundary-
spanning ties are instrumental in linking multiple
sources of diverse knowledge that may be useful to
innovation (Hansen et al. 2005 ; Lingo and O’Mahony
2009 ; Obstfeld 2005 ). Deﬁned as activities through
which new knowledge and expertise are sought from
other units (Hansen 1999 ), boundary-spanning is a
potential key driver of exploratory innovation. For
instance, Pappas and Wooldridge ( 2007 ) show that
managers who span boundaries are more strategically
active compared to their non-boundary-spanning
counterparts. Exploratory innovation requires newknowledge (Benner and Tushman 2002 ) and is
facilitated when a work environment promotes risk-
taking and provides knowledge-rich stimuli andsufﬁcient resources (Amabile et al. 1996 ; Jansen
et al. 2012 ). Managers who span boundaries thusencounter a wider range of people with different
outlooks and approaches (Perry-Smith and Shalley
2003 ) and may ﬁnd it easier to navigate and nurture
their entrepreneurial projects despite organizational
politics (Lechner et al. 2010 ). In fact, recent studies
suggest that interactions with members of internal andexternal networks enable MMs to gain the support
they need to protect their entrepreneurial activities and
leverage their credibility (Morris et al. 2010 ) as well as
legitimacy (Hornsby et al. 2013 ).
While most boundary-spanning research has exam-
ined the positive outcomes for organizations, a reviewof studies in this area reveals that research into the
disadvantages of boundary-spanning has evolved
signiﬁcantly since Podolny and Baron’s ( 1997 ) work,
by developing a better understanding of how to build
and leverage ‘‘collective knowledge bridges’’ between
separate business units (Zhao and Anand 2013 ).
Scholars have recently tried to obtain a better under-
standing of how to coordinate and integrate intra-ﬁrm
and alliances activities (Stettner and Lavie 2014 ) and
of how multiple connections affect knowledge sharing
(Tiwana 2008 ). Nevertheless, while most boundary-
spanning research has examined the positive outcomesfor organizations, there is an emerging debate about
social liabilities (Tortoriello et al. 2012 ). By departing
from the homogeneity assumption, we acknowledgethe individual variety of the actors involved in
boundary-spanning in relation to exploratory innova-
tion in their units as well as cascading social liabilities.As such, this study develops theoretical implications
which advance strategic renewal and boundary-span-
ning research by showing how different actors’boundary-spanning and network conﬁgurations at
different managerial levels amplify or attenuate the
units’ exploration activities. With multi-level insightsinto how TMs’ and MMs’ foster CE in the form of
strategic renewal throughout organizational units, we
extend the conversation about different pathways tostrategic renewal and about the direct and indirect
impact of the key actors’ social exchanges.
2.2 Theoretical framework and hypotheses
Multiple theoretical perspectives and the debates
described above inform our research framework (see
Fig. 1). It reveals the impact of different hierarchical
positions on the ability to extract value from spanning
boundaries for corporate entrepreneurial action in the308 L. Glaser et al.
123form of business unit renewal activities. Ren and Guo
(2011 : 3) make a convincing case for the role of MMs
in fostering CE activities by using attention structuresand policy windows to sell new initiatives and
‘‘champion exploratory opportunities.’’ Conversely,
others highlight top-down role of TMs in being moreinﬂuential facilitators of executing CE strategies
(Hornsby et al. 2002 ) as well as beneﬁting more from
a supportive context, e.g., due to resource access(Hornsby et al. 2009 ). To resolve these opposing
views, whether strategic renewal should be driven by
TMs or MMs, our theoretical model distinguishesTMs and MMs in terms of their positions and roles.
We differentiate between two intra-organizational
networks: the information network of TMs and theinformation network of the MMs. This facilitates
analyzing how the boundary-spanning activities of
managers at different hierarchical levels have adifferential effect on their units’ exploratory
innovation.
Our multi-level model also acknowledges that
decisions and actions of managers are ‘‘embedded’’
in a system of social relations (Granovetter 1973 ),
which determines how enabling or constraining amanagers’ environment is for pursuing entrepreneurial
initiatives. As such, we argue—following the logic of
research on top executive characteristics (Ou et al.2014 )—that there may be important cascading effects
across the hierarchy as a consequence of TMs’
networking behavior.
We theorize that social liabilities in form of
increasing role conﬂict may be experienced by
MMs, which in turn obstructs exploratory innovation.Hence, we extend the emerging conﬁgurational per-
spective (Guler and Nerkar 2012 ; Hansen 1999 ;
Tiwana 2008 ) by investigating what the optimal
conﬁguration of ties looks like. It is possible to
conceive that the ﬁt in terms of overlapping ties
between TMs’ and MMs’ networks conditions theeffect of TM boundary-spanning. Such a constellation
improves the potential for utilizing network ties to
implement potential exploratory innovation, e.g., as itimproves MMs’ ability to anticipate demands from the
top (Hansen 1999 ). Hence, this paper extends the
notions of social liabilities with cascading effects andprovides insights into associated remedies.
2.3 Relative utility of TMs’ and MMs’ boundary-
spanning
The ability to bridge knowledge from a variety of
organizational domains, i.e., spanning boundaries, is
seen as vital to promoting CE (Hayton and Kelley
2006 ). Managers’ boundary-spanning activities have
been linked to outcomes closely related to strategic
renewal, such as creativity, new product development,
and service enhancement (Carlile 2004 ; Hargadon and
Sutton 1997 ; Tortoriello et al. 2012 ). Dess et al. ( 2003 )
emphasize the value of social exchanges inside the
organization in the pursuit of strategic renewal.
Yet, the literature on strategic renewal acknowl-
edges that managers of different levels have different
CE roles (Kuratko et al. 2005 ). On the one hand, TMs
act in concert with others throughout the organization
to identify effective pathways for new business
creation or new product development (Hornsby et al.
Middle Managers’ 
Boundary−spanningRole ConflictTop Management 
Boundary−spanningBU Exploratory 
Innovation+ H1
-H 4
-H 3+H 2
Fit between 
TM and MM 
Boundary− 
spanning tiesFig. 1 Multi-level research
frameworkAchieving strategic renewal 309
1232009 ). In addition, TMs can also draw on insights
generated through the interaction with external stake-
holders (Collins and Clark 2003 ; Geletkanycz and
Hambrick 1997 ; Yoo et al. 2009 ). On the other hand,
MMs are responsible for harboring and championing
new initiatives, facilitating adaptability and entrepre-neurial processes, synthesizing information and
reporting upwards, and implementing new programs
(Floyd and Lane 2000 ). An important difference
between TMs and MMs is their formal authority,
which has been shown to play a critical role in
executing tasks and the structural ability to leverageorganizational resources and capabilities that support
corporate entrepreneurial action (Hornsby et al. 2009 ;
Huy 2001 ; Ibarra 1993 ). Hence, the more powerful a
manager, the more (s)he may beneﬁt from boundary-
spanning activities when pursuing exploratory goals.
Power differences also highlight another distinction
between TM and MM roles. Prior research has
demonstrated that the roles of TM and MM differ
signiﬁcantly in terms of their requirements with regardto strategic thinking and actions (Bartlett and Ghoshal
1995 ; Currie and Procter 2005 ; Wooldridge et al.
2008 ). Key tasks for TMs are to convey effectively the
units’ strategic priorities to their direct reports, in most
cases MMs. As summarized by Floyd and Lane ( 2000 :
158) in order to achieve strategic renewal, the TM roleset includes ratifying, directing and recognizing, while
the MMs’ roles are to champion, facilitate, synthesize
and implement. A crucial difference in this respectconcerns the signiﬁcance of boundary-spanning for
these activities. TM boundary-spanning is expected to
support actions such as opportunity discovery andstrategy formulation, as it imbues such actions with
fresh external knowledge and information (Pappas and
Wooldridge 2007 ). Yet, for MMs, the implementation
of renewal activities may not beneﬁt from the injection
of new information received through boundary-span-
ning activities, for instance as new ideas are of limitedutility when resource availability is limited. Hence,
TMs can leverage the know-how and ideas sourced
through boundary-spanning more easily than MMs
who are more constrained in terms of resource access
(Huy 2001 ).
Taken together, boundary-spanning creates an
opportunity for both TMs and MMs to access a variety
of different perspectives and information ﬂowsthroughout the organization (Perry-Smith and Shalley
2003 ; Tsai and Ghoshal 1998 ), allowing both levels toachieve higher levels of exploratory innovation within
their units (Rogan and Mors 2014 ). However, given
their different role requirements, authority and varyingdegrees of resource access, the relationship between
boundary-spanning and exploratory innovation is
expected to be stronger for TMs than for MMs.
Hypothesis 1 The positive relationship between
boundary-spanning and exploratory innovation is
stronger for TMs than for MMs.
2.4 TMT boundary-spanning and MMs’ role
conﬂict
While acquiring knowledge outside organizational
units provides the opportunity to see a problem or task
from an alternative perspective that can stimulate
creativity and foster experimentation (Hansen 1999 ;
Hargadon and Sutton 1997 ; Perry-Smith 2006 ), it also
creates inconsistent expectations to exert work-roles
by unit members. Earlier ﬁndings from socio-psycho-logical research have demonstrated that individuals
who engage in boundary-spanning also experience
signiﬁcant role overload and role conﬂict, becausethey face simultaneous and often conﬂicting pressures
(Kahn et al. 1964 ; Katz and Kahn 1978
). Importantly,
these disadvantages of cross-unit boundary-spanningmay extend to members other than the focal actor, as
unit differences in terminology, perspectives, and
expectations lead to an overall lack of understandingamong MMs within a unit (Mehra et al. 2006 ),
exacerbating perceived ambiguity and role conﬂict
(Floyd and Lane 2000 ).
According to role theory (Kahn et al. 1964 ),
individuals form perceptions of their organizational
role, which are shaped by role senders, includingsupervisors (Walker et al. 1975 ). When individuals’
expected behaviors are inconsistent, they lead to role
conﬂict, which is deﬁned as the degree of incongruityor incompatibility of expectations associated with a
role (Rizzo et al. 1970 ).
Prior research has suggested that the corporate
context perpetuates the development of expected
behaviors (i.e., role schemas) that are in conﬂict with
entrepreneurial behavior (Corbett and Hmieleski2007 ). Due to different perspectives, interests, and
expectations, boundary-spanning by top management
team (TMT) members could create signiﬁcant gaps
between what TMT plans or intends and what is310 L. Glaser et al.
123expected and perceived by MMs (Ford et al. 2008 ;
Huy 2002 ). For instance, TMs may send confusing
signals demanding that MMs deploy existingresources efﬁciently but also develop new competen-
cies. MMs’ role implies that they are the accomplices
of the TM and at the same time representative of theirsubordinates (Sims 2003 ). Their focus is on commu-
nicating information effectively between the ﬁrm’s
two internal managerial stakeholders (TMs and oper-ation-level managers) (Huy 2002 ; Kuratko et al.
2005 ), which puts them in a difﬁcult position. Coping
with contradicting demands originating from TMTboundary-spanning, may lead MMs to experience
stronger tensions and greater role conﬂict (Ashford
et al. 2003 ; Friedman and Podolny 1992 ). Moreover,
boundary-spanning can lead to additional perceived
role conﬂict, when the promised beneﬁts cannot be
realized or lose desirability (Gargiulo and Benassi2000 ). This is likely to happen when there is
information asymmetry between TMs and MMs,
resulting in unrealistic mandates (Lu ¨scher and Lewis
2008 ) or goals (Raes et al. 2011 ). Thus, MMs whose
TMs span boundaries become particularly susceptible
to role conﬂict due to differing and inconsistentexpectations (Kahn et al. 1964 ).
Furthermore, scholars have shown that the potential
for role conﬂict experienced by managers is partly afunction of the number of roles they are expected to
play (Nandram and Klandermans 1993 ; Peterson et al.
1995 ). In large global ﬁrms, positions are deﬁned as
job roles, and managers accordingly behave in ways
that are consistent with the way their roles are deﬁned
(Kahn et al. 1964 ) and shaped by function-speciﬁc
experience (Mom et al. 2015 ). However, TMT mem-
bers span boundaries and draw on a wide range of
different perspectives due to a vast number of internaland external relations (Collins and Clark 2003 ;
Geletkanycz and Hambrick 1997 ; Yoo et al. 2009 ).
Thus, the TMTs’ suggestions and demands cascadingdown the hierarchy may be infused with a broad range
of insights and challenges for MMs, expanding the
role set, to the extent that the latter will struggle to ﬁnd
a common ground facilitating integration and imple-
mentation of knowledge (Dougherty 1992 ; Tortoriello
et al. 2012 ). Because MMs have limited time and are
exposed to a myriad of requests, they face challenging
and conﬂicting cognitive demands (Leroy 2009 ).
Overall, we expect that boundary-spanning of TMT
members will result in role conﬂict among MMs, whoﬁnd it increasingly difﬁcult to execute their roles
successfully because the expectations imposed upon
them are incompatible (Bolino and Turnley 2005 ;
Kahn et al. 1964 ).
Hypothesis 2 TMTs’ boundary-spanning is posi-
tively related to MMs’ role conﬂict.
2.5 Role conﬂict and exploratory innovation
We have argued that MMs’ role conﬂict may be a
consequence of TMT boundary-spanning. Becauseorganizations are role systems in which the social
interactions between system members determine how
work is carried out (Katz and Kahn 1978 ), role conﬂict
should impact performance outcomes (Tubre and
Collins 2000
). Therefore, we investigate how role
conﬂict among MMs is related to strategic renewalactivities within their units.
Prior research has shown that exploratory innova-
tion involves a high level of knowledge generation(Grant 1996 ). This requires a deep immersion, transfer
and absorption of new knowledge and thus necessi-
tates MMs to spend time on exploration activities. Thelatter include scanning the environment and recogniz-
ing opportunities (Shepherd et al. 2007 ), proposing
and interpreting entrepreneurial opportunities (Horns-by et al. 2009 ), and developing new organizational
routines and systems (Crossan and Apaydin 2010 ;
Zollo and Winter 2002 ). Looking at role theory,
exploration activities of MMs thus require facilitating
adaptability and exerting upward inﬂuence by cham-
pioning new initiatives, which demand an entrepre-neurial mindset that nurtures creativity and
experimentation as well as emotional equanimity
(Huy 2002 ; Mantere 2008 ; McGrath 2001 ).
Scholars have shown that MM who experience role
conﬂict can suffer from ‘‘reluctance’’ (Goffee and
Scase 1992 ), ‘‘disillusionment’’ and ‘‘disaffection’’
(Johnson and Frohman 1989 ), or ‘‘paralysis’’ (Westley
1990 ). Indeed, Dess et al. ( 2003 ) argue that managers
caught in role conﬂict are unlikely to display entre-preneurial behavior successfully, which will disrupt
the information exchange needed for CE. For instance,
Currie and Procter ( 2005 ) noted that MMs who
experienced role conﬂict were caught between tradi-
tional expectations and innovative role demands. They
appeared uncertain about whether and what kind of
change was appropriate, and consequently, whichAchieving strategic renewal 311
123strategic role was expected. As a result, MMs may be
more focused on increasing reliability and thus on
exploitative activities, rather than on explorationactivities. Role conﬂict creates stress for MMs that
leads to organizationally dysfunctional behaviors such
as dishonesty and avoidance (Grover 1993 ), which can
disrupt exploratory innovation, since these behaviors
may deprive the ﬁrm of timely access to the required
information (Dess et al. 2003 ). Given that coping with
role conﬂict and stress requires time and dedication,
MMs will reduce experimental behaviors, limit search
scope, and have an increasingly selective perception ofalternatives (Rowley et al. 2000 ). In short, while
exploratory innovation requires MMs to experiment
and adopt a long-term orientation (Tushman andO’Reilly 1996 ), role conﬂict may constrain their
capacity to pursue the creative and experimental
activities associated with exploration.
It is likely that MMs faced with disparate and
incompatible demands fail to identify, let alone seize
improvement opportunities to enhance their units’exploratory innovation (Bolino and Turnley 2005 ).
Although the entrepreneurial actions expected of MMs
encompass proposing and interpreting new businessopportunities (Hornsby et al. 2009 ), MMs experienc-
ing role conﬂict will respond to problems in familiar
ways, to save time and effort, and use low-risksolutions based on existing capabilities (Daft and
Lengel 1986 ; Galunic and Rodan 1998 ). Role conﬂict
among MMs will, therefore, keep them from departingfrom existing knowledge and reduce their unit’s
exploratory innovation.
Hypothesis 3 MMs’ role conﬂict is negatively
related to their units’ exploratory innovation.
2.6 The role of ﬁt between multi-level ties
While we expect MMs’ role conﬂict to be inﬂuenced
by the extent to which TMTs span boundaries, MMs
themselves can also play an active role in reducing
these effects. As change agents, their activities includeinteracting systematically with other organizational
actors in different parts of the organization and linking
actions and ideas between technical and administra-tive levels of organizations (Van Cauwenbergh and
Cool 1982 ). Based on their unique position in
organizations, MMs are nested in a diverse set ofsocial relations (Huy 2002 ). However, instead ofassuming that these managers can get ‘‘stuck’’ in the
midst of the demands from TMs as well as the
concerns of peers and subordinates, we propose thatMMs can also develop similar relationships outside
their unit, i.e., a structural overlap with their TMs’
network providing the protection and complementaryinsights needed to perform their roles and meet
seemingly contradictory expectations. Overlap and
complementarity may help MMs anticipate and inter-pret demands from TMT members effectively and thus
reduce ambiguity and mitigate the potential for role
conﬂict (Rogers and Molnar 1976 ).
The idea that network activity at one level of the
system is related to network structures at another level
is in line with Burts’ ( 2007 ) observation that oppor-
tunities for direct social capital disappear with the
inclusion of indirect contacts. Consequently, conﬁg-
urations of MMs boundary-spanning and TMT bound-ary-spanning ties determine how a network structure
enables and constrains interactions between the two
levels. It is a promising avenue for research as shownby Hornsby et al. ( 2009 ) who distinguish several
managerial levels and role perceptions. Moreover,
Moliterno and Mahony ( 2011 ) have shown that the
success of an individual’s boundary-spanning activi-
ties depends on that individual’s position relative to
the group.
To further investigate this multi-level perspective
of social network theory, we propose that a MM’s own
boundary-spanning ties in the information networkmay serve as a key contingency protecting him/her
from encountering role conﬂict. For instance, MMs
may span boundaries themselves to provide access tothe information and resources needed to anticipate and
fulﬁll the TMTs expectations. When MMs span the
same ties as their TMTs, demands and expectationsbecome more aligned, information asymmetry is
reduced, and the possibility of role conﬂict will be
reduced (Raes et al. 2011 ). Furthermore, by comple-
menting the structural gaps created by TMTs bound-
ary-spanning activities, MMs can span similar
relationships outside their focal unit. Hence, in a
closed system, spanning the same boundaries facili-tates reputation and trust—also through monitoringbehavior (Burt 2004 ). Consequently, the social and
emotional costs of opportunism within and outside the
network and these ties create a tendency towardcomfort in interaction, which in turn reduces the risks
and costs of coordination. This ﬁt between ties may312 L. Glaser et al.
123buffer demands that cause role conﬂict and protect
MMs in the execution of their roles (Andriopoulos and
Lewis 2009 ).
To illustrate what we mean with the ﬁt between
boundary-spanning ties of TMT and MM, Fig. 2
presents a general model of cross-level effects formulti-level organizational theory. The triangles rep-
resent ﬁve units (A–F) and the dots (1–2) represent
two hypothetical MMs working in unit A. The straightlines are the boundary-spanning ties of the TMT of
unit A, while the dashed lines represent the boundary-
spanning ties of the two MMs.
As demonstrated in Fig. 2, the TMT of unit A spans
boundaries with two other units (unit B and C). MM 1
also spans two boundary ties and MM 2 spans threeboundary ties. We deﬁne the degree to which MMs
boundary-spanning ties are the same as the TMT
boundary-spanning ties as overlapping ties and pro-pose that a ﬁt in terms of overlap will reduce role
conﬂict. Such ties enable MMs reporting to boundary-
spanning TMs to reconcile the contradictions inherentin different bodies of knowledge, values and beliefs
originating from TMs. For instance, Marrone et al.
(2007 ) found that direct boundary-spanning yielded
beneﬁts to unit MMs by reducing their role overload.
Thus, direct boundary-spanning by MMs may provide
them with emotional support from peers or help themprioritize tasks and devise strategies to cope with
conﬂicting demands originating from TMT members
(Kohli and Jaworski 1994 ). Thus, boundary-spanning
may help MMs anticipate and embrace contradictory
demands by drawing on their colleagues’ experiences
in similar situations or their own trial-and-errorlearning process (Smith and Lewis 2011 ).
Furthermore, research indicates that a dense and
even redundant network of ties is often a preconditionfor internalizing a clear and consistent set of expec-
tations and values in order to be effective in one’s role
(Podolny and Baron 1997 ). For instance, a dense
network of personal contacts positively inﬂuences the
speed and openness of the spread of information
among network members due to exchange-inducing
1 2F C
DAB
Unit
Middle Manager
TM Boundary−spanning Tie
MM Boundary−spanning TieEFig. 2 Overlapping
boundary-spanning tiesbetween two hypothetical
MMs and their TMsAchieving strategic renewal 313
123social norms that create a sense of generalized
exchange (Hansen 1999 ; Uzzi 1997 ). Consequently,
when MMs have boundary-spanning ties similar totheir TMT, demands, interests and expectations may
be anticipated more easily and can be addressed more
effectively. Mutual ties among TMTs and MMs havethe advantage of providing information to MMs,
reducing time and effort needed to look for differen-
tiating and integrating contradictory work streams.Thus, a ﬁt in terms of overlap facilitates alignment of
work streams and interests.
As shown in Fig. 2, overlap in ties may facilitate
cooperation and knowledge integration due to reduced
friction and an improved mutual understanding (Tor-
toriello and Krackhardt 2010 ). Also, overlapping ties
will involve exchange processes among organizational
actors sharing a common language, which speeds up
the transfer of information, enhances recognition ofproblems and solutions, and allows for the transfer of
tacit knowledge that is hard to codify (Reagans and
McEvily 2003 ; Szulanski 1996 ). All these beneﬁts will
provide adequate remedies to role conﬂict that
emerges when MMs are faced with boundary-span-
ning TMs. Accordingly, we expect that ﬁt in terms ofoverlap weakens the relationship between TMT
boundary-spanning and MMs’ role conﬂict.
Hypothesis 4 Fit in terms of overlapping boundary-
spanning ties between MMs and the TMT of the same
unit reduces MMs’ role conﬂict.
3 Methods
3.1 Research setting
To test our hypotheses, we conducted a ﬁeld study in a
large multi-national transport and logistics services
company with approximately 163,000 employeesworldwide. The company, with headquarters in the
Netherlands, grew considerably in the years prior to
our study and had annual revenues of approximately$17 billion in 2010. The company served as an
appropriate setting to conduct our ﬁeld study for
several reasons. In April 2009, the Dutch Ministry forInfrastructure and the Environment announced that it
was ending the monopoly of privatized mail. Facing
new entrants and market liberalization, the company
needed to balance between remaining its marketsharein the home market and exploring opportunities using
new technologies in emerging product-market
domains. Stimulating entrepreneurial behavior amongthe business units’ managers was a strategic priority.
The company consisted of 34 geographically dis-
persed business units, each with their own decision-making and budget responsibilities. Accordingly, we
expected to encounter sufﬁcient variance in terms of
boundary-spanning activities of the TMs and MMs aswell as variance among the units’ respective level of
strategic renewal activities.
3.2 Research design and data collection
To avoid potential problems associated with single-
informant and common-method bias (Podsakoff et al.
2003 ), primary and secondary data were collected at
multiple levels within the ﬁrm. The primary data forthis study were collected in 2010 by surveying the two
population groups; the TMs and the MMs of each unit.
At the time of the survey, human resource represen-tatives provided us with the contact details of all the
TMs and MMs of the company’s 34 business units. We
started by contacting the MMs who report directly tothe TMT of their unit. Respondents were requested to
complete several scales capturing their role conﬂict
and information about their communication linkageswith other organizational units. A second survey,
which was sent to the TMTs of each unit, contained
questions about the unit’s exploratory innovation andtheir knowledge transfer relationships with other units.
Similar to the MM survey, TMs reported on their
communication relationships inside the organization.We could thus triangulate the network data obtained
from the managers and thereby enhance the validity of
the measures and reduce common-method variance.To ensure conﬁdentiality, we promised not to reveal
any names of the units and managers involved in this
research.
For the 687 surveys that were issued in total, we
obtained usable responses from 397 MMs (72 percent
response rate) and 72 TMs (56 percent response rate),
which means that per unit, on average 2.1 TMs and
11.7 MMs completed the survey. We tested fornonresponse bias by comparing key attributes of
respondents and non-respondents. Logistic regression
analyses indicated no signiﬁcant differences on eithergender tenure or job grade. By gathering primary and
secondary data at multiple levels, we established the314 L. Glaser et al.
123validity of the measures and reduced common-method
variance preventing potential problems associated
with single-informant bias and common-method bias(Podsakoff et al. 2003 ).
3.3 Measures and validation3.3.1 Exploratory innovation
A six-item scale from Jansen et al. ( 2006 ) measuring
exploratory innovation of the unit was adopted. The
TMs were asked to indicate the extent to which theirunit departs from existing knowledge and skills or
existing customers, markets and products by rating the
items on a seven-point Likert scale ranging from 1,‘‘strongly disagree,’’ to 7, ‘‘strongly agree.’’ One
example items is: ‘‘We commercialize products and
services that are completely new to our unit.’’ Allitems loaded on a single factor with an eigenvalue of
4.07 and accounting for 64 percent of the variance
(a=.90). The items were averaged to form a single
measure of exploratory innovation.
3.3.2 Role conﬂict
This construct was operationalized by adopting the
eight-item scale developed by Rizzo et al. ( 1970 ). The
MMs were asked to indicate the extent to which they
experienced role conﬂict by rating the items on a scale
ranging from 1, ‘‘strongly disagree’’, to 7, ‘‘stronglyagree.’’ An example item is: ‘‘I receive incompatible
requests from two or more people.’’ We conducted
exploratory analyses, as previous scholars have onlyused several items from the original eight-item scale to
cover the full range of the construct (cf. Coelho et al.
2011 ; Schuler et al. 1977 ). The results of the explor-
atory factor analysis yield cross loadings of one item.
We ran another exploratory factor analysis excluding
one item and found all items loading on a single factorhaving an eigenvalue of 2.75 and accounting for 54
percent of the variance ( a=.81). The seven items
were averaged to form a single measure of role
conﬂict.
3.3.3 TMT boundary-spanning
The TMs were presented with a list of all 34 business
units and asked to check off the units they regularlycontacted for new knowledge or expertise (cf. Hansen
1999 ). Following Tsai ( 2001 ), we also asked the
opposite question, that is to say, TMs were asked toindicate which units came to their own unit for new
knowledge or expertise. Because we had more than
one top manager in each unit, we calculated the sumtotal of their boundary-spanning ties to represent the
variable ‘‘TMT boundary-spanning.’’ We considered
data valid when knowledge transfer relationship(indicated by any TM of the knowledge source unit)
was conﬁrmed by any TM of the knowledge recipient
unit. We thus discerned the existence of a tie betweenTMT iand TMT jif a top manager iindicated (s)he had
provided their knowledge to unit jand a top manager
from unit jalso conﬁrmed receiving knowledge from
unit i(cf. Hansen 1999 ; Tsai 2001 ). Using validated
data, we recorded all 72 responses into a 34 934 one
mode data matrix, in which cell X ijrepresents the
number of conﬁrmed ties if TMT iprovided its
knowledge to TMT j. Consistent with prior research
(Burt 2004 ), we then calculated for each of the TMTs
the number of boundary-spanning ties using UCINET
6 (Borgatti et al. 2002 ). These values ranged from 1 to
23 with a mean score of 7.2 and a standard deviation of3.3.
3.3.4 MM boundary-spanningThe MMs were presented with a list of the units and
were asked to tick the units that provided them with
new knowledge or expertise. Responses were recorded
in a 397 934 two-mode network matrix in which cell
Xij=1 when MM iindicated an information-seeking
relationship with unit j, and Xij=0 otherwise. Based
on the egocentric network, the boundary-spanning of
each MM was constructed from the number of units towhich the MM in question was connected. These
values ranged from 1 to 30, with a mean score of 4.8
and a standard deviation of 4.5.
3.3.5 FitFit, in terms of overlapping ties, was calculated by
transforming the 34 X 34 unit matrix and the 397 X 34MMs matrix and then applying Boolean combinations,
using UCINET 6 (Borgatti et al. 2002 ). We combined
the two matrices by recording all responses in one datamatrix, under the condition that they had at least a
value of 1. For each MM, we calculated the number ofAchieving strategic renewal 315
123ties to units to which their TMT also had boundary-
spanning ties. Next, we calculated the proportion of
overlap for each MM, by dividing the number ofmutual ties by the total number of MMs’ boundary-
spanning ties. These overlapping values ranged from 0
to 1. A high value indicates that a MM seeksknowledge from units that share dense inter-unit
knowledge relationships by their TMT, whereas a low
value means that a MM seeks knowledge from unitsthat have few or no knowledge transfer ties with their
TMT.
3.3.6 Control variables
We controlled for possible alternative explanations by
including ﬁve relevant control variables. At the
individual level, we controlled for gender
(female =1, male =0) and job grade. Research
ﬁndings suggest that relative to men, women are more
likely to experience role conﬂict (Bolino and Turnley
2005 ). Gender could accordingly impact MMs’ role
conﬂict. We controlled for job grade, as, within the
selected group of MMs, there were two different job
grades. Job grade reﬂects the strategically hierarchicalposition of a manager, serving as a proxy for power
and job complexity. Research shows that the relation-
ship between general mental ability and performanceis stronger at higher levels of job complexity (Hunter
and Hunter 1984 ). Although the difference between
the two grades was relatively small, we decided tocontrol for job grade (grade A =0, grade B =1) to
make sure that it did not affect our ﬁndings.
At the unit level, we controlled for region, group
size and client focus. We control for region to take
different regional cultures and associated mindsets
into consideration (Ambos and Schlegelmilch 2008 ;
Shane et al. 1995 ). Research indicates that global
geographic diversity determines a ﬁrm’s overall
performance (Grant 1987 ; Tallman and Li 1996 ) and
that mindsets may vary per region (Schwartz 1999 ),
which is why we controlled for the region of the unit.
We also controlled for unit size, as research suggests
that group size inﬂuences group dynamics and
performance (Moreland and Levine 1992 ). Larger
groups tend to be less cohesive and have more
members that engage in boundary-spanning activities.
Finally, we controlled for a units’ client focus, as unitsmay specialize in different markets and have different
ranges of products and services, which will inﬂuencetheir degree of exploratory innovation. We thus
included a dummy variable to indicate whether the
unit in question provided products and services forbusiness clients (coded 1) or for consumer clients
(coded 0).
3.4 Analytical approach
As all units are managed by TMT, exploratory
innovation consists of ‘‘shared level construct’’ (Klein
and Koslowski 2000 ). With our ﬁrst survey, we
gathered data from TM, to assess their unit-levelcharacteristics that we presumed to be shared within a
unit and capable of differentiating among units. To
ensure that within-unit agreement and between-unitdifferences were included, we conducted several
analyses. First we calculated ICC1 and ICC2 for
exploratory innovation to assess whether the data metthe statistical criteria for aggregation.
ICC1 and ICC2 for exploratory innovation were .56
and .90. Next, we calculated interrater agreementscore (rwg; LeBreton and Senter 2008 ) and used the
interrater reliability to examine the agreement
between two or more TMs regarding the assignmentof the unit variable. The mean interrater agreement
was .77 for units’ exploratory innovation. We decided
that there was enough evidence to justify aggregatingthe data to the unit level by taking the mean score of
the TMs within each unit, as suggested by Klein and
Kozlowski ( 2000 ).
To test our hypotheses, we started our analysis by
testing the possible existence of common-method
variance (CMV; Lindell and Whitney 2001 ). We
conducted exploratory factor analysis since role
conﬂict and exploratory innovation were measured
by different sources. Checking the convergent validityof measurement scales, we found that the factor
loadings of the items were greater than .5, and the
average variance extracted for both exploratory inno-vation and role conﬂict is greater than 54 %. The inter-
item consistency was validated by high Cronbach
alphas (both [.80). In addition, in ‘‘ Appendix ,’’ we
present an illustration of the network structure of the
several units under study, as mapping the networkcontributes to a better understanding of the inter-unit
network (Brass et al. 2004 ). The squares represent the
units (total 34), and the lines represent the boundary-spanning ties of the TMTs with other units. We
highlighted unit 11, in which the TMT spans a lot of316 L. Glaser et al.
123boundary ties, whereas the TMT of unit 33 spans only
two boundary ties. Clearly, there was variation
between the boundary-spanning ties of TMTs of theseveral units under study. We used hierarchical linear
modeling (HLM) (Raudenbush et al. 2004 ) to test our
hypotheses as HLM allows variance in outcomevariables to be analyzed at multiple hierarchical levels
and is appropriate for nested data. HLM not only
estimates model coefﬁcients at each level, but alsopredicts the random effects associated with each
sampling unit at every level.
In order to test hypothesis 1, we created a dummy
variable for the two management levels (TM =1a n d
MM=0). We calculated the interaction between
boundary-spanning and management level andincluded this interaction term in our linear regression
analysis. For hypotheses 2 and 4, we used HLM
(Raudenbush et al. 2004 )t oo b t a i na na c c u r a t ee s t i m a -
tion of the relationship between the different levels and
without the shortcomings of aggregation or disaggre-
gation approaches. For hypothesis 2, we ﬁrst ran a nullmodel for role conﬂict with no predictors to ensure that
there was enough variance between the units. Next, we
ran a model with the TMT predictor to test hypothesis 2and included the ﬁt in terms of overlapping ties to test
hypothesis 4. In all analyses, level 1 predictors were
group mean centered and the level 2 predictors weregrand-mean centered, as centering reduces multicollin-
earity (Bryk and Raudenbush 1992 ). Although it is
difﬁcult to estimate precise effect sizes in cross-levelmodels, Snijders and Bosker’s ( 1999 ) overall pseudo R
2
(*R2) was calculated for the models; these estimates
are based on proportional reduction of level 1 and level2 errors due to the predictors of the model.
As a ﬁnal step, we tested hypothesis 3. Because
HLM does not provide bottom-up processes, wefollowed Marrone et al. ( 2007 ) and aggregated role
conﬂict (mean ICC =.72) at the unit level by averag-
ing MMs’ role conﬂict scores per unit. We conductedlinear regression analysis to test our third hypothesis.
4 Results
4.1 Descriptive statistics
Table 1presents the means, standard deviations and
correlations among all variables under scrutiny. We
found that TMT boundary-spanning correlatedpositively with exploratory innovation ( r=.36,
p\.01) and also with MMs’ role conﬂict ( r=.14,
p\.01). We did not ﬁnd a signiﬁcant correlation
between boundary-spanning of MMs and exploratory
innovation ( r=- .06, n.s.). Furthermore, MMs’ role
conﬂict was negatively correlated with exploratoryinnovation ( r=- .13,p\.05), and with ﬁt in terms
of overlap ( r=- .11,p\.01).
4.2 Hypothesis testing
4.2.1 Hypotheses 1 and 3Table 2summarizes the results of the regression
analyses for exploratory innovation. Model 1 containsTMT boundary-spanning effects and Model 2 contains
the MM boundary-spanning effects on unit explora-
tion. As shown in Model 1b, the coefﬁcient for TMTboundary-spanning is positive and signiﬁcant
(c=.08, p\.05). We then tested whether MM
boundary-spanning was positively related to explor-atory innovation. As shown in Model 2b, we did not
ﬁnd a signiﬁcant direct effect of MMs’ boundary-
spanning on exploratory innovation ( c=- .02, n.s.).
To examine the ﬁrst hypothesis—expecting the
positive relationship between boundary-spanning and
exploratory innovation to be stronger for TMT mem-bers than for MMs—we combined the TMT and MM
datasets. We then included the interaction variable
between management level and boundary-spanning.The results shown in Model 3b support hypothesis 1,
as the relationship between boundary-spanning and
exploratory innovation differs depending on themanagement level ( c=.05, p\.10) and this inter-
action explained a small, albeit signiﬁcant amount of
variance in exploratory innovation ( DR
2=.05,
p\.01). Hypothesis 3 predicts that role conﬂict of
MMs is negatively related to exploratory innovation.
As shown in Model 4b, MMs’ role conﬂict is indeednegatively related to exploratory innovation ( c=-
.13,p\.05), conﬁrming hypothesis 3.
4.2.2 Hypotheses 2 and 4
Table 3summarizes the results of the HLM analyses
for hypotheses 2 and 4. Control variables (including
gender, job grade, region, client focus, and unit size)were included in all analyses. As a ﬁrst step, theAchieving strategic renewal 317
123control variables were entered in the model. We then
tested whether TMT boundary-spanning was posi-
tively related to MM role conﬂict (hypothesis 2). As
shown in model 2, TMT boundary-spanning is signif-icantly and positively related to MMs’ role conﬂict
(c=.05,p\.05), conﬁrming hypothesis 2. As a ﬁnal
step, we added ﬁt in terms of overlapping ties to themodel and found a negative signiﬁcant relationship
with MM role conﬂict ( c=- .20,p\.05), support-
ing hypothesis 4.
5 Discussion
It is well recognized in the CE literature that managers
at different levels play different roles and that theirsocial exchanges matter for strategic renewal (cf. Dess
et al. 2003 ). Most research emphasizes the role of
MMs as key drivers of CE. For instance, MMs areidentiﬁed as the most entrepreneurial people (Morris
and Jones 1999 ), the largest group of initiators (Borins
2000 ), and the main source of creativity in entrepre-
neurship (Bernier and Hafsi 2007 ). Yet, this signiﬁcant
contribution of MMs cannot be taken for granted and
cannot be understood in isolation of their TMT’sinﬂuence. In addition, researchers have argued that the
middle management level could also be seen as amajor barrier to change and strategic renewal (Guth
and MacMillan 1986 ). Given the important role of
MMs, scholars have argued that in order to achieve
strategic renewal, TMs and MMs need to act in acomplementary way (Raes et al. 2011 ; Wooldridge
et al. 2008 ). Through an integrated multi-actor
perspective, our study assesses the importance ofTMs’ and MMs’ boundary-spanning for unit’s explor-
atory innovation. We scrutinize different mechanisms
that channel the effects of boundary-spanning andconsider whether there are cascading effects of TMs’
boundary-spanning activities on MMs’ role percep-
tion. Hence, the core theoretical contribution of thisstudy is not only to reveal how different TMs’ and
MMs’ networks inﬂuence the strategic renewal of their
unit, but also to provide insight into mechanisms thatenable MMs to translate boundary-spanning of their
superiors into unit renewal activities.
Our multi-level framework was examined using a
sample of TMs and MMs in a large multi-national
ﬁrm. Our ﬁndings conﬁrm that the utility of boundary-
spanning varies depending on the hierarchical positionof the actors involved. We provide novel insights in
terms of cascading effects that explain why boundary-
spanning does not always translate into renewalactivities of business units. Given different role
requirements and varying levels of power and resourceTable 1 Means, standard deviations and correlations
Mean SD 123456 7 89
Control variables
1. Gender .29 .472. Grade 1.13 1.6 .34**
3. Unit region 14.1 11.5 .09 -.01
4. Unit client focus .74 .44 -.08 -.07 -.69**
5. Unit size 49 29.5 .05 -.06 -.36** .25**
Middle managers level
6. Role conﬂict 3.7 1.2 -.03 .01 -.10 .03 .09
7. MM boundary-spanning 4.8 4.5 .03 -.14** .06 -.03 -.05 -.07
Unit level
8. TMT boundary-
spanning7.2 3.3 .05 .05 -.24** .14** .56** .14** -.01
9. Exploratory innovation 4.2 1.5 .08 -.02 -.39** .34** .05 -.13** -.06 .36**
Fit between boundary-spanning ties
10. Overlap .22 .30 .01 -.06 .17** .15** -.15** . -.11* .03 -.02 -.10*
n=397 middle managers and 72 top managers in 34 business units. Two-tailed tests
*p\.05; ** p\.01318 L. Glaser et al.
123access (Huy et al. 2014 ) the relationship between
boundary-spanning and exploratory innovation is
stronger for TMs than for MMs. Hence, with regard
to boundary-spanning, especially TMs play a key rolein driving strategic renewal. This ﬁnding is particu-
larly insightful vis-a `-vis other evidence indicating that
TMs have greater structural ability to leverageboundary-spanning activities and implement entrepre-
neurial ideas (Hornsby et al. 2009 ). By revealing
differential effects across hierarchical levels, weenhance the understanding of the impact of roles,
power and positions, which are crucial in executing
strategic renewal in large global ﬁrms. As such, ourstudy extends the debate between top-down versus
bottom-up emergence of CE outcomes. Speciﬁcally,we provide evidence that the top-down perspective
suggested by Hornsby et al. ( 2009 ) is a valid
alternative to Burgelman’s ( 1983 ,1984 ) bottom-up
autonomous approach.
As an additional step, this study develops a nuanced
understanding of intra-ﬁrm boundary-spanning activ-
ities and how they enable, as well as why theyconstrain, unit-level strategic renewal activity. Our
ﬁndings show that the positive direct effect of TMT
boundary-spanning on exploratory innovation is offsetby the concomitant impact on MMs’ role conﬂict,
which relates negatively to exploratory innovation.
These results highlight the idea that TMT boundary-spanning may also add pressure on MMs who already
possess a demanding role (Floyd and Lane 2000 ; HuyTable 2 Linear regression analyses of exploratory innovation
Model
1aModel
1bModel
2aModel
2bModel
3aModel
3bModel
4aModel
4b
Control variables
Gender .05
(.13).01
(.13)-.20
(.21)-.18
(.21)-.02
(.15)-.09
(.16)-.11
(.19)-.11
(.19)
Grade .02
(.10).01
(.10).10
(.18).10
(.18)/C160.52
(.06)**.07
(.12)**-.03
(.016)-.04
(.16)
Unit region .06
(.01)*.07
(.01)*.01
(.01).01
(.01).06
(.00)**.07
(.01)**.07
(.01)**.08
(.01)**
Unit client focus .61
(.15)**.59
(.15)**.46
(.23)*.47
(.23)*.38
(.16)*.49
(.16)**.30
(.21)*.31
(.20)*
Unit Size .00
(.00)/C160.01(.00)*.00
(.00).00
(.00).00
(.00).00
(.00).00
(.00).00
(.00)
Management level .08
(.49)*
Boundary-spanning .03
(.02)*
TMT boundary-spanning .08
(.01)*
MM boundary-spanning -.02
(.02)
MM role conﬂict -.13
(.06)*
Interaction
Boundary-spanning * management
level.05
(.04)
/C160
R2.40 .42 .35 .36 .21 .25 .23 .25
DR2.02** .01 .05** .02*
n=397 middle managers and 72 top managers operating in 34 business units
**p\.01; * p\.05;/C160p\.10Achieving strategic renewal 319
1232001 ). It supports Currie and Procter’s ( 2005 ) notion
that inconsistent expectations and cues from key
stakeholders, especially TMs, put pressure upon MMsand make them reluctant to engage in exploration. Our
ﬁndings are particularly relevant to organizations with
a CE vision (Goodale et al. 2011 ), like the one the
focal ﬁrm developed in response to a changing
business and regulatory environment. Perceived obli-
gations originating from the TMT are especiallystrong in face of the tensions that arise when striving
for strategic renewal against the backdrop of ongoing
unit operations. In addition, our empirical evidence ofthis cascading effect points to a mechanism that could
explain the mixed results found in existing boundary-
spanning research and introduces a ‘‘cost-beneﬁt’’trade-off that comes with implications for future
theoretical development and management practice.
This is interesting, as social liabilities are frequentlynot captured across levels in primary studies. Conse-
quently, it seems fruitful to assess the cascadingeffects of roles and associated activities at one
hierarchical level on roles at other levels (e.g., Ou
et al. 2014 ).
As hypothesized, our ﬁndings show that it takes a
particular conﬁguration of boundary-spanning net-
works of the TMs and MMs to improve units’strategic renewal. This res ult suggests that although
TMs’ boundary-spanning spurs role conﬂict among
M M s ,n e t w o r ko v e r l a pa m o n gT M sa n dM M sc a nb ean important remedial factor. Overlapping ties of
TMs and MMs appear to be crucial in coordinating
joint efforts to initiate an d implement exploratory
innovation in business units. As such, this study is
complementary to the internal–external innovation
coordination study of Stettner and Lavie ( 2014 )a n d
Tiwana’s ( 2008 ) work, focusing on tensions and
complementarities between bridging ties and strong
ties in innovation-seeking alliances, which hasimplications for inter-ﬁrm network conﬁguration. In
our within-ﬁrm context, the overlapping tieTable 3 Hierarchical linear modeling analyses of MMs’ role conﬂict
Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4
Control variables
Gender -.08
(.16)-.08
(.15)-.08
(.20)-.07
(.19)
Grade .03
(.14).03
(.14).01
(.11).00
(.10)
Unit region -.03
(.03)-.03
(.03)-.03
(.00)**-.03
(.00)**
Unit client focus -.16
(.13)-.19
(.12)-.19
(.10)/C160-.19
(.10)/C160
Unit size .00
(.00).00
(.00).00
(.00).00
(.00)
Top management level
TMT boundary-spanning .05
(.02)*.05
(.02)*.05
(.02)*
Middle management level
MM boundary-spanning -.01
(.01)-.01
(.01)
Fit
Overlap between MM and TMT boundary-spanning -.20
(.01)*
Pseudo R2.09 .14 .16 .20
n=397 middle managers (level 1) and 34 TMTs (level 2)
Coefﬁcients (based on grand centering) are reported with standard errors in parentheses
**p\.01; * p\.05;/C160p\.10320 L. Glaser et al.
123conﬁguration facilitates the exchange of information
and knowledge in order to achieve a better under-
standing between TMs and MMs. This is vital inpresence of mutual dependency among these actors
(Ren and Guo 2011 ). In more general terms, for
managers to cope with the tension between preserv-ing existing competencies and developing new ones
may lead to misunderstanding and conﬂict (Floyd and
Lane 2000 ). Our notion of overlapping ties therefore
provides new insights for th e CE literature about how
TMs and MMs can jointly pursue the CE ambitions of
an organization, while avoi ding additional tensions
emerging from external knowledge and idea
sourcing.
This study’s ﬁndings point to strategic renewal being
mainly a top-down phenomenon, as TMT boundary-
spanning has a positive effect on unit exploration. That
said, MMs should network in line with their TMT inorder to alleviate the role conﬂict problem. Network
overlap—i.e., some redundancies among the boundary-
spanning ties of TMs and MMs—likely improves MMs’potential for implementing exploratory innovations.
However, for practitioners, we recommend some cau-
tion as overlap may also reduce MMs’ exposure to newideas. Hence, the diversity of the information available
to MMs in such a network constellation will be lower,
i.e., possibly reducing their ability to discover uniqueideas that could infuse strategic renewal activities. This
is analogous to Hansen ( 1999 ), who links a higher level
of diversity to improved search, but reduced transfer ofknowledge.
5.1 Limitations and directions for future researchThe present study comes with multiple limitations
that open up opportunities for further research. First,while the single organizati on research setting has the
advantage of controlling naturally for ﬁrm-level
factors inﬂuencing varia nce at the unit level, the
generalizability of the ﬁndings may be somewhat
limited (Edmondson and McManus 2007 ). Our multi-
level approach allowed us to map the entire organi-
zational network struc ture among all units and
managers, while controlling for context-speciﬁcconditions that might impa ct the strategic renewal
of business units. Future studies could replicate and
extend our ﬁndings by examining a wider range oforganizations and industries. In so doing, studies may
reveal variation acros s different industryenvironments and national cultures (Luo 2003 ). It
would be particularly inte resting for future multi-
level research to examine cascading network effectsin different industries and companies to validate the
robustness of our results (Kilduff and Tsai 2003 ). In
addition, as suggested by Rodan and Galunic ( 2004 ),
the content that is transferred through the boundary-
spanning ties is also a contingency that could reveal
when TMs’ or MMs’ boundary-spanning is conduciveto strategic renewal activity.
Second, this study illuminated some negative
effects of MMs’ role conﬂict; there may be othernegative consequences of role conﬂict worthwhile
avoiding. Although the number of potential roles
employees may take on at work is unlimited (Wel-bourne et al. 1998 ), empirical evidence on how and
under what circumstances managers are able to deal
with contradictory demands, is still scarce (Birkinshawand Gupta 2013 ). It would be interesting to include
other coping mechanisms and personality traits, such
as self-monitoring, self-efﬁcacy and regulatory focus,which act as moderators of the relationship between
role conﬂict and performance outcomes (Das and
Kumar 2010 ; McMullen et al. 2009 ). By explicitly
capturing these mechanisms, future research may
generate a better understanding—beyond the overlap-
ping network conﬁgurations—of how exactly MMscope with the contradictions inherent in their roles and
with multiple mandates from TMs.
Despite its limitations, this study helps scholars and
practitioners understand the differential value and
impact of boundary-spanning activities by TMs and
MMs on their ability to foster unit exploration. In thisspirit, we recommend more cross-hierarchical
research models and the associated multi-level anal-
yses to capture the joint and cascading effects indifferent contexts. Particularly, with respect to such
cascading effects, future research could help develop
and re-examine theory on intra-ﬁrm networks and CE,connecting the origins of strategic renewal activities to
the challenges arising during implementation (Dess
et al. 2003 ; Raes et al.
2011 ).
6 Conclusion
We began this paper by highlighting two core debates
in the CE literature, namely which managers drive
strategic renewal and how their social exchangesAchieving strategic renewal 321
123contribute to strategic renewal. This study challenges
the popular idea that MMs are key drivers of entrepre-
neurial action by providing evidence that—whenconsidering boundary-spanning—TMs are important
corporate entrepreneurs driving their units’ strategic
renewal activities. Accordingly, this research under-scores that multi-level theory building and examina-
tion is essential for generating a deeper understanding
of who drives CE activity in form of strategic renewal.We also reveal social liabilities as a consequence of
TM boundary-spanning in form of increasing role
conﬂict perceived by MMs, which in turn obstructs unitrenewal activities. Such multi-level effects may
account for some of the mixed ﬁndings in existing
network–innovation research and advance the debateabout costs and beneﬁts in network theory in general
and more speciﬁcally for CE as strategic renewal. Our
study also provides evidence that overlapping bound-ary-spanning ties of MMs reduce their inclination
toward role conﬂict. Hence, it takes a particular
conﬁguration of ties among boundary-spanning TMsand MMs to foster renewal effectively. In sum, the
theorizing and ﬁndings presented in this article make astep forward in the CE literature by differentiating
between actors and their networks at different levels
and by examining how these together enable andconstrain strategic renewal. This study advances
ongoing debates in studies about CE and social
networks by providing novel, empirically validatedinsights into who drives strategic renewal and by
uncovering multi-faceted effects of social exchanges.
Acknowledgments The authors are especially thankful to the
SBE Guest Editors Professors Kuratko, Hornsby, and Hayton as
well as the anonymous reviewers for their help in developingthis paper. We also appreciate the guidance of our colleaguesProfessor Justin Jansen and Dr. Marko Reimer.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License which permits any use,distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original author(s) and the source are credited.
Appendix
See Fig. 3.
Fig. 3 TMT boundary-spanning ties of the 34 units under study322 L. Glaser et al.
123References
Amabile, T. M., Conti, R., Coon, H., Lazenby, J., & Herron, M.
(1996). Assessing the work environment for creativity.Academy of Management Journal, 39 (5), 1154–1184.
Ambos, B., & Schlegelmilch, B. B. (2008). Innovation in mul-
tinational ﬁrms: Does cultural ﬁt enhance performance?Management International Review, 48 (2), 189–206.
Andriopoulos, C., & Lewis, M. W. (2009). Exploitation-
exploration tensions and organizational ambidexterity:
Managing paradoxes of innovation. Organization Science,
20(4), 696–717.
Ashford, S. J., Blatt, R., & Walle, D. V. (2003). Reﬂections on
the looking glass: A review of research on feedbackseeking behavior in organizations. Journal of Manage-
ment, 29 (6), 773–799.
Atuahene-Gima, K., & Murray, J. (2007). Exploratory and
exploitative learning in new product development: A socialcapital perspective in new technology ventures in China.Journal of International Marketing, 15 , 1–29.
Bartlett, C. A., & Ghoshal, S. (1995). Changing the role of top
management (part 3): Beyond systems to people. Harvard
Business Review, 3 , 132–143.
Belderbos, R., Faems, D., Leten, B., & Looy, B. V. (2010).
Technological activities and their impact on the ﬁnancialperformance of the ﬁrm: Exploitation and explorationwithin and between ﬁrms. Journal of Product Innovation
Management, 27 (6), 869–882.
Benner, M. J., & Tushman, M. L. (2002). Process management
and technological innovation: A longitudinal study of thephotography and paint industries. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 47 (4), 676–706.
Benner, M. J., & Tushman, M. L. (2003). Exploitation, explo-
ration, and process management: The productivitydilemma revisited. Academy of Management Review,
28(2), 238–256.
Bernier, L., & Hafsi, T. (2007). The changing nature of public
entrepreneurship. Public Administration Review, 67 (3),
488–503.
B i r k i n s h a w ,J . ,&G u p t a ,K .( 2 0 1 3 ) . Clarifying the distinctive con-
tribution of ambidexterity to the ﬁeld of organization studies.Academy of Management Perspectives, 27 (4), 287–298.
Bogenrieder, I., & Nooteboom, B. (2004). Learning groups: What
types are there? Organization Studies, 25 (2), 287–314.
Bolino, M. C., & Turnley, W. H. (2005). The personal costs of
citizenship behavior: The relationship between individual
initiative and role overload, job stress, and work-family
conﬂict. Journal of Applied Psychology, 90 (4), 740–748.
Borgatti, S. P., Everett, M. G., & Freeman, L. C. (2002). Ucinet
6 for windows . Harvard, MA: Analytic Technologies.
Borins, S. (2000). Loose cannons and rule breakers, or enter-
prising leaders? Some evidence about innovative publicmanagers. Public Administration Review, 60 (6), 498–507.
Brass, D. J., Galaskiewicz, J., Greve, H. R., & Tsai, W. (2004).
Taking stock of networks and organizations: A multilevelperspective. Academy of Management Journal, 47 (6),
795–817.
Bryk, A. S., & Raudenbush, S. W. (1992). Hierarchical linear
models: Applications and data analysis methods . Newbury
Park, CA: Sage.Burgelman, R. A. (1983). A model of the interaction of strategic
behavior, corporate context, and the concept of strategy.
Academy of Management Review, 8 (1), 61–70.
Burgelman, R. A. (1984). Designs for corporate entrepreneur-
ship in established ﬁrms . Stanford: Graduate School of
Business, Stanford University.
Burt, R. S. (2004). Structural holes and good ideas. American
Journal of Sociology, 110 (2), 349–399.
Burt, R. S. (2007). Secondhand brokerage: Evidence on the
importance of local structure for managers, bankers, andanalysts. Academy of Management Journal, 50 (1),
119–148.
Carlile, P. R. (2004). Transferring, translating, and transform-
ing: An integrative framework for managing knowledgeacross boundaries. Organization Science, 15 (5), 555–568.
Carpenter, M. A., Geletkanycz, M. A., & Sanders, W. G. (2004).
Upper echelons research revisited: Antecedents, elements,
and consequences of top management team composition.
Journal of Management, 30 (6), 749–778.
Coelho, F., Augusto, M., & Lages, L. F. (2011). Contextual
factors and the creativity of frontline employees: Themediating effects of role stress and intrinsic motivation.Journal of Retailing, 87 (1), 31–45.
Collins, C. J., & Clark, K. D. (2003). Strategic human resource
practices, top management team social networks, and ﬁrmperformance: The role of human resource practices increating organizational competitive advantage. Academy of
Management Journal, 46 (6), 740–751.
Corbett, A. C., & Hmieleski, K. M. (2007). The conﬂicting
cognitions of corporate entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice, 31 (1), 103–121.
Covin, J., & Miles, M. (2006). Corporate entrepreneurship and
the pursuit of competitive advantage. Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice, 23 , 47–64.
Cross, R., Nohria, N., & Parker, A. (2002). Six myths about
informal networks—And how to overcome them. MIT
Sloan Management Review, 43 (3), 67–75.
Crossan, M. M., & Apaydin, M. (2010). A multi-dimensional
framework of organizational innovation: A systematic
review of the literature. Journal of Management Studies,
47(6), 1154–1191.
Currie, G., & Procter, S. J. (2005). The antecedents of middle
managers’ strategic contribution: The case of a profes-
sional bureaucracy. Journal of Management Studies, 42 (7),
1325–1356.
Daft, R. L., & Lengel, R. H. (1986). Organizational information
requirements, media richness and structural design. Man-
agement Science, 32 (5), 554–571.
Danneels, E. (2002). The dynamics of product innovation and
ﬁrm competences. Strategic Management Journal, 23 (12),
1095–1121.
Das, T. K., & Kumar, R. (2010). Interpartner sensemaking in
strategic alliances: Managing cultural differences and
internal tensions. Management Decision, 48 (1), 17–36.
Dess, G. G., Ireland, R. D., Zahra, S. A., Floyd, S. W., Janney, J.
J., & Lane, P. J. (2003). Emerging issues in corporate
entrepreneurship. Journal of Management, 29 (3), 351–378.
Dougherty, D. (1992). Interpretive barriers to successful product
innovation in large ﬁrms. Organization Science, 3 (2),
179–202.Achieving strategic renewal 323
123Edmondson, A. C., & McManus, S. E. (2007). Methodological
ﬁt in management ﬁeld research. Academy of Management
Review, 32 (4), 1246–1264.
Floyd, S. W., & Lane, P. J. (2000). Strategizing throughout the
organization: Managing role conﬂict in strategic renewal.
Academy of Management Review, 25 (1), 154–177.
Ford, J. D., Ford, L. W., & D’Amelio, A. (2008). Resistance to
change: The rest of the story. Academy of Management
Review, 33 (2), 362–377.
Fourne ´, S. P. L. (2014). Managing organizational tensions: A
multi-level perspective on exploration, exploitation andambidexterity . Rotterdam, NL: Erasmus Research Institute
of Management (ERIM).
Fourne ´, S. P. L., Jansen, J. J. P., & Mom, T. J. M. (2014).
Strategic agility in MNEs: Managing tensions to captureopportunities across emerging and established markets.
California Management Review, 56 (3), 13–38.
Friedman, R. A., & Podolny, J. (1992). Differentiation of
boundary spanning roles: Labor negotiations and implica-
tions for role conﬂict. Administrative Science Quarterly,
37(1), 28–47.
Galunic, C., & Rodan, S. (1998). Resource recombinations in
the ﬁrm: knowledge structures and the potential for
Schumpeterian innovation. Strategic Management Jour-
nal, 19 (12), 1193–1201.
Gargiulo, M., & Benassi, M. (2000). Trapped in your own net?
Network cohesion, structural holes, and the adaptation of
social capital. Organization Science, 11 (2), 183–196.
Geletkanycz, M. A., & Hambrick, D. C. (1997). The external ties
of top executives: Implications for strategic choice and per-
formance. Administrative Science Quarterly, 42 , 654–681.
Goffee, R., & Scase, R. (1992). Organizational change and the
corporate career; the restructuring of managers job aspi-rations. Human Relations, 45 (4), 363–385.
Goodale, J. C., Kuratko, D. F., Hornsby, J. S., & Covin, J. G.
(2011). Operations management and corporate entrepre-neurship: The moderating effect of operations control onthe antecedents of corporate entrepreneurial activity in
relation to innovation performance. Journal of Operations
Management, 29 (1–2), 116–127.
Gould, R. V., & Fernandez, R. M. (1989). Structures of medi-
ation: A formal approach to brokerage in transaction net-
works. Sociological Methodology, 19 , 89–126.
Govindarajan, V., Kopalle, P. K., & Danneels, E. (2011). The
effects of mainstream and emerging customer orientations
on radical and disruptive innovations. Journal of Product
Innovation Management, 28 (1), 121–132.
Granovetter, M. (1973). The strength of weak ties. American
Journal of Sociology, 78 (6), l360–l1380.
Grant, R. M. (1987). Multinationality and performance among
British manufacturing companies. Journal of International
Business Studies, 18 (3), 79–89.
Grant, R. M. (1996). Toward a knowledge-based theory of the
ﬁrm. Strategic Management Journal, 17 (S2), 109–122.
Grover, S. L. (1993). Why professionals lie: The impact of
professional role conﬂict on reporting accuracy. Organi-
zational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 55 (2),
251–272.
Guler, I., & Nerkar, A. (2012). The impact of global and local
cohesion on innovation in the pharmaceutical industry.
Strategic Management Journal, 33 (5), 535–549.Guth, W. D., & Ginsberg, A. (1990). Guest editor’s introduc-
tion: corporate entrepreneurship. Strategic Management
Journal, 11 (SI), 5–16.
Guth, W. D., & MacMillan, I. C. (1986). Strategy implemen-
tation versus middle management self-interest. Strategic
Management Journal, 7 (4), 313–327.
Hansen, M. T. (1999). The search-transfer problem: The role of
weak ties in sharing knowledge across organization sub-
units. Administrative Science Quarterly, 44 (1), 82–111.
Hansen, M. T., Mors, M. L., & Løva ˚s, B. (2005). Knowledge
sharing in organizations: Multiple networks, multiplephases. Academy of Management Journal, 48 (5), 776–793.
Hargadon, A., & Sutton, R. I. (1997). Technology brokering and
innovation in a product development ﬁrm. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 42 (4), 716–749.
Hayter, C. S. (2013). Conceptualizing knowledge-based entre-
preneurship networks: perspectives from the literature.
Small Business Economics, 41 (4), 899–911.
Hayton, J. C. (2005). Promoting corporate entrepreneurship
through human resource management practices: A review
of empirical research. Human Resource Management
Review, 15 (1), 21–41.
Hayton, J. C., & Kelley, D. J. (2006). A competency-based
framework for promoting corporate entrepreneurship.
Human Resource Management, 45 (3), 407–427.
Hitt, M. A., Nixon, R. D., Hoskisson, R. E., & Kochhar, R.
(1999). Corporate entrepreneurship and cross-functional
fertilization: Activation, process and disintegration of new
product design team. Entrepreneurship Theory and Prac-
tice, 23 (3), 145–167.
Hornsby, J. S., Bloodgood, J. M., Hayton, J., & Kuratko, D. F.
(2013). Network legitimacy diffusion: a model for corpo-rate entrepreneurship. International Entrepreneurship and
Management Journal, 9 (3), 307–322.
Hornsby, J. S., Kuratko, D. F., Shepherd, D. A., & Bott, J. P.
(2009). Managers’ corporate entrepreneurial actions:Examining perception and position. Journal of Business
Venturing, 24 (3), 236–247.
Hornsby, J. S., Kuratko, D. F., & Zahra, S. A. (2002). Middle
managers’ perception of the internal environment for cor-porate entrepreneurship: assessing a measurement scale.Journal of Business Venturing, 17 (3), 49–63.
Hunter, J. E., & Hunter, R. F. (1984). Validity and utility of
alternative predictors of job performance. Psychological
Bulletin, 96 (1), 72–98.
Huy, Q. N. (2001). In praise of middle managers. Harvard
Business Review, 47 (8), 72–79.
Huy, Q. N. (2002). Emotional balancing of organizational
continuity and radical change: The contribution of middle
managers. Administrative Science Quarterly, 47 (1), 31–69.
Huy, Q. N., Corley, K., & Kraatz, M. (2014). From support
to mutiny: Shifting legitimacy judgements and emo-tional reactions impacting the implementation of radical
change. Academy of Management Journal ,57(6),
1650–1680.
Ibarra, H. (1993). Network centrality, power, and innovation
involvement: Determinants of technical and administrative
roles. Academy of Management Journal, 36 (3), 471–501.
Ireland, R. D., Covin, J. G., & Kuratko, D. F. (2009). Concep-
tualizing corporate entrepreneurship strategy. Entrepre-
neurship: Theory and Practice, 33 (1), 19–46.324 L. Glaser et al.
123Ireland, R. D., Kuratko, D. F., & Morris, M. H. (2006). A health
audit for corporate entrepreneurship: Innovation at all
levels: Part I. Journal of Business Strategy, 27 (1), 10–17.
Jansen, J. J. P., Simsek, Z., & Cao, Q. (2012). Ambidexterity and
performance in multiunit contexts: Cross-level moderating
effects of structural and resource attributes. Strategic
Management Journal, 33 (11), 1286–1303.
Jansen, J. J. P., Van Den Bosch, F. A. J., & Volberda, H. W.
(2006). Exploratory innovation, exploitative innovation,
and performance: Effects of organization antecedents andenvironmental moderators. Management Science, 52 (11),
1661–1674.
Johnson, L., & Frohman, A. (1989). Identifying and closing the
gap in the middle in organizations. Academy of Manage-
ment Executive, 3 , 107–114.
Kahn, R. L., Wolfe, D. M., Quinn, R. P., Snoek, J. D., & Ro-
senthal, R. A. (1964). Organizational stress: Studies in role
conﬂict and ambiguity . Oxford: Wiley.
Katz, D., & Kahn, R. L. (1978). The social psychology of
organizations . New York: Wiley.
Kelley, D. J., Peters, L., & O’Connor, G. C. (2009). Intra-
organizational networking for innovation-based corporateentrepreneurship. Journal of Business Venturing, 24 (3),
221–235.
Kilduff, M., & Tsai, W. (2003). Social networks and organi-
zations . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Klein, K. J., & Kozlowski, S. W. J. (2000). From micro to meso:
Critical steps in conceptualizing and conducting multilevel
research. Organizational Research Methods, 3 (3),
211–236.
Kleinbaum, A. M., & Tushman, M. L. (2007). Building bridges:
The social structure of interdependent innovation. Strate-
gic Entrepreneurship Journal, 1 (1–2), 103–122.
Kohli, A. K., & Jaworski, B. J. (1994). The inﬂuence of cow-
orker feedback on salespeople. Journal of Marketing,
58(4), 82–94.
Kuratko, D. F., Ireland, R. D., Covin, J. G., & Hornsby, J. S.
(2005). A model of middle-level managers’ entrepreneurial
behavior. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 29 (6),
699–716.
LeBreton, J. M., & Senter, J. L. (2008). Answers to 20 questions
about interrater reliability and interrater agreement.
Organizational Research Methods, 11 (4), 815–852.
Lechner, C., Frankenberger, K., & Floyd, S. W. (2010). Task
contingencies in the curvilinear relationships between
intergroup networks and initiative performance. Academy
of Management Journal, 53 (4), 865–886.
Leroy, S. (2009). Why is it so hard to do my work? The chal-
lenge of attention residue when switching between work
tasks. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 109 (2), 168–181.
Lindell, M. K., & Whitney, D. J. (2001). Accounting for com-
mon method variance in cross-sectional research designs.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 86 (1), 114–121.
Lingo, E. L., & O’Mahony S. C. (2009). Nexus work: Brokerage
on creative projects . SSRN.
Luo, Y. (2003). Industrial dynamics and managerial networking
in an emerging market: the case of China. Strategic Man-
agement Journal, 24 (13), 1315–1327.Lu¨scher, L. S., & Lewis, M. W. (2008). Organizational change
and managerial sensemaking: Working through paradox.
Academy of Management Journal, 51 (2), 221–240.
Mantere, S. (2008). Role expectations and middle manager
strategic agency. Journal of Management Studies, 45 (2),
294–316.
Marrone, J. A., Tesluk, P. E., & Carson, J. B. (2007). A multi-
level investigation of antecedents and consequences of
team member boundary-spanning behavior. Academy of
Management Journal, 50 (6), 1423–1439.
McFadyen, M. A., & Cannella, M. (2004). Social capital and
knowledge creation: Diminishing returns of the number
and strength of exchange relationships. Academy of Man-
agement Journal, 47 (5), 735–746.
McGrath, R. G. (2001). Exploratory learning, innovative
capacity and managerial oversight. Academy of Manage-
ment Journal, 44 (1), 118–131.
McMullen, J. S., Shepherd, D. A., & Patzelt, H. (2009). Man-
agerial (in) attention to competitive threats. Journal of
Management Studies, 46 (2), 157–181.
McNamara, P., & Baden-Fuller, C. (1999). Lessons from the
Celltech case: Balancing knowledge exploration andexploitation in organizational renewal. British Journal of
Management, 10 (4), 291–307.
Mehra, A., Dixon, A. L., Brass, D. J., & Robertson, B. (2006).
The social network ties of group leaders: Implications forgroup performance and leader reputation. Organization
Science, 17 (1), 64–79.
Moliterno, T. P., & Mahony, D. M. (2011). Network theory of
organization: A multilevel approach. Journal of Manage-
ment, 37 (2), 443–467.
Mom, T. J. M., Fourne ´, S. P. L., & Jansen, J. J. P. (2015).
Managers’ work experience, ambidexterity, and perfor-mance: The contingency role of the work context. Human
Resource Management . doi: 10.1002/hrm.21663 .
Moreland, R. L., & Levine, J. M. (1992). The composition of
small groups. In E. J. Lawler, B. Markovsky, C. Ridgeway,& H. A. Walker (Eds.), Advances in group processes (Vol.
9, pp. 237–280). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Morris, M. H., & Jones, F. F. (1999). Entrepreneurship in
established organizations: The case of the public sector.Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 24 (1), 71–91.
Morris, M., Kuratko, D., & Covin, J. (2010). Corporate entre-
preneurship & innovation . Mason, OH: Cengage Learning.
Nandram, S. S., & Klandermans, B. (1993). Stress experienced
by active members of trade unions. Journal of Organiza-
tional Behavior, 14 (5), 415–431.
Obstfeld, D. (2005). Social Networks, the tertius iungens ori-
entation, and involvement in innovation. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 50 (1), 100–130.
Ou, A. Y., Tsui, A. S., Kinicki, A. J., Waldman, D. A., Xiao, Z.,
& Song, L. J. (2014). Humble chief executive ofﬁcers’connections to top management team integration and
middle managers’ responses. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 59 (1), 34–72.
Pappas, J. M., & Wooldridge, B. (2007). Middle managers’
divergent strategic activity: An investigation of multiple
measures of network centrality. Journal of Management
Studies, 44 (3), 323–341.Achieving strategic renewal 325
123Perry-Smith, J. E. (2006). Social yet creative: The role of social
relationships in facilitating individual creativity. Academy
of Management Journal, 49 (1), 85–101.
Perry-Smith, J. E., & Shalley, C. E. (2003). The social side of
creativity: A static and dynamic social network perspec-
tive. Academy of Management Review, 28 (1), 89–106.
Peterson, M. F., Smith, P. B., Akande, A., Ayestaran, S.,
Bochner, S., Callan, V., & Cho, N. G. (1995). Role conﬂict,
ambiguity, and overload: A 21-nation study. Academy of
Management Journal, 38 (2), 429–452.
Phelps, C. C. (2010). A longitudinal study of the inﬂuence of
alliance work structure and composition on ﬁrm explor-
atory innovation. Academy of Management Journal, 53 ,
890–913.
Podolny, J. M., & Baron, J. (1997). Resources and relationships:
Social networks and mobility in the workplace. American
Sociological Review, 62 , 673–693.
Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., & Lee, J. Y. (2003).
Common method biases in behavioral research: A critical
review of the literature and recommended remedies.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 88 (5), 879–903.
Raes, A. M. G., Heijltjes, M. G., Glunk, U., & Roe, R. A. (2011).
The interface of the top management team and middle
management: A process model. Academy of Management
Review, 36 (1), 102–126.
Raudenbush, S. W., Bryk, A. S., & Congdon, R. (2004). HLM6:
Hierarchical linear and nonlinear modeling . Lincoln-
wood, IL: Scientiﬁc Software International.
Reagans, R., & McEvily, B. (2003). Network structure and
knowledge transfer: The effects of cohesion and range.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 48 (2), 240–267.
Ren, C. R., & Guo, C. (2011). Middle managers’ strategic role in
the corporate entrepreneurial process: Attention-basedeffects. Journal of Management ,37(6), 1586–1610.
Rizzo, J. R., House, R. J., & Lirtzman, S. I. (1970). Role conﬂict
and ambiguity in complex organizations. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 15 (2), 150–163.
Rodan, S., & Galunic, C. (2004). More than network structure:
How knowledge heterogeneity inﬂuences managerial per-
formance and innovativeness. Strategic Management
Journal, 25 (6), 541–562.
Rogan, M., & Mors, L. (2014). A network perspective on indi-
vidual level ambidexterity in organizations. Organization
Science ,25(6), 1860–1877. doi: 10.1287/orsc.2014.0901 .
Rogers, D. L., & Molnar, J. (1976). Organizational antecedents
of role conﬂict and ambiguity in top-level administrators.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 21 (4), 598–610.
Rowley, T., Behrens, D., & Krackhardt, D. M. (2000). Redun-
dant governance structures: An analysis of structural and
relational embeddedness in the steel and semiconductor
industries. Strategic Management Journal, 21 (3),
369–386.
Schuler, R. S., Aldag, R. J., & Brief, A. P. (1977). Role conﬂict
and ambiguity: A scale analysis. Organizational Behavior
and Human Performance, 20 (1), 111–128.
Schwartz, S. H. (1999). A theory of cultural values and some
implications for work. Applied Psychology, 48 (1), 23–47.
Shane, S., Venkataraman, S., & MacMillan, I. C. (1995). Cul-
tural differences in innovation championing strategies.Journal of Management, 21 (5), 931–952.Sharma, P., & Chrisman, J. J. (1 999). Toward a reconciliation of the
deﬁnitional issues in the ﬁeld of corporate entrepreneurship.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 23 (3), 11–27.
Shepherd, D. A., McMullen, J. S., & Jennings, P. D. (2007). The
formation of opportunity beliefs: Overcoming ignorance
and reducing doubt. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal,
1(1–2), 75–95.
Shi, W., Markoczy, L., & Dess, G. G. (2009). The role of middle
management in the strategy process: Group afﬁliation,
structural holes, and tertius iungens. Journal of Manage-
ment, 35 (6), 1453–1480.
Sims, D. (2003). Between the millstones: A narrative account of
the vulnerability of middle managers’ storying. Human
Relations, 56 (10), 1195–1211.
Smith, W. K., & Lewis, M. W. (2011). Toward a theory of
paradox: A dynamic equilibrium model of organizing.
Academy of Management Review, 36 (2), 381–403.
Snijders, T. A. B., & Bosker, R. J. (1999). Multilevel analysis:
an introduction to basic and advanced multilevel modeling .
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Srivastava, A., & Lee, H. (2005). Predicting order and timing of
new product moves: The role of top management in cor-porate entrepreneurship. Journal of Business Venturing,
20(4), 459–481.
Stettner, U., & Lavie, D. (2014). Ambidexterity under scrutiny:
Exploration and exploitation via internal organization,alliances, and acquisitions. Strategic Management Journal,
35(13), 1903–1929.
Szulanski, G. (1996). Exploring internal stickiness: Impedi-
ments to the transfer of best practice within the ﬁrm.
Strategic Management Journal, 17 (2), 27–43.
Tallman, S., & Li, J. (1996). Effects of international diversity
and product diversity on the performance of multinationalﬁrms. Academy of Management Journal, 39 (1), 179–196.
Tiwana, A. (2008). Do bridging ties complement strong ties? An
empirical examination of alliance ambidexterity. Strategic
Management Journal, 29 (3), 251–272.
Tortoriello, M., & Krackhardt, D. (2010). Activating cross-
boundary knowledge: The role of simmelian ties in the
generation of innovations. Academy of Management
Journal, 53 (1), 167–181.
Tortoriello, M., Reagans, R., & McEvily, B. (2012). Bridging
the knowledge gap: The inﬂuence of strong ties, network
cohesion, and network range on the transfer of knowledgebetween organizational units. Organization Science, 23 (4),
1024–1039.
Tsai, W. (2001). Knowledge transfer in intraorganizational
networks: Effects of network position and absorptivecapacity on business unit innovation and performance.
Academy of Management Journal, 44 (5), 996–1004.
Tsai, W., & Ghoshal, S. (1998). Social capital and value crea-
tion: The role of intra-ﬁrm networks. Academy of Man-
agement Journal, 41 (4), 464–476.
Tubre, T. C., & Collins, J. M. (2000). Jackson and Schuler
(1985) Revisited: A meta-analysis of the relationshipsbetween role ambiguity, role conﬂict, and job performance.
Journal of Management, 26 (1), 155–169.
Tushman, M. L., & O’Reilly, C. A. (1996). Ambidextrous
organizations: Managing revolutionary and revolutionarychange. California Management Review, 38 , 8–30.326 L. Glaser et al.
123Uzzi, B. (1997). Social structure and competition in interﬁrm
networks: The paradox of embeddedness. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 42 (1), 35–67.
Van Cauwenbergh, A., & Cool, K. (1982). Strategic manage-
ment in a new framework. Strategic Management Journal,
3(3), 245–264.
Walker, O. C., Churchill, G. A., & Ford, N. M. (1975). Orga-
nizational determinants of the industrial salesman’s role
conﬂict and ambiguity. Journal of Marketing, 39 , 32–39.
Welbourne, T. M., Johnson, D. E., & Erez, A. (1998). The role-
based performance scale: Validity analysis of a theory-based measure. Academy of Management Journal, 41 (5),
540–555.
Westley, F. R. (1990). Middle managers and strategy: Micro-
dynamics of inclusion. Strategic Management Journal,
11(5), 337–351.Wooldridge, B., Schmid, T., & Floyd, S. W. (2008). The middle
management perspective on strategy process: Contribu-
tions, synthesis, and future research. Journal of Manage-
ment, 34 (6), 1190–1221.
Yoo, J. W., Reed, R., Shin, S. J., & Lemak, D. J. (2009). Stra-
tegic choice and performance in late movers: inﬂuence ofthe top management team’s external ties. Journal of
Management Studies, 46 (2), 308–335.
Zhao, Z. J., & Anand, J. (2013). Beyond boundary spanners: The
‘collective bridge’ as an efﬁcient interunit structure fortransferring collective knowledge. Strategic Management
Journal, 34 (13), 1513–1530.
Zollo, M., & Winter, S. G. (2002). Deliberate learning and the
evolution of dynamic capabilities. Organization Science,
13(3), 339–351.Achieving strategic renewal 327
123