Page 81
I am extremely glad that I 1 am extremely glad that I
chose this organization to chose this department to
work for over others I was work for over other employ­
considering at the time I ment opportunites I was
joined. considering at the time I
joined.
There's not too much to be There's not too much to be
gained by sticking with this gained by sticking with this
organization indefinitely. department indefinitely.
Often, I find it difficult to Often, I find it difficult to
agree with this organization's agree with this department's
policies in important manners policies in important matters
relating to its employees. relating to its employees.
I really care about the fate of I really care about the fate of
this organization. this department.
For me this is the best of all For me this is the best of all
possible organizations for possible departments in this
which to work. organization for which to
work.
Deciding to work for this Deciding to work for this
organization was a definite department was a definite
mistake on my part. mistake on my part.
Figure 4.2 Continued
Page 82
Each item was scored on a seven point scale using
the anchors "strongly agree" to "strongly disagree"
employed by Porter and Smith [Mowday et al, 1979].
Both commitment scores were calculated by summing the
fifteen items which comprised each scale. It was
decided to combine the two commitment scores into an
overall score by summing the thirty items. As the
correlation between the department and organizational
scores was .67 and significant at the .001 level this
indicated the scores measured similar if not identical
constructs, thus the combination of these scales was
appropr iate.
4.1.5 Turnover
There are three types of turnover: involuntary
termination, voluntary termination, or transfer to a
different department. This study focuses attention on
only the latter two types of turnover. Turnover is
measured via an individual's intention to leave.
Intention to leave has two facets: intention to
quit and intention to transfer. Intention to quit is
measured via three items developed by Mobley et al
[1978] and are combined to form one scale as discussed
in Awal [1981]. Intention to transfer is adapted from
the intention to quit measure. The relevant items are
presented in table 4.3.
Page 83
Intention to quit:
How frequently do you think of quitting your job?
1 2 3 4 5
Never Constantly
I intend to leave this organization.
1 2 3 4 5
Definitely Definitely
Not Yes
I plan to search for another job.
1 2 3 4 5
Definitely Definitely
Not Yes
Intention to transfer:
How frequently do you think of transfering to a different
department in this company?
1 2 3 4 5
Never Constantly
I intend to transfer to another department within
this company.
1 2 3 4 5
Definitely Definitely
Not Yes
I plan to search for a job in another department of
this company.
1 2 3 4 5
Definitely Definitely
Not Yes
TABLE 4.3
Page 84
A number of the study participants indicated,
however, that their companies do not offer them
opportunities for internal transfer. Therefore, the
inclusion of the intention to transfer measure may be
inappropriate for this study. To determine this, a
variable which measured the number of departments which
the employee perceived he/she could transfer to and
still perform similar duties was examined. This
variable revealed that one third of the companies had
either none or very few perceived transfer
possibilities. Therefore, it was decided to drop
intention to transfer from this study.
4.1.6 Individual Differences
Information regarding age, sex, education,
departmental tenure, organizational tenure, and years
of DP experience was gathered. The scales are
presented in table 4.3.1.
Age (check one)
under 20_________ ____ 40-49
20-29 50-59
30-39 ____ 60 or over
Education (check one)
Some high school
High School degree
Technical school experience
Some college experience
College degree
Some graduate work
Master's or higher degree
Sex: Male Female____
Years experience in EDP: ____
Years with company: ____
Years in current department: ____
TABLE 4.3.1
Page 86
4.1.7 Job Tasks
To determine which of a variety of programming and
systems development tasks an individual was engaged in,
an unpublished measure developed by Zmud was used. To
validate Zmud's measure it was compared against a
review of the literature. The convergence between
Zmud's programming items and the review was perfect.
Tremendous overlap existed between the analytic
literature review items and Zmud's items. Zmud's items
were then reviewed by two MIS experts and deemed
representative of ISDP job tasks. It was believed,
therefore, that Zmud's items adequately represented the
programming and analytic job duties and were adopted
for use. The job duties items are presented below.
Programming duties:
Program design
Program coding
Program testing
Analytic duties:
Determine system requirements
System design
System testing
Evaluate an operational program/system
Evaluate system feasibility
To validate the job task items the development
manager from the first study company was asked to
identify which of the subjects were primarily
programmers, programmer/analysts, and systems analysts.
Page 87
This information was compared to the job task score
derived from the Zmud items. The more negative the job
task score the more programming the individual was
engaged in while the more positive the the score the
more analytic duties engaged in. The average score for
those individuals (n=5) the manager identified as
programmers was -2.1. The average score for
programmer/analysts (n=ll) was -1.4, the score for
senior programmer/analysts (n=6) was +.8 while the
single systems analyst had a score of +2.1. The
average job task score became more positive as
individuals were identified by the manager as having
more analytic tasks. This suggests Zmud's items were
able to effectively discriminate between the different
posit ions.
As boundary spanning was a type of job duty
similar to programming and analysis all three types of
job duties were placed in the same section and scored
similarly. Each item was scored on a five point scale
using the anchors "not at all a part of my job" to "a
most significant part of my job". The programming duty
score was the average of the three programming items
while the analytic duty score was the average of the
five items. Averages were used to keep the programming
and analytic scores comparable in magnitude. Each
individual had a score for programming duties and a
score for analytic duties. These scores were used to
Page 88
compute a single score to classify the individual and
is explained in chapter 5 section 5.
4.2 Ordering of Measures
As several questionnaires were being combined to
form one survey instrument, the ordering and placement
of scales was an important issue. Scales that
requested less sensitive information were placed first.
The scales were ordered as follows:
1)Job Duties
2)Boundary Spanning Activities
3)Role Stress
4)Job Satisfaction
5)0rganizational Commitment
6)Departmental Commitment
7)Biographical and General Information
8)Miscellaneous Data not part of this study
9)Intention to Leave
The boundary spanning and job duties scales
required no subjective evaluation of the subject’s
company or job thus these items were placed at the
Page 89
beginning of the survey. The role stress scale
required the individual to respond to evaluative
information regarding his/her job tasks; the job
satisfaction measure asked questions regarding
supervisors, co-workers, pay, the work and promotions
and was considered to be more sensitive information
than role stress. The organizational and departmental
commitment measures request an individual to evaluate
her/his company and departments and thus were placed
after the satisfaction measures.
People who do not wish to be identified in a
survey often will not provide biographical information.
Therefore, the biographical and general information was
placed following the commitment measures.
Several pages of the qiiestionnaire asked
information regarding technology and project
organization that was to be used by a later study and
was not a part of this thesis. Information regarding
intention to leave was placed near the end of the
survey as intention to leave was the most sensitive
information gathered.
Page 90
4.3 Pre-Test
To assess how clear the instructions and the
wording of the items were, the questionnaire was
pre-tested on two individuals. Since the goal of the
pre-test was to evaluate the clarity of the instrument,
two individuals with substantially different
backgrounds were felt to be sufficient to assess this.
One individual was 35 with substantial DP work
experience while the other was 24 with little DP work
experience. Both found the instructions clear;
however, both noted that three of the departmental
commitment items were vague. These items were revised
as described in section 4.1.4. The complete survey
instrument can be found in appendix A.
4.4 The Sample and Selection
A field study was considered to be the most
feasible and economical method to investigate* the
complex phenomena of interest. Sixteen companies,
primarily from the metropolitan New York area, were
contacted requesting their participation in the study.
These companies comprised a convenience sample.
Each company received a letter explaining the
requirements and benefits of participating in the
study. A copy of the letter can be found in Appendix
Page 91
B. Followup telephone calls were made to each company
and three companies were personally visited by the
researcher to outline the study in detail. Of the
sixteen companies, four declined to participate citing
top management policy or poor timing due to heavy
workloads. One company which had agreed to participate
has yet to forward the necessary data. Two were
eliminated from consideration as they had no ISDP or
their systems development personnel were decentralized:
there were fewer than ten ISDP in a single work unit.
In total, nine companies participated in the study with
data collected from 229 individuals. The nine
companies had each agreed to supply 30 individuals for
a total of 270 subjects. However, due to vacations,
illness and schedule conflicts not all thirty were able
to participate. The 229 subjects represents an overall
response rate of 85 percent.
The decision was made to include only centralized
DP groups as decentralized ISDP were found to exhibit
very different characteristics from their more
centralized counterparts [Olson, 1981]. The study
participants included applications programmers,
programmer/analysts, analysts, and project leaders.
Additionally, to assure the study participants were
engaged in comparable tasks, only those individuals
working on internal systems development projects were
included.
Page 92
The participating companies varied in size from
approximately 30 ISDP to over one thousand. The
different industries are outlined below.
Page 93
NUMBER OF INDUSTRY NUMBER OF
COMPANIES SUBJECTS
COMMERCIAL
1 BANKING 24
3 INSURANCE 85
2 BROKERAGE 41
PUBLIC
1 ACCOUNTING 27
INVESTMENT
1 BANKING 26
ELECTRONICS
1 MANUFACTURING 26
9 229
With the exception of one firm located outside the
metropolitan New York area, the study companies were
competing in the same labor market. This was
substantiated during informal discussions with the
study personnel when a number revealed that they had
been employed in one or more of the other study
companies. Descriptive information regarding the
individual participants is presented in table 4.4,
Paqe 94
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS
AGE
RANGE NUMBER PERCENT
20-30 96 42#
30-40 98 43#
40-50 30 13#
50-60
229 100#
GENDER
Female 92 40#
Male
122
60#
229 100#
YEARS EXPERIENCE IN DATA PROCESSING
Mean 6.1 years
Minimum 1.0 years
Maximum 27 years
S.D. 4.5 years
YEARS WITH COMPANY
Mean 4.332 years
Minimum 1.0 years
Maximum 25.0 years
S.D, 4.9 years
Table 4,4
Page 95
EDUCATION
High School Degree 6 2>%
Technical School Experience 8 4?S
Some College 37 16$
College Degree 99 4 3%
Some Graduate Worlc 35 15#
Master’s or Higher Degree 44 1%
229 100%
Table 4.4 Continued
