Journal of Applied Communication Research
ISSN: 0090-9882 (Print) 1479-5752 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rjac20
The boundary-spanning role of a cooperative
support organization: managing the paradox
of stability and change in non-traditional
organizations
Lynn Harter & Kathleen Krone
To cite this article: Lynn Harter & Kathleen Krone (2001) The boundary-spanning role of a
cooperative support organization: managing the paradox of stability and change in non-
traditional organizations, Journal of Applied Communication Research, 29:3, 248-277, DOI:
10.1080/00909880128111
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/00909880128111
Published online: 13 Dec 2010.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 461
View related articles 
Citing articles: 3 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rjac20
The Boundary-Spanning Role of a
Cooperative Support Organization:
Managing the Paradox of Stability
and Change in Non-Traditional
Organizations
Lynn M. Harter and Kathleen J. Krone
ABSTRACT This project provides an interpretation of how one cooperative support
organization, the Nebraska Cooperative Council, discursively functions to help its constit-uent cooperatives consolidate resources in order to better intersect with organizations in alarger bureaucratic system. In analyzing qualitative data collected through in-depth inter-views, surveys, and organizational documents, we found the paradox of stability andchange a revealing prism through which to make sense of participants’ experiences. Wework toward locating and describing how the Council, through its boundary-spanningactivities, helps cooperatives manage the paradox of stability and change while protectingtheir core participatory ideologies. By providing networks of learning, promoting thelegitimacy of cooperative forms of organizing, and protecting cooperatives’ interests, theCouncil is an entity helping cooperatives to reconcile their internal requirements fordemocracy with the external demands of the marketplace.KEY WORDS: Boundary spanners, non-traditional organizations, democratic ideologies,
paradox of stability and change.
Research on worker participation in decision-making is creating an extensive
and rapidly expanding literature base with efforts toward democratization
of work classiﬁed in two broad groups: (1) participation programs within existingbureaucratic structures, and (2) alternative organizational ideologies and struc-tures (Cheney, 1995). Over the past ten years, scholars have focused attention onworker self-management and autonomous work groups (e.g., Barker, Melville, &Pacanowsky, 1993), democratic leadership (e.g., Buzzanell, Ellingson, Silvio,
Lynn M. Harter is an Assistant Professor at Minnesota State University Moorhead; Kathleen J. Krone
is an Associate Professor at University of Nebraska Lincoln. This study is based upon the ﬁrst author’sdoctoral dissertation conducted under the direction of the second author. The data collection wasfunded by a grant provided by the Edith and Robert Day Foundation. The authors gratefully acknowl-edge the substantive feedback provided by Dan O’Hair and three anonymous reviewers. This article isdedicated to the Nebraska Cooperative Council for their support of the cooperative movement.Address: Lynn Harter, 116 G Center for the Arts, Dept. of Speech Comm. and Theater Arts, MinnesotaState Univ.-Moorehead, Moorehead, MN 56563.Journal of Applied Communication Research
Vol. 29, No. 3, August 2001, pp. 248–277
Copyright 2001, National Communication Association
Pasch, Dale, Mauro, Smith, Weir, Martin, 1997), and alternative organizations
(e.g., Ashcraft, 2000). In fact, Barker (1999) argued that participative, team basedorganizations marked the decade of the 1990s. During this time, organizationsconverted and restructured into new forms in which employees take on more ofthe responsibilities traditionally given to management. Extant literature indicatesthat participation as both rhetoric and reality is polysemic in nature and consistsof a variety of meanings and practices across investigators and contexts; meaningsshaped in part by various paradigms of thought and disciplines.
Scholars and practitioners alike agree that there is an evolutionary force in our
society that presently is moving us away from the traditionally observed bureau-cratic organization
1toward more participative forms of controlling work activity
(e.g., Cheney, Straub, Speirs-Glebe, Stohl, DeGooyer Jr., Whalen, Garvin-Doxas,Carlone, 1998; Cheney, Mumby, Stohl, & Harrison, 1997), yet the creation ofcooperative forms of organizing have existed in our society since the birth of ournation. By the very nature of their structures, worker owned cooperatives havegreater formal or legal rights to participation and most likely greater workerparticipation in informal ways (Rooney, 1992) and subsequently serve as exem-plars of non-traditional organizations (Ferree & Martin, 1995; Harrison, 1994). Atthe heart of non-traditional forms of organization is the priority of participation.Cheney (1995) conceptualized non-traditional organizations as “employing orga-nizations that deﬁne themselves at least somewhat in opposition to the ‘main-stream’ and are established and maintained with the principle of worker control”(p. 171). In spirit, alternative organizations maintain a strong notion of processand celebration of self-reﬂection, collective development, individual opportunityand value that Deetz (1995) labeled as participatory or dialogic communication.The focus of the current project is on one type of non-traditional organization,producer cooperatives in the state of Nebraska. Through these cooperatives,agricultural producers provide food and feed grains, beef, pork, and poultryproducts to households in the Midwest and throughout the world.
The democratic structure of cooperatives is ideal for creating individual em-
powerment; however, efforts to accomplish such alternative organizing are oftenplagued by pragmatic pressures to conform to mainstream practices. It is difﬁcultfor cooperatives to maintain their “integrity” over time when trying to manageissues of competition and inefﬁciency as well as pressures toward expansion(Cheney, 1995). One way for producer cooperatives to manage external inﬂuencewhile protecting their central principles and practices is through the creation orinclusion of cooperative support organizations (Abell, 1988; Cheney, 1995, 2000;Cornforth, Thomas, Lewis, & Spear, 1988). A cooperative support organizationhelps its constituent cooperatives survive by effectively consolidating resourcesin order to better intersect with organizations in a larger bureaucratic system. Theincorporation of cooperatives in support organizations or formal “nets of collec-tive action” (Czarniawska, 1997, p. 32) redeﬁne, in one sense, cooperatives’environmental boundaries and “enact” (Euske & Roberts, 1987; Weick, 1979)environments that seem less remote and threatening. In an attempt to explorewhat type of larger social environment is necessary for cooperatives to ﬁnanciallysurvive while maintaining their participatory roots, we explore one cooperativesupport organization, the Nebraska Cooperative Council (NCC), serving over onehundred worker owned cooperatives in the state of Nebraska. More speciﬁcally,we investigate how the NCC discursively calls into question dominant societal249
JACR AUGUST 2001
values, claims resources on behalf of agricultural cooperatives, and provides
space and resources for a democratic vision of organizing.
Despite the emergence of cooperatives and their support organizations into
mainstream private industry, such forms of organizing have been largely ignoredby organizational scholars (Ashcraft, 2000; Cheney et al., 1998; Ferree & Martin,1995; Harrison, 1994). Subsequently, organizational theory and research can begreatly enriched by empirically driven discourse about societal conditions en-abling and/or constraining non-traditional organizations. The project provides aunique opportunity to explore the boundary-spanning aspects of democracy bylooking beyond the perimeters of cooperatives to understand fully practices ofparticipation. The boundary-spanning dimension of workplace democracy high-lights important connections between intraorganizational and extraorganizationalrelations and networks (Cheney et al., 1998). Exploring cooperatives and theirsupport organization provides a natural arena, as opposed to acontextual orhypothetical scenarios, for observing potential contradictions between what peo-ple value and what they do when faced with real situations, constraints, andpressures. The struggles that cooperatives face in enacting environments support-ive of participatory organizational forms may provide valuable insights to theever-expanding literature base on participatory programs within corporate ter-rains, programs often referred to as “intermediate participation” (Rooney, 1992).
The practicality of the present research lies not only in its contribution to theory
but also in its value for practitioners attempting to negotiate democraticallyresponsible workplaces in general and within the agriculture industry speciﬁcal-ly—an industry struggling to manage economic challenges and uncertainties. Thecooperatives served by the Council are operating within a larger environmentalcontext plagued by concerns of continued economic viability. Despite a robustand healthy national economy, economic indicators bring attention to hardshipsfelt by the agriculture sector across the nation (Bereuter, 1998; Hain, 1998; Hord& Thompson, 1998). Instability in Nebraska’s agriculture sector due to low com-modity prices, lower than expected exports, and reduced government subsidies isespecially worrisome given that agriculture annually generates over $9 billion tothe state economy. The squeezing of proﬁt margins, during a time of volatilecommodity prices and pressures to move toward “corporate farming” (i.e., inwhich corporations like ConAgra could have full vertical integration in theagriculture industry from production to packaging and marketing), contribute toa turbulent and unstable macro-societal environment in which cooperatives exist(Hain, 1998). Economic instability for American farmers underscores the impor-tant role played by support organizations such as the Nebraska CooperativeCouncil. Research focused on the struggles and successes of the Council providesinsight into how producer cooperatives can enact and sustain their sacred dem-ocratic values in times of severe economic crises—crises characterized by pres-sures similar to those described by Deetz (1992) as leading to “corporate coloni-zation.” The results of the present study hopefully inform and support theCouncil’s practical efforts to help producer cooperatives survive economicallywhile retaining their democratic roots.
A prolonged economic downturn, such as the one that occurred from 1981–
1985, should cause concern for the public at large as an issue that affects nationaland international food production, supply, and distribution. Therefore, thisproject also aims to increase communication between what some people argue are250
PARADOX OF STABILITY AND CHANGE HARTER & KRONE
distinct co-cultures in America: Farmers and nonfarmers (Higgins, 1991). “Farm-
ers and nonfarmers, because they are members of different cultures, do not sharethe same systems of meaning. Their behaviors are constructed, coordinated, andinterpreted by different cultural information systems. They hold different percep-tions of the reality of farming” (p. 217). On the one hand, Americans have longregarded farming as an institution representing the best of traditional Americanvalues. Yet, most Americans live and work in urban and suburban areas and 48out of 49 Americans purchase food items from commercial operations (Danbom,1995). Subsequently, nonfarmers have little or no experience with farming, rarelyengage in direct communication with farmers, construct romanticized visions offarming, and have at best, a superﬁcial knowledge of agricultural policies andpractices. Unless farmers and nonfarmers engage in sustained efforts to commu-nicate with each other, agricultural issues which affect the economy, the envi-ronment, and food supplies will intrude upon the daily lives of all citizens.
History of Producer Cooperatives and CSOs
We embrace the deﬁnition of “cooperative” provided by the National Council of
Farmer Cooperatives (NCFC): “A business owned and democratically controlledby the people who use its services and whose beneﬁts are derived and distributedequitably” (1998, p. 1). This deﬁnition is consistent with ones adopted by com-munication scholars including Zorn (1997) who deﬁned cooperatives as typicallycharacterized by the users or purchasers of its services having ownership in theorganization. While informal cooperation in agriculture parallels the birth of ournation, co-operation in legal form is a much more recent phenomena. Farmers’lack of power in the marketplace during the early part of this century served as animpetus for Congress passing the Capper-Volstead Act in 1922 allowing producersthe legal right to act together in a cooperative manner (McBride, 1986). Producers,having important social needs unmet by conventional businesses, have continuedto construct cooperatives to embody their democratic ideals. It is important tonote, however, that the ideology of democracy in producer cooperatives usuallymanifests itself in “representative” practices rather than “direct” democraticforms (Rothschild-Whitt & Whitt, 1986). Nonetheless, the heritage of representa-tive democracy of the producer cooperatives involved in the present study doesrepresent a departure from normal capitalist practice described by Deetz (1992) asguided by the ideology of “managerialism.”
Since early settlement in our country, workers in a diverse range of industries,
crafts, and trades have repeatedly tried to make their work and their workplaces theirown. This resiliency in and of itself is hope for the future. If environmental contextsmore supportive of cooperative forms of organizing can be forged, this resiliencycould provide impetus for a less ambiguous future for democratic organizations.Ferree and Martin (1995) and Cheney et al. (1998) recommend we investigate hownon-traditional organizations’ options are expanded or limited by features of thelegal, political, or economic situations within which they operate. The interfacebetween cooperatives and their environments is an acute issue. The central dilemmais one of balance. As an alternative organization struggles to deﬁne itself againstbureaucratic organizations, too much exchange with said organizations can lead to aloss of distinctiveness or a compromise of an alternative ideology. However, too littleadaptation can undermine the success and continuance of alternative organizations.251
JACR AUGUST 2001
The creation of support organizations is one way for alternative farming organiza-
tions to manage external inﬂuence while protecting their core identities (Abell, 1988;Cornforth et al., 1988; Cheney, 1995; Cheney et al., 1998; Reinelt, 1995). A healthyco-operative sector is unlikely to develop or be maintained unless it has its ownsupporting infrastructure (Cornforth et al., 1988). CSOs are created as a defenseagainst some of the internal and external pressures and tensions facing cooperatives.They can mediate between cooperatives and the outside world. Virtually all CSOshave a core of common activities including development work with co-operativesduring the formation process, promotional work for the cooperative movement, andtraining on cooperative techniques. However, the form that CSOs take in performingthese functions is unclear and many questions remain about how best to develop thesupport structure to carry out these functions (Cornforth et al., 1988; Cheney, 1995;Rothschild-Whitt & Whitt, 1986). A few researchers have begun to address theseissues. Shefner-Rogers, Rao, Rogers, and Wayangankar (1998) investigated the Coop-erative Development (CD) Program of the National Dairy Development Board (NDDB)in India. In particular, Shefner-Rogers et al.’s work explored the impacts of a programdesigned to empower women dairy farmers in Indian villages. The ﬁndings providedinitial support for the hypothesis that the communicative efforts of the NDDB’sCooperative Development Program led to increased empowerment of Indian womendairy farmers.
The work of Shefner-Rogers et al. (1998) provides beginning steps toward ﬁlling a
scholarly and pragmatic need to better understand how CSOs discursively functionto meet the needs of their constituents. However, the communicative aspects of howCSOs operate remain largely unrecognized and understudied (Cheney, 1995). Thisproject represents one attempt to explore the utility of a support system, the NebraskaCooperative Council, engaging mainstream organizations on behalf of its constitu-ents. We were guided by the following research question:
RQ1: How does the Nebraska Cooperative Council discursively function to enact
environments supportive of cooperatives’ efforts to maintain democratic in-tegrity and economically survive when intersecting with organizations in alarger bureaucratic system?
Research Design
We use an interpretive framework due to its concern with process and how
people make sense of their lives and experiences. Underscoring our researchdesign is the belief that participants are authorities about their own life experi-ences (Fine, 1998). Subsequently, the ﬁndings represent the life experiences asshared by these authorities through three “data texts”: Organizational documents,information collected through in-depth interviews, and information collectedthrough survey questionnaires. The organizational setting and participants aredescribed below as well as procedures used for collecting and analyzing thediscursive texts.
Research Respondents and Context
The organizational context was the Nebraska Cooperative Council (NCC), a
statewide, non-proﬁt, non-partisan association enacted under the Nebraska non-proﬁt Corporation Act functioning as a Cooperative Support Organization serving252
PARADOX OF STABILITY AND CHANGE HARTER & KRONE
108 producer cooperatives in the state of Nebraska. The Council originated in
1945 because cooperatives were not effectively organized to advance publicrelations or education, to solve legislative or political problems, or to combatanti-cooperative organizations. In order to serve its constituents, the Council isdivided into four districts with each district electing four representatives to serveon the Council’s board. In addition to the Board of Directors, the Council consistsof a President, Director of Education and Communication, an ofﬁce manager, anofﬁce program coordinator, and a lobbyist. The former ﬁve positions are paidpositions funded through dues from participating cooperatives. In addition to theBoard of Directors and paid employees, the Council consists of “participatingmembers.” Participating members are federated regional cooperatives, ﬁnancialinstitutions and insurance companies of which the primary purpose is to serveproducer-owned cooperatives. A total of 91 farmers participated in the projectincluding the employees and board members of the Council as well as leaders oflocal cooperatives represented by the Council.
Procedures
Three avenues for collecting data were relied upon: (1) documents produced by
members of the NCC; (2) in-depth interviews with paid staff of the NCC, membersof the board of directors, managers and board directors of cooperatives; and (3)information gathered from managers and board directors of cooperatives (who didnotparticipate in interviews) through mailed survey questionnaires. The follow-
ing sections highlight these components further in terms of the “data texts” theyprovided for analysis.
Data collection. Organizational documents were collected in order to gain a
better understanding of the organization’s ofﬁcially articulated guiding ideology.The initial texts included the Council’s charter and mission statement, newslet-ters for the previous two years, and minutes from meetings for the previous twoyears. Searches for these initial texts and data from in-depth interviews revealedother documents appropriate for inclusion in the analysis including all memo-randa sent to Council members during the approximate three months of datacollection. In sum, the collection of organizational documents served the purposeof identifying and describing the Council’s ideological stance as manifested inofﬁcial rhetoric.
In-depth interviews served as the primary method of data collection. The
interviews, in which the lead author facilitated discussions, were semi-structuredallowing the participants to talk about their individual experiences and insights.A tentative interview protocol, consisting of a series of open-ended questions, wasdeveloped including questions about interviewees’ perceptions of the Council’spurpose/mission, their vision for the Council, how the NCC is distinctive fromother organizations, and the Council’s enduring characteristics and underlyingvalues. Additionally, questions were included asking participants to reﬂect onhow the Council helps local cooperatives sustain their values and economicallysurvive typical problems as well as successes associated with processes of theCouncil.
A total of 39 in-depth interviews were conducted. All of the Council’s board
members were interviewed as well as the President of the Council, then Director253
JACR AUGUST 2001
of Communications and Education, and Ofﬁce Manager. Over a two month period,
several managers (N 517) and board directors (N 510) from local cooperatives
across the state were also interviewed. Stratiﬁed purposeful sampling procedures,in which various sub-groups are represented, was used when selecting managersand board directors of local cooperatives for in-depth interviews (Creswell, 1997;Miles & Huberman, 1984). In other words, an effort was made to interview bothmanagers and board directors of cooperatives from each of the four geographicdistricts represented by the Council. It is important to note that all the interview-ees were also currently farming in addition to serving in leadership positionswithin their local cooperatives. The interviews with managers and board directorsof local cooperatives were conducted in the natural environments of the cooper-atives or the homes of the interviewees. Interviews with the paid staff of the NCCwere conducted at the Council’s home ofﬁce. Each interview lasted approximatelyan hour and a half. In order to get as clear of picture as possible and havepermanent artifacts ideally suited for transcription purposes, the interviews wereaudio-taped. Transcription of the interviews yielded over 750 pages of single-spaced data.
Survey packets were mailed to managers and board directors of local coopera-
tives represented by the NCC who did not participate in interviews (N 569). Each
survey packet consisted of a consent form, demographic sheet, and several open-ended questions consistent with questions asked during the in-depth interviews.Self-addressed stamped envelopes were also included for participants to returnthe surveys. A follow-up reminder was sent to all individuals. A total of 52surveys were returned resulting in a 75% response rate. Survey responses weretranscribed and included in the database, yielding over 100 pages of single-spaceddata.
Data Analysis. A thematic analysis of the discourse collected through in-
depth interviews, survey questionnaires, and organizational documents was con-ducted using the constant comparative method (Lindlof, 1995). This processbegins with data “reduction” and “interpretation” (Creswell, 1997; Lindlof, 1995)and is consistent with processes engaged in by other communication scholarsdoing interpretive work (e.g., Braithwaite, Baxter, & Harper, 1998; Clair & Thomp-son, 1996; Trethewey, 1997). First, all transcripts and documents were read intheir entirety to develop a sense of these data as a whole. The transcripts werere-read while playing the original tapes to ensure accuracy of transcriptions andto note special emphases or cues (e.g., paralinguistics) that might affect interpre-tation but did not appear on the transcripts. After “cleaning the data” and gaininga holistic sense of the discourse, we started the actual analysis process.
Instead of using a pre-determined category scheme, themes were allowed to
emerge from subjects’ own words as recommended for exploratory research(Strauss & Corbin, 1998). A constant comparative method allowed us to simulta-neously code and analyze the data in order to categorize it into developing“themes” representing recurring patterns of behaviors and meanings. The processbegan by manually coding the data on the actual transcripts. By engaging inconstant comparative analysis of data, speciﬁc incidents in the data were contin-ually compared, concepts were reﬁned and their properties were identiﬁed. Inthis inductive process, data segments were sorted into over-arching categorieswhich described members’ understanding of and experiences with the Council:254
PARADOX OF STABILITY AND CHANGE HARTER & KRONE
(1) networks of learning, (2) promoting legitimacy, (3) and protecting interests.
The development of sub-themes within each category was an emergent processthat continued as the data analysis proceeded. As the analysis progressed, thethemes were framed around the paradox of stability and change as it provided agood ﬁt with these data.
Rather than manually organizing themes, NUD.IST was used to help sort the
data. As Richards and Richards (1998) and Kelle (1995) suggest, using computer-assisted software for data analysis increases the efﬁciency with which the code-and-retrieval parts of the analytic process are managed. With NUD.IST, a rootdirectory was created to keep track of actual products of coding, includinginformation such as conceptual labels and thick descriptions of data. The processof identifying themes or patterns occurred until the data sufﬁciently repeateditself and saturation occurred. It is imperative to stress that the success of com-puter-aided analysis still rests with the theoretical sensitivity of the investigatorwhen creating and using coding schemes. NUD.IST did not identify themesthroughout the analysis; it merely functioned as a tool helping manage the data aswe categorized it. We believe the use of NUD.IST helped ensure that themesdeveloped were really grounded in data and not based on single or atypicalsituations.
Attempts to verify the accuracy of the ﬁndings were facilitated through mem-
ber-checking processes. Member checks are opportunities for researchers to solicitinformants’ views of the credibility of ﬁndings (Creswell, 1997; Lindlof, 1995).For the current project, two member-checking sessions with multiple participantswere conducted after the initial analyses of data were conducted. First, a thirtypage summary of results was provided to the President and ofﬁce manager. Theﬁrst author met with both of them to collect their reﬂections on the results.Additionally, a two-page executive summary was provided to ﬁve intervieweesand the ﬁrst author proceeded to meet with them to gather their insights. Newinformation and insights gleaned during member checks resulted in over 50transcribed pages and were included in the database.
Results and Interpretations
Participants’ narratives are saturated with the presence of a paradox that not
only paralyzes action but also enables it—the need for both stability and change.At the heart of contemporary producer cooperatives, and modern institutions ingeneral, is the persistence of the dialectic of stability and change (Czarniawska,1997). The term paradox comes from the Greek word “para 1dokein” meaning “to
think twice; to reconcile two apparently conﬂicting views” (Putnam, 1986, p.153). Putnam argues that system-wide paradoxes accrue from the complexities oforganizing and are inevitable. In reference to the paradox of change and stabilityin particular, O’Connor (1995) argues:
organizational change is a system contradiction in itself. Change and change pro-
cesses run counter to fundamental interests of management, such as control, stability,predictability, rationality, and economic result s... organizational change requires a
tolerance for ﬂoundering and a willingness to accept more and more change. (p. 770)
Contradictions are thus key phenomena for understanding change. Members
desire predictability in organizations while at the same time are energized by255
JACR AUGUST 2001
spontaneity and novelty (Weick & Westley, 1996). From the interplay of certainty
with uncertainty, order with disorder, predictability with novelty, organizationssustain a dynamic ongoingness. Berg and Smith (1990) argue that recognizing theparadox of stability and change makes it possible to discover a link betweenopposing forces and open up the framework that gives meaning to the apparentcontradictions in the experience. We embrace the perspective that paradoxes areproperties of life itself. While the term “paradox” commonly connotes somethingnegative or inconsistent, it captures the inherent tension between seeminglyopposing forces. We do not use the term as evidence of failure or inadequacy. Likeother communication scholars guided by dialectical perspectives (see Baxter &Montgomery, 1996; Braithwaite, Baxter, & Harper, 1998; Putnam, 1986), we as-sume the presence of oppositional forces are inherent in our social realities. Thediscourse reveals perceptions of the NCC as an active agent in helping membersof cooperatives acknowledge and manage the paradox of stability and change.Paradox appears in the interwoven but oppositional forces, namely throughstruggles between action and structure, stability and instability (Putnam, Phillips,& Chapman, 1996).
Listening to members of cooperatives, we were impressed by their struggle with
the ongoing tensions between the forces of stability and change. “I spent probably65% of my time this last year wondering or considering how cooperatives aregonna change. Without a doubt, co-ops must adapt to the changing ag environ-ment” suggests one co-op manager. Yet, innovations and change, whether ofﬁ-cially sanctioned or not, frequently oppose the prevailing way of doing things inorganizations (Putnam, 1986). Any attempt to work with change needs to take intoconsideration those individual and organizational defense mechanisms againstanxiety that structure and form managerial and organizational responses tochange (Vince & Broussine, 1996). In a conversation with the President of theCouncil, he described his role as “helping cooperatives change without chang-ing.” When asked to explain what he meant, he said, “without continual educa-tion, the cooperative character can slip away with perhaps not even a whimper ofprotest, and the cooperative can become regarded the same as any other business.”Cooperatives, at times, struggle to remain stable in the midst of change. Forinstance, cooperatives strive to maintain their participatory ideology (i.e., stabil-ity—the prevailing way of organizing activity in cooperatives) while trying toembrace changes that may threaten democracy (e.g., mergers between coopera-tives that lead to increased size of organization and perhaps less opportunity forparticipation).
Throughout their discourse, participants characterized the negotiation of
change and stability as primarily due to technological advances, legislative ac-tions, and a competitive marketplace providing opportunities for globalization.“There’s so much new technology available that producers can determine exactlywhat combination of N, P, and K should be applied to each acre,” argued one manin his discussion of how technological advances allow better fertilizer placementthrough site speciﬁc application.
Underscoring participants’ discussions was the speed of change. “I don’t know
where we are going to be in 3 to 5 years anymore because everything is changingso fast, everything is so ﬂuid. It isn’t that change is something new; that’s alwaysbeen there. It is the speed of change. Long term planning is three years, not ten.”Helping cooperatives stay current with the changing agriculture industry was256
PARADOX OF STABILITY AND CHANGE HARTER & KRONE
cited by the President of the Council as a key concern: “I think the biggest thing
that will affect this association here, and my successor, is helping co-ops safelyposition themselves while keeping up with the pace of change.”
Uncertainty often accompanies change as does the search for predictability and
order (Berger & Calabrese, 1975). Furthermore, people experiencing paradoxicalsituations also experience anxiety (Leathers, 1979) and feelings of paralysis (Put-nam et al., 1996). Thus, it was hardly surprising to hear interviewees share theiranxieties about the changing agriculture environment. Participants’ discourseindicates that the forces of certainty and uncertainty coexist in a dynamic inter-play with one another. “We all get very comfortable with what we are doing andsometimes we are forced into change and the change is a little different and wehave to just step back and take a moment, be open-minded, be at peace withambiguity knowing we will reach that comfort zone again,” shared one man. Weheard organizing being described as the ongoing process of weaving together thecertainty of continuity and the uncertainty of discontinuity. Hence, it appears thatit is the process of uncertainty reduction that is important, not necessarily theachievement of uncertainty reduction. Importantly, the Council was described asplaying a key role in helping cooperatives help their members to balance stabilityand change. “We are a diminishing breed of folk, agriculture is. So was thedinosaur. The dinosaur would not change. So he’s no longer here. Are we goingto refuse to change and become extinct? That’s why we need the help of theCouncil.” Individuals experiencing novel encounters are often motivated to seekinformation to reduce uncertainty (Berger & Calabrese, 1975). In organizations,communication can provide stability in uncertain situations and enable membersto make sense of critical events (Weick, 1979; Kramer, 1994; Jorgensen & Patelle,1992). Sufﬁcient task information is necessary to perform appropriately, clarifyrole expectations, and develop appropriate scripts and schemas to understandand participate in social systems (Jablin, 1987). Throughout our interviews, theuncertainty reduction function of talk was illustrated as we heard participantstalk about their reliance on the Council to make sense of their environment andprovide space for dialogue between the unpredictable and the given. The NCCserves to forestall, forecast, and absorb uncertainty in order for cooperatives toachieve orderly, reliable patterns of resource ﬂow and exchange. In this sense, theCouncil serves an important “boundary-spanning” role as it attempts to establishand manage relationships between cooperatives and external agencies (Adams,1976, 1980; Fennell & Alexander, 1987; Oliver, 1990; Thompson, 1967).
The NCC serves as a peripheral structure dealing directly or interfacing with the
environment and has evolved to help cooperatives manage the ongoing dialecticof controlling and being controlled by their environments. The Council searchesfor and collects information about decision-making on plausible events whichmight affect cooperatives. Relying on the NCC as an adaptive response to envi-ronmental uncertainty is especially critical for cooperatives in times of turbulentinstability. In this sense, the Council’s communication activities serve as stabi-lizing forces for the cooperatives. “How would I describe the council?” stated aco-op manager, “I think it’s probably the backbone of the cooperative movementin the state of Nebraska. I think we need an organization like that to protect us,especially in today’s changing trend lines in the ag environment.” Another persondescribed the Council as “providing a sense of continuity.” This sense of connec-tion with the past and with like-minded others serves an important function257
JACR AUGUST 2001
described by Handy (1995) as, “an antidote to feelings of impotence which rapid
change induces in us all” (p. 248). The Council operates as an entity helping theirconstituents preserve their historically created and maintained cooperative spiritin the face of innovation and change. Perceptions of the Council as boundary roleoccupants helping cooperatives negotiate the paradox of stability and change areevident in three broad themes: Networks of learning, promoting legitimacy, andprotecting interests. In addition to data excerpts woven into the following dis-cussion, see Appendix A for a table of signiﬁcant statements supporting argu-ments constructed around the following themes.
Theme 1: Networks of Learning
The Council was described by many as a network linking cooperatives together.
The NCC represents a bridging strategy on the part of cooperatives, a way in whichthey can construct connections with various actors in their environments.Through the activities of the Council, cooperatives are able to come together andpursue common or mutually beneﬁcial goals and interests. “It’s [the Council] agood way to get a group of people together that are all in this together, that are allin this for the same reasons,” shared one manager while the board director of thesame co-op commented, “During meetings, we have a chance to visit with otherlike-minded people. It truly is an effective way to bring us together.” The net-works of learning created through the Council were described by many as em-phasizing cooperation, collaboration, and coordination. Through the Council,cooperatives are able to maximize their resource base in order to reduce dupli-cation of efforts and optimize goal attainment. At the crux of the learning net-works is the promotion of the collective good of members through information-sharing. The following two sub-themes, locus of innovation and avoiding stagna-tion, further explore how the Council functions to help cooperatives manage theparadox of stability and change through their networks of learning. The sub-themes illustrate how cooperatives have constructed an environment fosteringalliances and allowing cooperatives to remain true to their democratic ideology byintegrating their core values in decision-making (Conrad, 1993) while embracinginnovation and change in order to economically prosper. The coordination effortsof the Council illustrate how two or more organizations can share power anddevelop social agreements that stabilize and coordinate mutual interdependence(Pfeffer & Salancik, 1978).
Locus of innovation. When the knowledge base of an industry is complex and
ever-changing, the locus of innovation is often found in networks of learningrather than in individual organizations (Powell, Koput, Smith-Doerr, 1996).Change becomes a stimulus to and focus of collaborative efforts seeking to reduceuncertainties associated with emerging trends. Pervasive throughout participants’discourse was their fundamental concern for accessing new information, technol-ogies, and markets. In environments characterized by instability due to variousfactors including rapid technological development, very few small organizationshave the internal capabilities necessary for managing uncertainty. The Councilprovides a venue through which cooperatives can pool their resources for inno-vative purposes. In the case of the Council, members perceive collaboration as away to enhance organizational learning. Sources of innovation do not lie within258
PARADOX OF STABILITY AND CHANGE HARTER & KRONE
the boundaries of a single cooperative. Rather, innovation and sense-making
about it occurs in a context of a community of cooperatives.
In the early 1980s, the Council established an Educational Advisory Committee
(EAC) comprised primarily of board directors and managers of cooperatives andled by a paid, full time educational director whose role is developing, planning,and coordinating the education programs. Also serving on the committee in anon-voting, ex-ofﬁcio capacity is a representative of the University of NebraskaInstitute of Agriculture and Natural Resources. The committee reviews educa-tional programs to identify needs and establishes priorities and practical ap-proaches for the Council’s educational efforts. Underscoring the Council’s edu-cational programs is the belief that continuing education plays an increasinglyimportant role in assuring that “cooperatives operate not only efﬁciently but inthe cooperative spirit.” Through its education initiatives, the Council appears toserve an ideological function in promoting social solidarity among cooperativemembers around a value system based on democratic principles. This discursivefunctioning of the Council is particularly important considering the larger corpo-rate culture, in which cooperatives are situated, valuing innovations that lead togrowth, production, and maximization of proﬁt (Tompkins & Cheney, 1985).
At the crux of the Council’s education endeavors is the Director Certiﬁcation
Program (DCP). This program is currently co-sponsored by the University ofNebraska. One of the main objectives of the DCP is to provide a basic understand-ing of cooperatives including the responsibilities of the board of directors. Manyinterviewees described the importance of this program in helping them to learn toput on the “cooperative hat” and consider how decisions affect more than theirfamily farm. Participants described the program as inculcating a sense of collec-tivity that may at times be in opposition to a sense of individuality among farmers.At their most basic level, the programs are designed to teach members about howto organize themselves in a cooperative and collective manner. For any socialorganization to function, there must exist a common set of norms, values, andexpectations (Jablin, 1987). These may take the form of accepted traditions orformal rules. A democratic consciousness is essential to cooperatives. Addition-ally, a fundamental part of the character of cooperatives is their need to under-stand themselves in collectivist terms. The Council’s efforts are directed towardinstilling the philosophy and practice of participation necessary to maintain ademocratic set of values. As a key agent of socialization, the Council serves as animportant vehicle for cultivating the ideology of democracy as well as collectivityamong the cooperative community and constructing an identity for the coopera-tive movement in the state of Nebraska. “Using baseball terms,” noted the Presi-dent of the Council, “our role is getting them out of the dug out to home plate sothey can participate in the game.”
The Council’s educational programs were discussed by interviewees as playing
a key role in their making sense of cooperative life and creating an evaluative basefrom which to judge situations, actions, and objects. In other words, the Council’slocus of innovation discursively functions to create and maintain the fundamentalcharacter of cooperatives. Beneath the ideological vision of democracy, however,lies the much more difﬁcult and complex terrain of practical problems. Democ-racies, motivated by a desire for control of the enterprise by the people, ofteninhibit a timely response to environmental change and innovation. The Councilwas described by participants as a locus of innovation—a forum accessing knowl-259
JACR AUGUST 2001
edge but also helping members develop the capabilities to critically evaluate
innovation and adapt to change in ways that allow them to maintain the cooper-ative spirit. From a communication perspective, the Council’s efforts can beunderstood as discursive practices helping cooperatives manage the ever-presenttensions between the external corporate value of efﬁciency through innovationand the cooperative value of participation.
Avoiding stagnation. Cooperative leaders recognize the importance of con-
tinuing education as being essential to survival and future growth. As today’sagriculture climate increases in complexity, the challenges facing cooperativesbecome greater. Decisions are more difﬁcult and costly. Additionally, cooperativeleaders must face their own and others’ desire for stability and hesitancies towardchange. Many participants shared their perceptions of how easy it is to becomestagnant or stale in lieu of innovation.
I think education’s gonna be a big challenge for us. To keep our member patron
owners educated on why we can’t do this like we did a few years ago or 10 years ago.Why it’s necessary that a cooperative adapt and change and become more efﬁcient inorder to survive. It seems like some of our members have done things the same wayfor upteen years and they get comfortable with the status quo and they don’t see whythey have to change. Its easy to become complacent, oh we’ve been doing it this wayfor years, why should we change now?
The Council, through its ongoing educational efforts, was described by partic-
ipants as helping them to avoid stagnation. One of the Council’s educationalefforts, beyond the DCP, is the Graduate Director Seminar (GDS) series. Theseprograms are designed to provide opportunities for continuing education fordirectors and managers. While the series builds on materials covered in the DCP,the topics covered vary depending on members’ needs and interests as well ascompelling industry issues. Then Director of Education for the Council describedthe director manager workshops as “dealing with very current trends withincooperatives and how changes in agriculture are impacting cooperatives and whatcooperatives need to do to change. This coming year it will focus on using theinternet in the agriculture industry.” In the face of economic hardship andincreased competition from corporate farms, the Council is helping cooperativesﬁght stagnation by increasing their awareness of different strategic choices thatcould enhance their efﬁciencies. The Council helps cooperatives proactivelyengage in strategies (e.g., using the internet to market commodities) that allowcooperatives to control, and not merely adapt to, their environments.
Throughout their discourse, interviewees emphasized how the seminars helped
them prevent stagnation in their local cooperatives and “think outside the box.”When talking about cooperatives struggling to survive, many participants sug-gested the catalyst to failure was more often than not a lack of innovation on thepart of the cooperatives. “I think the companies that have not had directors atthose meetings, those are the ones struggling. Those coops are becoming nonex-istent because they are not keeping up with what’s going on,” commented oneparticipant while another suggested, “The surviving co-ops out there, the onesthat haven’t grown stagnant, are the ones willing to participate in their owneducation. Now is that the only reason they are surviving? No, I’m not saying that.But I am saying, it is part of the equation.” Training is an investment helping260
PARADOX OF STABILITY AND CHANGE HARTER & KRONE
cooperatives operate effectively as they change and adapt to diverse business
opportunities.
Cooperative members acknowledge the desire for participatory values within
their organizations and recognize the need for cooperative education amongmembers to ensure a consciousness based on those values. This need is particu-larly acute given that cooperatives exist in a mesh of relationships with externalinstitutions governed by free-enterprise ideology. Such external agencies canconstrain and challenge the actions of cooperatives. Furthermore, the agricultureindustry in general is facing extreme pressure to sustain competitive advantageand provide higher levels of performance. Through their networks of learning, theCouncil serves as a locus of innovation and helps members avoid stagnation whilemaintaining the cooperative spirit. Furthermore, environments are “enacted”(Weick, 1979) and common meanings are negotiated and shared through theCouncil’s networks of learning.
Theme 2: Promoting Legitimacy
Cooperatives exist in a complex web of relationships with other entities that can
stimulate, constrain, or challenge their actions. It is within this dynamic interplayof forces that the enhancement of organizational legitimacy becomes a motivationfor cooperatives to interconnect through the Council. Members’ discourse sug-gests that cooperatives seek legitimacy within their ever-changing organizationalﬁeld and the NCC’s discourse offers a critical source of such endorsement for thecooperative movement. Accountability pressures can emerge from various stake-holders affected by the agriculture industry (e.g., environmental groups) and frompolitical forces (e.g., regulatory agencies). These forces continually challengecooperatives to demonstrate and defend their legitimacy. Members’ discoursesuggests the Council plays an impression management role. Through the collec-tion and dissemination of information, the Council attempts to inﬂuence howothers see and evaluate cooperatives. While many participants were hesitant touse the terms “public relations” as they are often associated with shady practices,enhancing the proﬁle of cooperatives with other actors in their organizationalﬁeld is an important function of the Council. In one sense, the Council’s discourseserves a “framing” function (Fairhurst & Sarr, 1996) by managing meaning in sucha way that environments are enacted (i.e., events socially constructed) to promotechange in the best interests of cooperatives. To frame issues and promote valuesis also to affect images and identities (Cheney & Frenette, 1993; Heath, 1995;McMillan, 1987). Cheney & Vibbert argue that such symbolic management isparticularly important when high levels of environmental uncertainty exist due torapid changes like those characterizing the agricultural industry. Cooperativemembers rely on the Council’s rhetoric as a resource for justifying their form oforganizing (i.e., identity construction) and explaining to ever-changing constitu-ents why what they do is admirable and necessary (i.e., image management) (Fine,1996). While the primary targets of the Council’s legitimacy efforts include “JohnQ. Public” and “Generation X farmers,” it is important to remember that theCouncil as boundary-spanner simultaneously represents the organization to theenvironment and the environment to the organization—or as suggested by Cheneyand Vibbert (1986), public relations is “the art of adjusting organizations toenvironments and environments to organizations” (p. 394).261
JACR AUGUST 2001
“John Q. Public.” Many of the Council’s legitimacy efforts focus on the state-
wide population that is becoming more urbanized and distanced from agriculturein general and cooperatives speciﬁcally. As suggested by one manager, “theCouncil just needs to continue educating John Q. Public.” Many intervieweesshared their concerns about interacting with a public unaware of the plight ofcooperatives and their members.
Times are changing. We are becoming a smaller percentage of the population. As
urban people get farther away, generation wise, from the farm, their understanding offarms, of coops, of agriculture in general is distorted. They have a Norman Rockwellvision. And it’s just not accurate.
On the one hand, the construct of “John Q. Public” represents valuable stability
(i.e., pride, strong work ethic) in popular perceptions of farming. John Q. Publichas a “Norman Rockwell vision” of farming. Yet, cooperatives desire somechanges, along with continuity, in popular perceptions. The discourse of theCouncil serves to manage the tensions surrounding this paradox. Cooperativesrely on the Council to create, in part, a more informed public having access to avariety of agricultural viewpoints including those of cooperatives. The uncer-tainty reduction function of talk is again illustrated in this sub-theme. TheCouncil’s discourse serves to reduce uncertainty, for the general public, about therole of cooperatives in the agricultural industry as the circumstances in whichcooperatives exist change (e.g., more urbanized “John Q. Public”). In one sense,the Council participates in an ongoing “identity game” (Christensen & Cheney,2000), on behalf of cooperatives, by articulating, expressing, and celebratingcooperatives’ identities. The Council’s discourse also serves to reduce uncer-tainty, for cooperatives members, about potential changes in the circumstances inwhich cooperatives exist (e.g., more urbanized “John Q. Public”).
The need for state-wide understanding of cooperatives and their legitimate role
in the agriculture industry is magniﬁed by concerns about the 2000 governmentcensus. In the millennium year a census is conducted, and as a result there willbe a reapportionment of legislative districts. Many participants conveyed concernabout “environmental uncertainty” (Thompson, 1967) created by the census andits potential outcomes. As production agriculture is becoming a smaller part ofvoting populace, cooperatives fear one result is not having a voice with Congress.Underscoring the need for the Council’s efforts is members’ belief that they needto shape as well as respond to social conditions inﬂuencing their organizations.Thus, the Council is not merely a boundary-spanner but a “boundary-controller”attempting to play an active role in shaping, not merely adapting to, the environ-ment (Grunig, 1984).
Among other initiatives, the Council arranged for then Governor Ben Nelson to
sign a proclamation in recognition of October as Cooperative Month during thefall of 1998. A ceremony was held at the state capitol in which representatives ofcooperative organizations across the state participated. The purpose of Coopera-tive Month is to focus attention on the contributions cooperatives make to theeconomy and their commitment to helping communities prosper and grow. “Thisprogram [coop month] provides us with an excellent opportunity to focus on thebeneﬁts of the cooperative way of doing business,” shared one board director. Thetheme of this year’s month was “Cooperatives—businesses people trust.” Aspressure for more efﬁciency in the agriculture industry pervades public discourse,262
PARADOX OF STABILITY AND CHANGE HARTER & KRONE
advocacy about cooperatives and their democratic roots to external constituents
such as John Q. Public becomes imperative. Certainly, tensions between thedemands of a democratic workplace and the demands of the marketplace arereconcilable. But as the tensions continuously occur, they must be consciouslyand creatively addressed. Otherwise, producer cooperatives may fail economi-cally while retaining their democratic principles or fail ideologically while re-taining economic vitality. Subsequently, the Council becomes an “extension” ofcooperatives and an impression manager in order to enhance the proﬁle ofcooperatives with the general public.
“Generation X Farmers.” Participants in this study collectively recognize
that the changing demographics of the agriculture workforce have some conse-quence for the future of the cooperative movement. The notion of “generation Xfarmer” is a social construct that has gained attention in cooperative circles andis interpreted as an important concern—a focal point that galvanizes interest,directs attention, and mobilizes resources. Throughout their discourse, membersdescribed younger producers as few and far between and less loyal to coopera-tives. Less commitment to cooperatives is attributed to values associated withgeneration X and a lack of understanding about the nature of and need forcooperatives.
Throughout their discourse, members described young producers as less loyal
to the cooperative system.
I think you know like right now the younger farmers maybe don’t have the commit-
ment to their local coops that some of the older generations had. I think it’s a sign ofthe times. I think sometimes younger folks are not committed too much, not to aschool, a community, a wife, a coop. Twenty ﬁve years ago there was an element ofloyalty out there. Now when you deal with the younger farmers out there, it’s moreof what can this coop do for me. It’s bottom line performance.
A lack of loyalty to community based cooperatives was attributed by many
participants to a generation, and their value system, ﬁxated on the bottom line andproﬁt. Participants also ascribed generation X’s lack of loyalty to cooperatives (asperceived by older members) as rooted in a lack of understanding of whatcooperatives are, why they evolved, and how they operate. Farmers’ lack of powerin the marketplace was the primary impetus for legislation allowing producers ofagriculture products to act together, in a cooperative manner, in the processing,handling, and marketing of their products (McBride, 1986). Farmers saw animportant social need unﬁlled by conventional businesses and perceived anopportunity to create organizations embodying their democratic ideals. Thus,cooperatives emerged from a critique of the internal structure of mainstreamorganizations and the failure of these organizations to meet producers’ socialneeds. It is this history that members of the Council believe young producers donot understand.
Importantly, the discourse about “generation X farmers” illustrates the paradox
of stability and change. The new generation of farmers will ultimately become“stability” for the cooperative movement but also represent a threat of change asthey bring new orientations to the business of farming. By labeling them as“generation X farmers,” the coop (primarily older members) can make sense of theparadox. They need younger members to provide ultimate continuity even though263
JACR AUGUST 2001
such members are perceived to be “different” and represent change. Participants’
discourse framed the generation x phenomenon as transitional—they may be “genx farmers” now but we can help them “see the light” concerning what coopera-tives are really about. The label “generation X farmers” serves to help cooperativesre-frame the tensions surrounding demographic changes in cooperatives’ mem-bership.
The collective construction of the “generation X farmer” is a mirror triggering
action on the part of the Council. In other words, a gap between the identity ofcooperatives and what members perceive is the image of cooperatives has led toattempts to reduce such dissonance. Cooperatives’ image is important to itsmembers. Image represents members’ best guesses at what characteristics othersare likely to ascribe to them. In response to the perceived need for legitimacy inthe eyes of a younger generation of farmers, the Council has adopted severalstrategies. In hopes that patterns of action in response to environmental issues inturn modiﬁes the environment, the Council is using a variety of impression andimage management tactics to transform how generation X perceives cooperativeswithout violating attributes that deﬁne cooperatives’ core identities. Strategiesrange from public appearances by key industry representatives to farmer focusmeetings, video presentations, and the creation and distribution of ﬂiers. TheCouncil has also developed extensive youth education programs. In the late1980s, a teaching curriculum was developed by the Council and provided tosecondary education instructors across the state. This curriculum is updatedyearly and distributed to agriculture, business, and marketing instructors. TheCooperative Activities Award Competition was initiated early in the Council’shistory, 1952, for FFA chapters and has continued for over 45 years. In 1989, theCooperative Speaking Competition was added to provide an incentive for youngpeople to learn more about the cooperative form of organizing and developcommunication skills. The Council also provides yearly scholarships to univer-sity students majoring in an agriculture-related ﬁeld. The scholarship recipientsare expected to attend one of the subdistrict meetings of the Council or the annualmeeting.
The Council helps cooperatives come to grips with challenges stemming from
perceptions about generation X’s lack of understanding and respect for theirsystem of organizing. In order to gain their support, the Council helps coopera-tives establish and maintain relationships with generation X producers. TheCouncil functions to inform and impress this key public with regard to coopera-tives’ policies, functions, ideals, and standards. The Council treats cooperatives asif they were products, positioning them with care within the agriculture industrywhile differentiating them from other forms of organizing. The Council’s rhetoricfunctions as a socializing tool aimed at acculturating younger producers in the“value sets” that characterize cooperatives (Cheney & Frenette, 1993). In otherwords, the discourse operates by establishing and/or reinforcing particular valuepremises on which subsequent decisions are made. Through their youth educa-tion programs, the Council assists youth in understanding agricultural coopera-tives and how they function with the hope of creating “identiﬁcation” betweenyounger producers and cooperatives (Tompkins & Cheney, 1985). Participantsdiscussed the education of generation X producers and future farmers as a nec-essary investment towards securing the future of the cooperative movement. Thecouncil’s rhetoric does not represent mere “adaptation” on the part of coopera-264
PARADOX OF STABILITY AND CHANGE HARTER & KRONE
tives to a changing membership base; rather, the discourse tries to “enact” envi-
ronmental-organizational linkages conducive to the changes desired by coopera-tives (e.g., Gen X farmers’ identiﬁcation with cooperatives’ mission).
The linguistic devices of “John Q. Public” and “Generation X farmers” illustrate
how cooperative members’ discourse reﬂects the paradox of stability and changeand at the same time is a valuable resource for framing the paradox in ways thatare productive. Older farmers want to hold onto the heritage of the cooperativemovement and desire stability (i.e., “Generation X farmers”) whereas they alsowant to change public perceptions about cooperatives (i.e., “John Q. Public”) to beperceived as hip business people—the new version of old businesses “you cantrust.” The labels used by cooperative members when discussing various stake-holders may not be accidental. The notion of “John Q. Public” implies thatexternal constituents are open to information, are malleable. That is a verydifferent label than “city folk” which implies an unsolvable separation in per-spective.
Theme 3: Protecting Interests
Over the past two decades, ever-changing regulatory conditions have extended
into the day to day production, marketing, and delivery of agricultural goods andservices. The more stringent and unstable a regulatory environment, the greaterthe need for effective integration and linkage with it (Oliver, 1990). The Council’sdiscourse functions to manage uncertainty, on behalf of cooperatives, that per-vades regulatory struggles. The Council is responsible for identifying, tracking,analyzing, and prioritizing issues as well as formulating positions in response tothem. Through these actions, the Council protects or buffers cooperatives fromexternal threats, pressures, and environmental disturbances. The “core technol-ogy,” a phrase originally coined by Thompson (1967), of cooperatives is protected(i.e., stability) as the Council increases the cushion between them and theirever-changing environment.
Political and legal resources of large systems can more readily deal with rules
and regulations of governmental agencies. Throughout their discourse, partici-pants indicated that resource scarcity leads cooperatives to form the Council inorder to exercise power on their behalf. As cooperatives exist in a stringentregulatory environment, the greater resources of the NCC function to understand,engage in “sense-making” about, regulatory issues better than they could alone.“There’s strength in numbers, you know. United we stand, divided we fall. Weneed to maintain that philosophy.” Monitoring the public policy arena to identifyoccurring trends which can demand a reorientation of cooperatives’ policies wasdescribed by many participants as increasing in importance. Several peopleattributed the complexity of legislative actions and speed of those changes ascatalysts to prioritizing protection of cooperatives. While the importance of pro-tecting cooperatives’ interests will surely ﬂuctuate with the temper of the regu-latory climate, interviewees overwhelmingly perceive greater reliance on theCouncil, in comparison to 55 years ago when the Council was created, as an“extension” of cooperatives in the legislative arena. “One of our priorities obvi-ously is to protect the interests of cooperatives from the legislative and regulatorystandpoint,” suggested one co-op manager. “That’s becoming more difﬁcult inthat regulations are very complex and often times very costly. And so our role in265
JACR AUGUST 2001
protecting cooperatives’ interests in that area is very important.” Two sub-themes
based on metaphors provided by participants, “watchdog” and “voice,” providemore insight into how the Council discursively functions to protect cooperatives’interests.
“Watchdog.” Observing legislative activities and discerning what develop-
ments could adversely affect the operating environment of cooperatives is animportant self-preservation function served by the Council. Throughout theirdiscourse, participants linked cooperatives’ ability to understand what issues arebecoming salient to the “watchdog” role of the Council.
Basically, they are our watchdog. Watching, making sure that something doesn’t just
get slipped by the legislature without us knowing about it. You know every once ina while you get some people that don’t like cooperatives. They like to put a law outthere that in some way makes it so we are not on an even playing ﬁeld with privatecompanies. The Council watches out for this kinda action.
The watchdog metaphor used by many participants to describe the Council
illustrates perceptions of increasing demand for an outside force to monitor andprobe cooperatives’ environments in order to identify problems and opportuni-ties. One of the motivating factors for the creation of the Council over 50 years agowas cooperatives’ inability to handle legislative and political problems. Today,cooperatives still rely on the Council to identify and monitor trends which maymature into public policy affecting the agriculture industry. Many participantsbelieve they would stay uninformed about key issues affecting their organizationif it were not for the Council’s rhetorical efforts. The Council protects coopera-tives’ interests by monitoring a variety of policy issues ranging from ethanolproduction credits, fertilizer tax laws, grain warehousing and licensing, to a hostof other issues. The President of the Council estimates that of the hundreds of billsintroduced each session of the legislature, the Council monitors more than ahundred.
A key component of the issues monitoring role performed by the Council is its
“ﬁlter function,” the acquisition (i.e., shifting and sorting) and distribution ofinformation necessary for cooperatives to make sense of their environments.Through legislative surveillance, the Council observes short-term political andsocial trends, evaluates their operational, social, and ﬁnancial impacts, and pro-motes dialogue with cooperatives about these issues. The Council serves as a“watchdog” not just in the acquisition and distribution of information, but inhelping cooperatives understand what they need to do as a result of certaininformation. New regulations, which are often lengthy and technical in nature,have led the Council to hire outside experts in order to accurately interpretregulations for their members. In addition to informing their members of regula-tions, they help to ensure that cooperatives maintain compliance. Ensuring co-operative compliance with ever-changing state and federal regulations is per-ceived by members as a priority of the Council.
“Voice.” Many participants used the metaphor of “voice” to depict how they
view the Council as protecting cooperatives’ interests. The metaphor of voicehighlights the importance of expression to cooperative members and illustrateshow organizations are social institutions fulﬁlling multiple functions, including266
PARADOX OF STABILITY AND CHANGE HARTER & KRONE
representation, for stakeholders (Haas & Deetz, 2000). To have a voice is to
exercise the power to make your experiences be heard and understood (Putnam etal., 1996). The concern with voice often arises in cooperative circles due in partto perceptions that rural voices in general are unique and often ignored, silenced,or misunderstood. Farmers have values and political interests in need of repre-sentation and the Council’s discourse functions to provide this representation.
The Council brings together a place for the cooperatives to have a voice perhaps
mostly with the legislature. It’s kind of a place to bring their ideas together so thatthey can speak and be heard. Have their opinion count somehow. Have some sort ofsay when laws come up that will affect them.
Members’ discourse illustrates a belief that the Council is there to speak on
behalf of cooperatives—present their case. Underlying this metaphor is the as-sumption that cooperative members’ standpoints are often silenced. The Coun-cil’s rhetoric serves an empowerment function by providing a voice for authenticcommunication about members’ genuine interests and cooperative experiences.While the metaphor of “watchdog” highlights the importance of monitoringissues, the “voice” metaphor foregrounds the active role of the Council in positiondevelopment and advocacy—championing the cooperative movement.
In performing its advocate role, the Council prioritizes cooperative policy
issues, constructs an industry stance, and creates strategy options. Operating as avoice for members across the state, the Council wards off potential threats to thecooperative movement. The importance of public opinion to the operation oforganizations is not new. But cooperatives are now being politicized in ways theyhaven’t previously experienced. Cooperatives, through the Council, are articulat-ing their positions more clearly and urgently to governmental agencies and othercritical audiences. In addition to warding off threats, participants rely on theCouncil to help make the strain of current regulations manageable. Making adifference through voice aptly describes the role of the Council in interfacing withexternal actors on behalf of cooperatives. Through the Council, cooperatives areable to add a new voice and perhaps change existing asymmetries. “We have abigger voice through the Council. A bigger voice that says this is an issue for coopsacross the state. 100 coops—now that’s a little more clout,” shared one man. “ButYork by itself or Shelby by itself, we would just end up being like the sheepfollowing the gilts along. The Council protects us from that.”
An important aspect of the voice metaphor is access (Putnam et al., 1996).
Members of cooperatives rely on the Council to provide access for their voices tobe heard. However, several members of the Council’s Board of Directors indicatedit was becoming increasingly difﬁcult to provide such access. These difﬁcultiesled the Council to create a committee this past spring to investigate the option offorming a political action committee (PAC).
To me it’s an access issue. Strictly an access issue. I want to make sure we have an
opportunity to get in there and tell the cooperative’s story. It has nothing to do withbuying votes. What it does is give me an opportunity to go talk to those urbanlegislators who drive down here, who don’t even go to their ofﬁce, they go right to theﬂoor of the legislature, and when they’re done with business for the day, they get backin their cars and leave.
Many board members linked the possibility of a PAC with accessibility. The
dialogue surrounding the potential formation of a PAC illustrates a desire on the267
JACR AUGUST 2001
part of cooperative members to be empowered—to have their voices be heard and
respected. Participants’ discourse also revealed hesitancies in associating theirorganizations with committees often perceived as distorting voices. PACs providean alternative form of communication potentially providing access for coopera-tives; however, they could also undermine bona ﬁde efforts of making a differencethrough voice. The connection between power and voice is no clearer than inmembers’ discussion of the possible need for a PAC. Importantly, some interview-ees insightfully discussed that PACs are a potential avenue for expression that canlead to domination and distortion.
As both “watchdog” and “voice,” there exists a synergism surrounding the work
of the Council as it reaches beyond traditional boundaries of cooperatives. Theapproach of the Council helps external audiences understand the role of cooper-atives in the agriculture industry and in society and analyze the ramiﬁcations ofalternative approaches to regulation. To encourage signiﬁcant public support,cooperatives are doing more than defending themselves against attack. Throughthe Council, cooperatives are able to reach out and participate effectively withcritical outside constituencies.
Discussion
Many scholars have presented theoretical arguments about the potential impor-
tance of cooperative support organizations such as the Nebraska CooperativeCouncil in sustaining democratic ideology and practice (e.g., Cheney, 1995; Corn-forth et al., 1988; Rothschild-Whitt & Whitt, 1986), yet little empirical data haveexisted with which to provide an in-depth understanding of the day-to-dayfunctioning of such support organizations. These results make a signiﬁcant con-tribution toward an understanding of how cooperatives’ options can be expandedby support organizations and their boundary spanning activities. By providingnetworks of learning, promoting the legitimacy of cooperative forms of organizing,and protecting cooperatives’ interests, the Council is an entity helping coopera-tives reconcile their internal requirements for democracy with the external de-mands of the ever-changing marketplace and of other institutions on which theydepend. Clearly, the results suggest that “democracy” and “participation” cannotbe fully understood within the conﬁnes of organizations. Rather, the study high-lights the boundary-spanning aspects of participatory organizational forms byexploring how the Council, on behalf of its constituent cooperatives, enactsinter-organizational linkages supportive of democratic ideologies.
The results suggest the CSOs serve at least a two-part function for cooperatives.
First and foremost, they offer a support structure. They provide mechanismsthrough which information can be collected, made sense of, and disseminated,position statements can be created, policies can be debated, and education effortscan be enacted. Second, they serve as discourse communities where membershave a safe haven to discursively make sense of inherent tensions and contradic-tions of organizing. Importantly, the CSOs’ dual functions of support and dis-course are both necessary for maintaining cooperatives’ viability and democraticidentities. Previous literature points to the importance of CSOs as a “buffer”between cooperatives and mainstream organizations (e.g., Abell, 1988; Cornforth,Thomas, Lewis, & Spear, 1988; Cheney, 1995). The data reported here clearlysupport these arguments. By serving as “watchdog” and “voice,” the Council268
PARADOX OF STABILITY AND CHANGE HARTER & KRONE
enacts environmental linkages that strategically position cooperatives in the ag-
ricultural industry. However, this study highlights an equally important role forCSOs—providing space for discursively managing tensions. Several themes pointto how the discourse of the Council functions to reduce uncertainty surroundingchanging circumstances in which cooperatives are situated (e.g., John Q. Public)and changing membership of cooperatives (e.g., Generation X farmers). Throughtheir education and legitimacy efforts, the Council helps cooperatives maintaintheir participatory spirit (i.e., stability) while being open to innovation andchange. Additionally, the discourse of the Council functions to create identiﬁca-tion between key stakeholders (e.g., John Q. Public, Generation X farmers) and thecooperative movement.
This study also contributes to extant literature on boundary-spanners and
research about change. The results highlight an important role of the Council asa boundary-spanner helping cooperatives manage the paradox of stability andchange. The discourse of the Council functions to enact the larger environment inwhich cooperatives exist by “making sense” (Weick, 1979) of and “framing”(Fairhurst & Sarr, 1996) innovation and change while protecting cooperatives’“core technologies” (e.g., democratic ideologies) (Thompson, 1967). The role ofboundary-spanners as change agents merits more attention in future research aswell as the uncertainty reduction function of support organizations’ discourse.Furthermore, these ﬁndings point to the importance of understanding change asnegotiated in “nets of collective action” (Czarniawska, 1997, p. 32) as well as infocal organizations. Subsequently, future research should investigate change as it
occurs in extra-organizational environments by various stakeholders includingfocal organizations.
There are limitations to the ﬁndings. Most of the members of the participating
cooperatives were white, middle-class, college-educated, male United States cit-izens, thereby representing the dominant United States’ culture. Not surprisingly,the issues dealt with in this project are deeply embedded in cultural beliefs andpractices. Therefore, some of the communication patterns observed in the Councilmay not translate to groups consisting of different ethnicities, classes, and edu-cational levels. This limitation is made salient by some unanswered questions.There were a couple of circumstances which kept presenting themselves butwhich did not get full attention due to the setting of the study and research design.First, the gender mix of the groups may be signiﬁcant. The setting of the currentstudy did not permit raising or addressing questions about the gendered nature oforganizing in cooperative movements. Also, this study was conducted with afairly homogeneous set of cooperatives, albeit participants did express howchanging demographics were threatening the system’s homogeneity. Neverthe-less, there is a tremendous variety of democratic groups attempting to operate,including smaller support groups, food cooperatives, etc. Based on the study’scurrent ﬁndings, it is likely that complexity of the democratic organization, botheconomically and in terms of its members, imposes different sets of constraintsupon cooperative support organizations. Additionally, the research design struc-tured data collection from leaders in local cooperatives. While such leaders arealso currently farmers being served by the Council, it would be interesting toexpand the research design and gather data from the “rank and ﬁle” of coopera-tives across the state of Nebraska. For instance, it would be interesting to inter-269
JACR AUGUST 2001
view “generation X” farmers about their experiences with cooperatives and the
Council.
Literature on organizational socialization would serve as a fruitful framework
for work exploring how the Council, and other cooperative support organizations,function in helping members cultivate an understanding and appreciation fordemocracy as well as a sense of collective efﬁcacy. Participants cited the Council’seducational efforts as primary vehicles for developing the ideological groundingnecessary for members to operate with a democratic consciousness. Future re-search is needed to examine in detail the assimilation processes that unfold asnew members encounter the programs sponsored by the Council.
Participants overwhelmingly described the Council as enabling the cooperative
movement across the state to succeed. In fact, it was extremely difﬁcult to identifyways the Council potentially constrained the movement, even if unintentionally.It is possible the participants are unaware of the Council’s oppressive potential. Itis also possible that constraining discourse could be better identiﬁed throughparticipant observations. Critical theory, coupled with ethnographic methods,could be used to draw out and elicit the ways in which ideology (and discourse)serves as a source of disempowerment for members and perhaps serves theinterests of some individuals and/or cooperatives more than others. For instance,we were struck by how interviewees at times referred to themselves as “manag-ers,” running business and corporations. In a sense, it appears that members haveadopted language from mainstream institutions to describe their own activitieseven though they consider their cooperative form of organizing as distinct fromtraditional organizing methods. This adoption of language associated with theideology of managerialism (Deetz, 1992) could be a form of discourse that emergesfrom how the cooperatives and the Council manage boundaries with externalorganizations. Perhaps members of cooperatives emulate the dominant organiza-tional model to ensure their economic survival. The pragmatic consequences ofsuch discourse need to be further explored in future research.
The results support previous arguments that farmers and non-farmers (e.g.,
“John Q. Public”) constitute unique co-cultures (Higgins, 1991). The participantsof this project clearly view the lay public as unaware of and uninformed aboutagriculture in general and cooperatives speciﬁcally. Our observations suggest thatthe Council actively seeks out opportunities to educate “John Q. Public” aboutagriculture in general and cooperative speciﬁcally. In fact, it became clear that theCouncil viewed this project as one such opportunity for reciprocal learning.Additionally, the results suggest that sub-cultures may exist within the agricul-ture industry (i.e., “Generation X farmers”). Future research designs should in-clude younger producers as well as nonfarmers in attempts to better understand“cultural” relations between farmers and nonfarmers.
Practical Implications
Isolated groups have a high probability of failure (Putnam and Stohl, 1990). Our
country’s historical landscape is cloaked with remnants of producer cooperatives,initiated with the greatest of hope, that did not survive. In fact, the long termsurvival of producer cooperatives is punctuated with problems and democracy isoften short-lived (Cheney, 2000). We know that external vertical systems pressuredemocratic organizations toward an increasing hierarchy (e.g., Farrell, 1995;270
PARADOX OF STABILITY AND CHANGE HARTER & KRONE
West, 1993). The question then is what kind of environment do cooperatives, and
other non-traditional organizations, need in order to maintain their democraticcommitments over time—or “authenticity” as described by Cheney (1995)? Thisproject suggests the work of the Council allows cooperatives to intersect with keypublics and manage the paradox of stability and change while protecting theircore democratic identities. Practically speaking, the results point to the impor-tance of support systems for sustaining democratic values either in alternativeorganizational structures or participation programs in larger bureaucratic institu-tions. These cooperatives rely primarily on external structures (i.e., the Council)to instill cooperative values in their membership and other stakeholders. TheCouncil’s discourse takes the form of education initiatives, legitimacy efforts, andpolicy initiatives to protect interests. These are practical strategies for managingthe paradox of stability and change and managing inter-organizational relation-ships. Other alternative organizations or coordinators of participation programswithin existing bureaucracies may need to rely on different strategies.
This study is grounded in the notion that the way individuals talk about events,
issues, and institutions provides knowledge about their beliefs, actions, andworld view and ultimately into the process through which they make sense oftheir experiences. In sum, individuals’ rhetoric deﬁnes their realities. For in-stance, an analysis of metaphors (e.g., “voice,” “watchdog”) used by participantsto describe the Council yielded insights into how the Council is perceived asbuffering and protecting cooperatives. The collective construction of “GenerationX Farmer” provides farmers with a way of understanding and managing theparadox of stability and change as manifest in demographic changes in member-ship. Structuring concepts through metaphor, however, is to highlight certainaspects of the concept and hide certain other aspects. The construct “GenerationX Farmer” as used by older farmers refers to a group of individuals who do notunderstand the value of cooperative forms of organizing in agriculture and whoare only concerned with the proﬁt maximizing capabilities of organizations.While this certainly may be true of some younger farmers, this construct and itsuse may alienate potential members of cooperatives. Furthermore, the constructin context fails to recognize that as the education level of the workforce in general,and in agriculture speciﬁcally, increases, there is increasing demand on the partof workers to “participate” in the daily decision-making that affects their worklives (Barker, 1999). One practical implication of this work, then, is the need forcooperative members to understand the constitutive nature of language and reﬂecton additional and/or alternative ways of “framing” the issue of stability andchange as manifest in demographic changes in younger producers.
The practical value of this project also reveals itself through its insights,
applicable to all organizations, on ways to manage the paradox of stability andchange. Berg and Smith (1990) and Handy (1995) argue that overly rationalattempts to either reconcile or categorize change tend to suppress the paradoxicaltension that could give meaning to the change process. Rather, we should encour-age workers to stay with the paradox and discover links that give meaning toopposing forces. Another thing to be learned from this case study is the impor-tance of managerial recognition of individual and organizational defense mecha-nisms against anxiety and uncertainty that, at a largely unconscious level, struc-ture and form managerial and organizational responses to change. The Council isa boundary-spanning organization that helps cooperatives manage uncertainty271
JACR AUGUST 2001
and tensions surrounding change and the equally important desire for stability. It
is quite possible that boundary-spanners (e.g., public relations specialists) formainstream organizations also serve similar functions. Future research shouldinvestigate this possibility. From a practical standpoint, practitioners can betrained to understand the nature of paradoxes as powerful aspects of organiza-tional life and possible strategies (e.g., education) for managing the tensions.
Conclusion
Ultimately, this study leads us closer toward the question, “how can we change
society so that it may support democratic ways of organizing?” Organizationalcommunication scholars must continue to go beyond the conﬁnes of organiza-tional structures and include in their research programs the wider patterns ofsociety which may ultimately destroy or support democratic forms of organizing.The ideas, interpretations, and heuristic merit of the current project represent aresearch program to be developed over the next few years. Furthermore, theﬁndings suggest the value of potential mechanisms (e.g., training about demo-cratic consciousness) through which practitioners can enable non-traditionalorganizations to maintain their alternative ideologies and economically survive.Finally, participatory ideologies can certainly still serve as a point of reference forour personal, professional, and societal decision-making even though democraticorganizing may be unattainable in all its features.
Endnotes
1. Bureaucracy denotes a classical organization paradigm with enduring inﬂuence on the design
and practice of many contemporary workplaces (Harrison, 1994). We use the term broadly in referringto institutions characterized by hierarchy of authority, division of labor, technical qualiﬁcations forhiring and promotion, formalized rules and procedures for behavior, and/or impersonal relationships.Just as Weber predicted early in this century, bureaucracy has come to be the dominant form oforganization in every sector/industry in our culture (Cheney, Mumby, Stohl, Harrison, 1997). Whilebureaucracy is not directly opposed to the spirit of democracy, and in fact, offers a system ofopportunities for individuals based on rational criteria, its prevalence and rigidity tend to limitpossibilities for creative expression and the achievement of the deep mutual understanding requiredfor consensus-building. Extant literature argues that bureaucratic structures feminize managers, work-ers, and clients with hierarchies and rigid rules that enforce subordination, dependence, and power-lessness (Ashcraft, 2000; Ferguson, 1985).
References
Abell, P. (1988). Establishing support systems for industrial cooperatives: Case studies from the third
world. London: Avebury.
Adams, J. S. (1976). The structure and dynamics of behavior in organization boundary roles. In M. D.
Dunnette (Ed.), Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology (pp. 1175–1199). Chicago:
Rand McNally.
Adams, J. S. (1980). Interorganizational processes and organization boundary activities. Research in
Organizational Behavior, 2, 321–355.
Aschcraft, K. (2000). Empowering professional relationships: Organizational communication meets
feminist practice. Management Communication Quarterly, 13(3), 347–392.
Barker, J. R. (1999). The discipline of teamwork. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage publications.
Barker, J. R., Melville, C. W., & Pacanowsky, M. E. (1993). Self-directed teams at XEL: Changes in
communication practices during a program of cultural transformation. Journal of Applied Commu-
nication Research, 21(4), 297–312.
Baxter, L. A., & Montgomery, B. M. (1996). Relating: Dialogues & dialectics. New York: Guilford Press.272
PARADOX OF STABILITY AND CHANGE HARTER & KRONE
Berg, D. N., & Smith, K. K. (1990). Paradox and groups. In J. Gillette & M. McCollum (Eds.), Groups in
context (pp. 106–132). Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Berger, C. R., & Calabrese, R. (1975). Some explorations in initial interaction and beyond: Toward a
developmental theory of interpersonal communication. Human Communication Research, 1, 99–
112.
Bereuter, D. (1998). Keeping in touch: Doug Bereuter reports for the 1stcongressional district Nebraska.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. House of Representatives.
Braithwaite, D. O., Baxter, L. A., & Harper, A. M. (1998). The role of rituals in the management of the
dialectical tensions of “old” and “new” in blended families. Communication Studies, 49(2), 101–120.
Buzzanell, P., Ellingson, L., Silvio, C., Pasch, V., Dale, B., Mauro, G., Smith, E., Weir, N., & Martin, C.
(1997). Leadership processes in alternative organizations: Invitational and dramaturgical leadership.Communication Studies, 48, 286–310.
Cheney, G. (1995). Democracy in the workplace: Theory and practice from the perspective of com-
munication. Journal of Applied Communication Research, 23, 167–200.
Cheney, G. (2000). Values at work: Employee participation meets market pressure at Mondragon. New
York: Cornell University.
Cheney, G., & Frenette, J. (1993). Persuasion and organization: values, logic, and accounts in contem-
porary corporate public discourse. In C. Conrad (Ed.), Ethical nexus (pp. 49–73). Norwood, New
Jersey: Ablex Publishing.
Cheney, G., Mumby, D., Stohl, C., & Harrison, T. (1997). Communication and organizational democ-
racy: An introduction. Communication Studies, 48, 277–278.
Cheney, G., & Vibbert, S. L. (1986). Corporate discourse: Public relations and issues management. In
L. Thayer (Ed.), Organization and communication: Emerging perspectives (pp. 165–194).
Cheney, G., Straub, J., Speirs-Glebe, L., Stohl, C., DeGooyer Jr., D., Whalen, S., Garvin-Doxas, K.,
Carlone, D. (1998). Democracy, participation, and communication at work: A multidisciplinaryreview. In M. Roloff (Ed.), Communication Yearbook 21 (pp. 35–91). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Clair, R., & Thompson, K. (1996). Pay discrimination as a discursive and material practice: A case
concerning extended housework. Journal of Applied Communication Research, 24, 1–20.
Cornforth, C., Thomas, A., Lewis, J., & Spear, R. (1988). Developing successful worker cooperatives.
London: Sage.
Creswell, J. (1997). Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing among ﬁve traditions. Thousand
Oaks: Sage.
Czarniawska, B. (1997). Narrating the organization: Dramas of institutional identity. Chicago: Univer-
sity of Chicago Press.
Danbom, D. B. (1995). Born in the country: A history of rural America. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press.
Deetz, S. (1992). Democracy in an age of corporate colonization. Albany, New York: SUNY Press.
Deetz, S. (1995). Transforming communication transforming business. New Jersey: Hampton Press.
Euske, N., & Roberts, K. H. (1987). Evolving perspectives in organization theory: Communication
implications. In F. Jablin, L. L. Putnam, K. H. Roberts, & L. W. Porter (Eds.), Handbook of organi-
zational communication (pp. 41–69). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Fairhurst, G. T., & Sarr, R. A. (1996). The art of framing. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Farrell, A. (1995). “Like a tarantula on a Banana boat”: Ms. magazine. In M. M. Ferree & P. Y. Martin
(Eds.), Feminist organizations: Harvest of the new women’s movement (pp. 53–68). Philadelphia:
Temple University Press.
Fennell, M. L., & Alexander, J. A. (1987). Organizational boundary spanning in institutional environ-
ments. Academy of Management Journal, 30, 456–476.
Ferree, M. M., & Martin, P. Y. (1995). Doing the work of the feminist movement: Feminist organiza-
tions. In M. M. Ferree & P. Y. Martin (Eds.), Feminist organizations: Harvest of the new women’s
movement (pp. 3–26). Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Fine, G. A. (1996). Justifying work: Occupational rhetorics as resources in restaurant kitchens.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 1–24.
Fine, M. (1998). Working the hyphens: Reinventing self and others in qualitative research. In D. K.
Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.), The landscape of qualitative research (pp. 130–154). Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage Publications.
Grunig, J. E. (1984). Organizations, environments, and models of public relations. Public Relations
Review and Education, 1, 6–29.
Haas, T., & Deetz, S. (2000). Between the generalized and the concrete other: Approaching organiza-273
JACR AUGUST 2001
tional ethics from feminist perspectives. In P. Buzzanell (ed.), Rethinking organizational and
managerial communication from feminist perspectives (pp. 24–46). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hain, J. C. (September 6, 1998). Future of farms now on the line, says ag expert. The Lincoln Journal
Star, A1.
Handy, C. (1995). The age of paradox. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Harrison, T. M. (1994). Communication and interdependence in democratic organizations. In S. A.
Deetz (Ed.), Communication yearbook 17 (pp. 247–274). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Heath, R. L. (1994). Management of corporate communication. Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Higgins, M. A. (1991). Bridging the communication gap between farmers and nonfarmers. Journal of
Applied Communication Research, 19(3), 217–222.
Hord, B., & Thompson, J. (June 28, 1998). Is a crisis sprouting on farms? Omaha World Herald,
8–10.
Jablin, F. (1987). Organizational entry, assimilation and exit. In F. M. Jablin, L. L. Putnam, K. H.
Roberts, & L. W. Porter (Eds.), Handbook of organizational communication: An interdisciplinary
perspective (pp. 679–740). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Jorgensen, J. D., & Patelle, J. L. (1992). Measuring uncertainty within organizational relationships: An
analysis of the CLUES instrument. Management Communication Quarterly, 6(2), 180–203.
Kelle, U. (1995). Computer-aided qualitative data analysis: Theory, methods, and practices. Thousand
Oaks: Sage Publications.
Kramer, M. (1994). Uncertainty reduction during job transitions. Management Communication Quar-
terly, 7(4), 384–412.
Leathers, D. (1979). The impact of multichannel message inconsistency on verbal and nonverbal
decoding behaviors. Communication Monographs, 46, 88–100.
Lindlof, T. (1995). Qualitative communication research methods. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
McBride, G. (1986). Agricultural cooperatives: Their why and their how. Westport, Connecticut: AVI
Publishing Company.
McMillan, J. (1987). In search of the organizational persona: A rationale for studying organizations
rhetorically. In L. Thayer (Ed.), Organization and communication: Emerging perspectives (pp.
21–45). Norwood, New Jersey: Ablex Publishing.
Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (1984). Qualitative data analysis: A sourcebook of new methods.
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
O’Connor, E. S. (1995). Paradoxes of participation: Textual analysis and organizational change.
Organization Studies, 16(5), 769–803.
Oliver, C. (1990). Determinants of interorganizational relationships: Integration and future directions.
Academy of Management Review, 15, 241–265.
Pfeffer, J., & Salancik, G. R. (1978). Administrator effectiveness: The effects of advocacy and informa-
tion on resource allocations. Human Relations, 30, 641–656.
Powell, W. W., Koput, K. K., & Smith-Doerr, L. (1996). Interorganizational collaboration and the locus of
innovation: Networks of learning in biotechnology. Administrative Science Quarterly, 41, 116–145.
Putnam, L. L. (1986). Contradictions and paradoxes in organizations. In L. Thayer (Ed.), Organization
and communication: Emerging perspectives (pp. 151–167). Norwood, New Jersey: Ablex Publishing.
Putnam, L. L., Phillips, N., & Chapman, P. (1996). Metaphors of communication and organization. In
S. R. Clegg, Hardy, C., & W. R. Nord (Eds.), Handbook of Organization Studies, (pp. 375–408).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Putnam, L. L., & Stohl, C. (1990). Bona ﬁde groups: A reconceptualization of groups in context.
Communication Studies, 41(3), 248–265.
Reinelt, C. (1995). Moving into the terrain of the state: The battered women’s movement and the
politics of engagement. In M. M. Ferree & P. Y. Martin (Eds.), Feminist organizations: Harvest of the
new women’s movement (pp. 84–104). Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Richards, T. J., & Richards, L. (1998). Using computers in qualitative research. In N. K. Denzin & Y. S.
Lincoln (Eds.), Collecting and interpreting qualitative materials (pp. 211–245). Thousand Oaks:
Sage.
Rooney, J. (1992). ESOPS, producer cooperatives, and traditional ﬁrms: Are they different? Journal of
Economic Issues, XXVI(2), 593–603.
Rothschild-Whitt, J., & Whitt, J. A. (1986). The cooperative workplace. Cambridge: Cambridge.
Sargent, M. (1982). Agricultural co-operation. Hampshire, England: Gower Publishing.
Shefner-Rogers, C. L., Rao, N., Rogers, E. M., & Wayangankar, A. (1998). The empowerment of women274
PARADOX OF STABILITY AND CHANGE HARTER & KRONE
dairy farmers in India. Journal of Applied Communication Research, 26(3), 319–337.
Stake, R. (1995). The art of case study research. Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Grounded theory methodology: An overview. In N. K. Denzin & Y. S.
Lincoln (Eds.), Strategies of qualitative inquiry (pp. 158–183). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Thompson, J. D. (1967). Organizations in action. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Tompkins, P., & Cheney, G. (1985). Communication and unobtrusive control in contemporary orga-
nizations. In R. McPhee & P. Tompkins (Eds.), Organizational communication: Traditional themes
and new directions. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications.
Trethewey, A. (1997). Resistance, identity, and empowerment: A postmodern feminist analysis of
clients in a human service organization. Communication Monographs, 64, 327–354.
Weick, K. E. (1979). The social psychology of organizing (2nded.). New York: Random House.
Weick, K. E., & Westley, F. (1996). Organizational learning: Afﬁrming an oxymoron. In S. R. Clegg, C.
Hardy, & W. R. Nord (Eds.), Handbook of organization studies. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
West, J. T. (1993). Ethnography and ideology: The politics of cultural representation. Western Journal
of Communication, 57, 209–220.
Zorn, T. (1997). The uncooperative cooperative: Attempting to improve employee morale at Weaver
Street Market. In B. Davenport Sypher (Ed.). Case studies in organizational communication 2:
Perspectives on contemporary work life (pp. 312–336). New York: Guilford Press.
Received February 9, 2000
Accepted December 14, 2000
Appendix A
Table of Signiﬁcant Statements
Core Themes and
Sub-Themes Signiﬁcant Statements
PARADOX OF STABILITY
AND CHANGETimes are changing. I’ve been here 26 years, I can tell you a lot
about coops. Not all changes are good but that’s just the way it is.We’ve gotta adapt.
I feel like we are in pretty good shape keeping up with technological
changes. But that target is always a moving target, alwayschanging. You think you’ve got focused in on it, and somethingadvances like GPS. Everything has just become more complicated.
Certainly trying to keep up with the changing regulatory
environment is a challenge as far as the ability for localcooperatives to compete.
As things change, with competition and the price of grain where it
is, we’re starting to see ah, you know, our philosophies areprobably changing a little bit too.
We need to adapt to changes so that the cooperative system can
remain of value to its member producer, yet we need to maintainour cooperative spirit, what makes us unique and special.
We all get very comfortable with what we are doing and sometimes we
are forced into change and the change is a little different and wehave to just step back and take a moment, be open-minded, be atpeace with ambiguity knowing we will reach that comfort zoneagain.
NETWORKS OF
LEARNINGProbably the biggest beneﬁt I’ve had being with the Council is that
I’m able to get to know people across the state, producers andmanagers. Just the network, the personal contacts made withothers is invaluable.
It [the Council] provides a good venue for producers and managers
to get togethe r... there’s a tremendous amount of changes going
on out there and the faster we can spread information about those,
probably the stronger it makes the coops.275
JACR AUGUST 2001
Core Themes and
Sub-Themes Signiﬁcant Statements
Locus of Innovation It’s working together on mutually beneﬁcial kinds of issues that’s
very very important, I think, to cooperatives. And that’s what ourCouncil and our education programs do. They perform as anextension to the cooperative in ways we would not be able to doindependently.
We look to the Council to be our educator. We do a certain amount
of this internally but more times than not when we have a newdirector come on our board, he may be an excellent farmer butknow nothing about cooperative organizing. This is where theCouncil performs an important education function for us.
Avoiding Stagnation It’s neat seeing how people look at things in different ways. It
removes a lot of the staleness cause we all get a little stale.
Its easy to become complacent, oh we’ve been doing this for years,
why should we change?
PROMOTING
LEGITIMACYAs agriculture gets smaller in numbers of people and we actually
become a minority, people are just farther away from it. TheCouncil helps educate the general public.
The Council educates common people about agriculture and coop
issues. Well, for instance, round up ready beans. You know there’sthis big misperception, you know about engineering and genetics,that this is a bad thing. And it really isn’t.
John Q. Public We need to continue educating people in the cities. We’ve always
believed there is a need for coops to be upfront on issues thatconcern them. If we don’t do it nobody else will.
As we continue to deal with a population shift, we’re getting less of
a rural population. And, you know eastern Nebraska is differentthan western Nebraska. And we need to make sure the publicunderstands what cooperatives are and how they work.
I think its anybody’s guess right now how they will draw the legislative
lines. But a strong bet is that there’s gonna be less rural legislativedistricts. And that constitutes a strong challenge for us politically.
Generation X Farmers The Council needs to continue getting out there and telling our
story. Right now we’ve got a real need to get our youngerproducers out there so that they can understand really the value ofcooperatives. The 50 to 55 year old still remembers his fathertelling him you know how coops helped him. But we’re notgetting that down to the 30 year old producer out there. TheCouncil needs to continue and try to inform them just what coopscan do for them.
I think you know that younger farmers don’t have the commitment
to their local coops that some of the older generation had. I thinkit’s a sign of the times. I think sometimes younger folks are notcommitted to much, not to a school, a community, a wife, a coop.
Twenty ﬁve years ago, there was an element of loyalty out there, it’s
more of what can this coop do for me. It’s bottom lineperformance.
Younger farmers tend to be more aggressive. More bottom-line
oriented. More price conscious. And the coop isn’t always thecheapest on every product, every time. He’s worried about moneyin the short term. The here and now. And so, ultimately, he’s lessloyal to the coop.
PROTECTING INTERESTS Talk about people being unaware of what an organization does for
someone. So many of our patrons have no idea of the importanceof the Nebraska Cooperative Council and what they’ve done. Howthey’ve saved them through the years. Something comes up thatmay have had a huge impact on our patrons and you know, thecouncil got the bill sidelined and written correctly. Our coopcouncil has been the watchdog for Nebraska’s farmers andranchers. If we don’t take care of things ourselves, no one else isgoing to. And that’s our coop council.276
PARADOX OF STABILITY AND CHANGE HARTER & KRONE
Core Themes and
Sub-Themes Signiﬁcant Statements
I don’t think there’s any way a local coop could spend the effort, the
dollars, the manpower, the expertise—especially in the legislativearena. There’s just no way they can do that. But by pooling ourefforts together, as state cooperatives, there’s just power innumbers.
Watchdog Basically, they are our watchdog. Watching, making sure that
something doesn’t just get slipped by the legislature without usknowing about it. You know every once in awhile you get somepeople that don’t like cooperatives. They like to put a law outthere that in some ways makes it so we are not on an even playingﬁeld with private companies. The Council watches out for thiskinda action.
The thing I appreciate about the Council is what they do for us as
far as the legislative watchdog. There are so many bills and somay different viewpoints about all kinds of things. And I feel thatthe Council does an outstanding job of making sure we are awareof these things.
They look into laws that come into legislation, you know. And I
think that’s a very important part of the Council. Because we asindividual coops and farmers can’t be down there [Lincoln]looking at everything that comes down the legislative pipe. Thecoop council watches all that for us.
Voice To have a Council to represent us and speak for us, it’s important.
We have enough things on our plates out here, it wouldn’t workfor us to be there.
As we move more and more towards an urban legislature, through
the Council we try to keep a rural voice in the legislature. Andthat’s gonna get even more important in terms of what the Councildoes for us.
They [the Council] often have to go in there and put out small ﬁres
before they get big. There’s many a bad bill that would have beenpassed had it not been for the Council.
Well, a lot of independents don’t like cooperatives cause we cut into
their proﬁt. So they like to set up laws that beneﬁt onlythemselves and don’t beneﬁt the customer or anybody else downthe road. And so we need the Council to continue being our voiceso to speak and try to prevent that from happening.277
JACR AUGUST 2001