INFORMATION TO USERS
This reproduction was made from a copy of a document sent to us for microfilming. 
While the most advanced technology has been used to photograph and reproduce 
this document, the quality of the reproduction is heavily dependent upon the 
quality o f the material submitted.
The following explanation o f techniques is provided to help clarify markings or 
notations which may appear on this reproduction.
1.The sign or "target” for pages apparently lacking from the document 
photographed is “ Missing Page(s)”. If it was possible to obtain the missing 
page(s) or section, they are spliced into the film along with adjacent pages. This 
may have necessitated cutting through an image and duplicating adjacent pages 
to assure complete continuity.
2. When an image on the film is obliterated with a round black mark, it is an 
indication of either blurred copy because of movement during exposure, 
duplicate copy, or copyrighted materials that should not have been filmed. For 
blurred pages, a good image of the page can be found in the adjacent frame. If 
copyrighted materials were deleted, a target note will appear listing the pages in 
the adjacent frame.
3. When a map, drawing or chart, etc., is part o f the material being photographed, 
a definite method o f “sectioning” the material has been followed. It is 
customary to begin filming at the upper left hand comer of a large sheet and to 
continue from left to right in equal sections with small overlaps. If necessary, 
sectioning is continued again— beginning below the first row and continuing on 
until complete.
4. For illustrations that cannot be satisfactorily reproduced by xerographic 
means, photographic prints can be purchased at additional cost and inserted 
into your xerographic copy. These prints are available upon request from the 
Dissertations Customer Services Department.
5. Some pages in any document may have indistinct print. In all cases the best 
available copy has been filmed.
UniversityMicrofilms
International
300N.Zeeb Road  
Ann Arbor, Ml 48106
8415758
B aro u d i, J a c k  Jo sep h
JOB SATISFACTION, COMMITMENT, AND TURNOVER AMONG 
INFORMATION SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT PERSONNEL: AN EMPIRICAL 
INVESTIGATION
New York University, Graduate School of Business Administration  Ph.D. 1984
University
Microfilms
International 300 N. Zeeta Road, Ann Arbor, Ml 48106
Copyright 1984
by
Baroudi, Jack Joseph  
All Rights Reserved
PLEASE NOTE:
In all c a s e s  this m aterial h as been filmed in the best possible way from th e available copy. 
Problem s en co u n tered  with this d o cu m en t have b een  identified here with a ch eck  m ark V .
1. Glossy p h o to g rap h s or p a g e s _______
2. Colored illustrations, paper or p rin t ______
3. Photographs with dark b a c k g ro u n d ______
4. Illustrations a re  p oor c o p y _______
5. P a g e s with black m arks, not original copy
6. Print show s through a s th ere is text on both sid e s of p a g e _______
7. Indistinct, broken or small print on several p a g e s
8. Print e x ceed s m argin req u irem e n ts ______
9. Tightly bound copy with print lost in spine _______
10. C om puter printout p ag es with indistinct p rin t ______
11. P a g e (s) _____________ lacking w hen material received, and not available from school or
author.
12. P a g e (s) _____________ seem  to b e  missing in num bering only a s text follows.
13. Two pages n u m b e re d ____________ . Text follows.
14. Curling and wrinkled p a g e s _______
15. O ther __________________________________________________ _______ __________________
University
Microfilms
International
JOB SATISFACTION, COMMITMENT, AND TURNOVER  
AMONG INFORMATION SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT PERSONNEL:  
AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION
Jack J, Baroudi
A thesis presented to the Faculty of the Graduate  
School of Business Administration, New York University,  
in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the  
degree of Doctor of Philosophy.
1984
COPYRIGHT BY  
JACK J. BAROUDI  
1984
1  ,   T u  u l \  c  ^   ,  hereby swear and
affirm that no part of the dissertation which I  have submitted for  
publication has been heretofore published, and/or copyrighted in  
the United States of America, except in the case of passages quoted  
from other published sources; that I  am the sole author and  
proprietor of said dissertation; that the dissertation contains no  
matter which, if published, will be libelous or otherwise injurious,  
or infringe in any way, the copyright of any other party; and that  
I  will defend, indemnify and hold harmless New York University  
against all suits an d . proceedings which may be brought, and against  
all claims which may be made against New York University by reason  
of the publication of said dissertation.
[j
Sworn and subscribed to before me this
DAY OF
Stole of «<*»
County o1r ; S E me v  i j s y f  QRN
Job Satisfaction, Commitment,  and Turnover  
Among Information Systems Development Personnel:
An Empirical Investigation
Jack J. Baroudi  
Abstract
This study examines the antecedents of job  
satisfaction, commitment and turnover for 229 information  
systems development personnel (ISDP) employed by nine  
companies within several industries. The antecedents  
studied include boundary spanning, role ambiguity and role  
conflict. A model of these variables is built and tested  
via path analysis. A secondary analysis is performed to  
explore the impacts of task and individual differences on  
the study variables. The task differences include analytic  
and programming tasks while the individual differences  
studied are age, tenure, education and years of data  
processing experience.
The analyses revealed the following. Systems analysts  
span more boundaries than programmers. The major hazard  
faced by systems analysts when they span boundaries is role  
conflict which negatively impacts their job satisfaction,  
commitment and intention to quit. The overall effect of  
boundary spanning is to reduce ISDP intention to quit
Page 2
despite its positive relationship with role conflict.  
Systems analysts and programmers are both intolerant of role  
ambiguity. Role ambiguity is very detrimental greatly  
reducing ISDP job satisfaction, commitment and increasing  
ISDP intention to quit. Role ambiguity is not related to  
boundary spanning nor is it related to analytic or  
programming duties. Programmers are less committed than  
systems analysts and are more likely to express intentions  
to leave. The analysis also reveals that individual  
difference variables have little explanatory power regarding  
the study variables.
The above information is used to make recommendations  
to IS management. Finally, recommendations and directions  
are suggested regarding future research.
ACKNOW L EDGMENTS
I  wish to express my sincere thanks to my thesis  
advisors, Dr. Michael Ginzberg, Dr. Margrethe Olson,  
and Dr. Arthur Brief, for their guidance during the  
writing of this thesis. I  would also like to thank  
Drs. Olson, Ginzberg, and Brief for enriching my  
graduate education with their guidance, tolerance, and  
friendship.
Finally, I  am indebted to the various companies  
that agreed to participate in this study and to the  
employees of those companies that made this study  
possible.
Any errors or deficiencies in this thesis are the  
fault of no one but the author.
January 13, 1984
(  ii)
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  i  i
CHAPTER ONE ................................................  1
1.0 Introduction ..........................................  2
1.1 Turnover ...............................................  3
1.2 Job Satisfaction .......... ...........................  4
1.3 Organizational Commitment ...........................  5
1.4 The Study ..............................................  6
1.5 The Study Model and Hypotheses .....................  9
1.6 The Organization of this Document ..................  11
CHAPTER TWO ................................................  13
2.0 Literature Review ....................................  13
2.1 Boundary Spanning ....................................  13
2.1.1 Consequences of Boundary Spanning Activites... 19
2.2 Role Conflict and Role Ambiguity ..................  22
2.2.1 Definitions .........................................  24
2.2.2 MIS Role Research ..................................  26
2.2.3 Antecedents and Consequences of Role
Conflict and Ambiguity....  ................  27
2.2.4 Moderating Factors .................................  30
2.3 Job Satisfaction ......................................  31
2.4 Organizational Commitment ...........................  33
2.4.1 Consequences of Commitment .......................  37
(iii)
2.4.2 Antecedents of Commitment .........................  39
2.5 Turnover ................................................  43
2.5.1 Antecedents of Turnover ...........................  47
2.5.2 Outcomes of Turnover . . . .. . . .    50
2.6 Plan of Attack .........................................  50
CHAPTER THREE ...............................................  54
3.0 Model and Hypotheses .....................    54
3.1 The Causal Model ......................................  54
3.2 Individual Differences ...................    62
3.3 Task Differences ......................................  64
CHAPTER FOUR ................................................  70
4.0 Methodology .............................................  70
4.1 The Measures ...........................................  70
4.1.1 Boundary Spanning ...................................  71
4.1.2 Role Ambiguity and Role Conflict., ..............  74
4.1.3 Job Satisfaction ....................................  77
4.1.4 Commitment ...........................................  76
4.1.5 Turnover ..............................................  82
4.1.6 Individual Differences............................. 84
4.1.7 Job Tasks .............................................  86
4.2 Ordering of Measures .................................  88
4.3 Pre-Test ................................................  90
4.4 The Sample and Selection .............................  90
4.5 The Procedure ..........................................  96
Chapter Five ................................................  99
5.0 Results and Discussion ...............................  99
5.1 Reliability and Descriptive Statistics ...........  99
(  iv)
5.2 Assumptions of Path Analysis ........................ 104
5.3 Testing the Proposed Model and Building
a Trimmed Model ........................................ 106
5.4 Testing the Residuals and Reconstructing
the Correlation Matrix ................................ Ill
5.5 The Original and Trimmed Models ..................... 118
5.6 Hypothesized Task Differences Between  
Programmers and Analysts ............................. 123
5.7 Individual Differences ................................ 129
CHAPTER SIX .................................................. 133
6.0 Conclusions ............................................. 133
6.1 Findings of the Study ................................. 133
6.2 Potential Sources of ISDP Role Ambiguity. ........ 134
6.3 Recommendations for IS Managers ..................... 138
6.3.1 Role Ambiguity and ISDP Management .............. 138
6.3.2 Appropriateness of ISDP Career Paths ............. 140
6.4 Recommendations for Future Research................142
6.5 Major Contributions of the Study ................... 145
REFERENCES....................................................148
APPENDIX A ................................................... 16 3
APPENDIX B ....................................................182
APPENDIX C ................................................... 184
APPENDIX D ................................................... 186
<v>
Page 1
CHAPTER ONE
"The biggest problem for DP managers is an old  
one: the continuing shortage of qualified DP
professionals. Personnel management- recruiting and  
maintaining a good staff- is still very likely the  
greatest challenge of the job."
-Datamation[1982]
"People productivity is the single greatest  
problem facing many Information Systems functions...The  
task of acquiring and supporting good Information  
Systems people is bigger than company management might  
think, and deserves to be taken seriously."
-Millert1980 3
"Management must spend more time and more money to  
solve the DP people problem."
-Information Systems News[1982]
Page 2
1.0 Introduction
The recruitment, selection, and management of  
information systems (IS) personnel is of importance to  
both the IS department and the organization. Outlining  
the critical IS issues of the 1980's, the Society for  
Information Management (SIM) identified IS personnel  
management as one of the seven areas requiring  
immediate attention.
The need to address IS personnel issues can be  
traced to several factors. During the last thirty  
years the cost to performance ratio of central  
processing power has seen a dramatic improvement by a  
factor of over one million [Birnbaum, 1982]. Yet,  
during this same period, even with the development of  
structured programming, structured and automated design  
techniques and the advent of fourth generation  
languages there has been only a four to one improvement  
in programmer productivity [Birnbaum, 1982]. The lag  
in personnel improvements when compared to  
technological improvements is striking. Additionally,  
personnel and not hardware is often the major expense  
of any system. This is well illustrated by the  
estimate that by the mid 1980's it will be cheaper to  
rent a one million instruction per second (MIPS)  
machine than to hire a programmer [Birnbaum, 1982],  
Thus, many of the problems facing IS departments today  
are not technology related but personnel related
Page 3
[Bartol and Martin, 1982], Two important aspects of  
effective IS personnel management are the turnover and  
job satisfaction of IS personnel [Bartol and Martin,  
1982].
1.1 Turnover
The criticality of turnover among IS personnel is  
illustrated by the fact that even in the recession year  
of 1982 the turnover rate was running between fifteen  
to twenty percent [Gray, 1982]. Additionally, the  
demand for DP professionals is growing by 15% every  
year [Gray, 1982]. This translates into intense  
pressure on the IS manager to search for and retain
qualified personnel. In a study of the IS manager,
Ives and Olson [1981] report that 61% of the IS
manager's time is spent with first and second level  
subordinates, much of which involves the acquisition  
and retention of qualified personnel.
While certain levels of turnover are necessary to  
eliminate less effective employees and to innovate
[Mobley, 1982], it is not at all clear what an  
appropriate turnover rate is for IS personnel.
However, a 20% turnover rate means that almost half of
the DP staff changes every two years and in a field
such as data processing where it is estimated to take  
18 months for an employee to become maximally  
productive [Cournoyver, 1983], 20% turnover is
Page 4
excessive.
Turnover is very expensive. One study reports  
that the costs of recruiting and training a project  
leader is $26,000 or 87% of the project leader's  
$30,000 salary [Barrocci and Cournoyer, 1982]. Cutting  
this $26,000 in half on the assumption that project  
leaders are unusually expensive to recruit and train  
the cost of 20% turnover is still very high. For  
example, a 100 person DP department with 20% turnover  
at $13,000 to recruit and train replacements translates  
into $260,000- a substantial amount of money. In sum,  
identifying the causes of IS personnel turnover is of  
great concern to IS management.
1.2 Job Satisfaction
Of equal importance to the IS manager, and related  
to the turnover problem is the job satisfaction of IS  
personnel. Satisfied employees are less likely to  
voluntarily leave the organization [Mobley, 1982].  
Additionally, job satisfaction and job performance are  
concomitantly linked [Schwab and Cummings, 1970].  
Understanding the causes of job satisfaction is also  
critical as dissatisfied employees may exhibit a number  
of personally and/or organizationally dysfunctional  
characteristics [Locke, 1976]. Failure to address job  
satisfaction issues for DP personnel has potentially  
costly consequences including increased absenteeism,
Page 5
turnover, ill-health and greviances [Locke, 1976].  
Therefore, an understanding of the causes of IS  
personnel job satisfaction should be an important goal  
of MIS research.
1.3 Organizational Commitment
Another important variable is the organizational  
commitment of DP personnel. Commitment refers to the  
extent to which the individual has a strong belief in  
and acceptance of organizational values, is willing to  
exert considerable energy on behalf of the  
organization, and has a strong desire to maintain  
membership in the organization [Mowday et al, 1982],  
It has been argued that: "Data processing people are
too often more dedicated to their particular technology  
than the corporation you don't build for tomorrow with  
that type of attitude."[Informat ion System News, 1982].  
This statement reflects the belief that many DP people  
are unable to see beyond their technology and concern  
themselves with the business needs of their companies.  
Organizational commitment, additionally is an important  
variable as i t has been shown to relate to turnover,  
tardiness, absenteeism, tenure and job performance  
[Mowday et al, 1982],
Page 6
Miller [1980] asserts that with good people  
becoming more difficult to find and keep, coupled with  
increasing salaries, companies are paying more and  
getting less. It follows therefore, that attention to  
the turnover, job satisfaction and commitment of DP  
personnel is an important part of building a stable,  
effective staff and necessary to begin controlling the  
expense attributable to turnover among IS personnel.
1.4 The Study
Ives, Hamilton, and Davis [1980] state that MIS  
research encompasses environmental, process and  
information subsystem variables. IS personnel  
turnover, satisfaction, and commitment comprise an  
important part of the information system development  
environment; therefore, these variables are of  
interest to the MIS research community. Yet, little is  
known regarding information system development  
personnel (ISDP). Prom 1973 to 1980 approximately 430  
dissertations have been completed in the MIS area  
[Hamilton et al, 1981] with fewer than 1% investigating  
the information system designer. Thus, while  
information regarding IS personnel would be of use to  
IS management and of interest to the MIS research  
community, little effort has been made to explore this  
area.
Page 7
This research will address the turnover, job
satisfaction, and commitment of ISDP who are engaged in  
the analysis, design, and/or programming of internal  
business systems. The linkages between job
satisfaction, commitment and turnover will be explored  
as well as their antecedents.
The antecedents examined by this study include  
boundary spanning, role ambiguity, and role conflict.  
Both the MIS normative and research literatures
[Bostrom, 1980; Mader and Hagin, 1974; Murach, 1977]  
suggests these are important variables with particular  
relevance to the MIS setting.
Boundary spanning may explain many of the  
non-technical requirements and behaviors of ISDP.  
Boundary spanning refers to the extent to which the  
role requires the individual to interact or cross  
departmental or organizational boundaries CAdams,1976].  
The prescriptive literature [Mader and Hagin, 1974;  
Murach, 1977] states that the process of system design  
requires continual interaction with individuals both  
internal and external to the IS department
necessitating the crossing of many intra-  
organizational boundaries.
ISDP must not only cross boundaries but must deal  
with a large number of different users with divergent  
and often conflicting requests. ISDP must attempt to
Page 8
reconcile these demands not only with the other users  
but also with the limited resources of the IS  
department. ISDP, therefore, may experience role  
conflict. Role conflict refers to the extent to which  
the information the role incumbent receives regarding  
the performance of his/her job is in conflict or  
requires too much of the role incumbent in too short a  
time period [Van Sell et al, 1981]
The process of designing a system is at least in  
part an art. Information regarding the system is often  
vague, unclear, and often lacking altogether. Yet the  
analyst must design systems based on this incomplete  
information. This lack of clear information may result  
in role ambiguity. Role ambiguity refers to the extent  
to which clear and percise information regarding what  
is expected of the role incumbent is lacking [Van Sell  
et al, 1981], Ambiguity may, therefore, be a problem  
for ISDP.
In summary, three important work outcome  
variables: turnover, job satisfaction and commitment
will be investigated as well as three antecedent  
variables: boundary spanning, role ambiguity, and role
conflict. To explore the relationship among these  
variables a path model will be built and tested using  
path analysis.
Page 9
1.5 The Study Model and Hypotheses
To test the causal relationships among the study  
variables the model in figure 1.0 is proposed. This  
model borrows heavily from the organizational behavior  
literature but has been adapted to address the  
particular needs of the IS setting. A detailed  
explanation and justification of the model is provided  
in chapter three.
In addition to testing the model, this study will  
develop and test a  number of hypotheses regarding ISDP  
task and individual differences. ISDP task differences  
and their relationships with the study variables will  
be explored. Finally, this study vill examine the  
effect of ISDP individual differences and their effects  
on job satisfaction, commitment and turnover.
The results of this study will provide much needed  
descriptive information regarding the information  
systems development environment. By developing an  
understanding of how boundary spanning, role ambiguity,  
and role conflict impact ISDP job satisfaction,  
commitment, and turnover this study will provide IS  
managers with information necessary to devise  
strategies and interventions to help alleviate the  
current IS personnel crisis.
Page 10
u
■ p
cd *H  _T3 C
Figure
Page 11
1.6 The Organization of this Document
Chapter two provides an in depth review of the MIS  
and organizational behavior literature for each of the  
six study variables. The particular importance of each  
variable to the MIS community is discussed as well as  
the variable's antecedents and consequences.
Chapter three formally articulates the study  
hypotheses drawing on the literature reviewed in  
chapter two. In addition to the causal model a number  
of hypotheses regarding ISDP individual differences are  
presented. These differences include: age, tenure,
educational level, gender, and years of DP experience.  
The final section of this chapter presents a number of  
hypotheses based on ISDP task differences. The task  
differences examined include programming and analytic  
tasks.
Chapter four describes the study methodology.  
Descriptions of the measures used and the subjects
surveyed are presented, as well as, the method used to
collect the data from the various study companies.
Chapter five discusses the data analysis and the
study results. Path analysis was used to test the
causal model while correlational and regression  
analysis were used to test the task and individual  
differences hypotheses.
Page 12
The conclusions are presented in chapter six. The  
importance of the findings of chapter five are  
discussed here and this information is used to make  
recommendations to IS mangers and IS researchers.
Page 13
CHAPTER TWO
2.0 Literature Review
In order to build a model of ISDP turnover,  
commitment, and job satisfaction the relevant MIS and  
organizational literature was reviewed. This chapter  
is divided into 5  sections, each examining different  
variables in the model. Each section discusses the  
importance of the variable to MIS and its antecedents  
and consequences.
2.1 Boundary Spanning
ISDP are involved in a number of different tasks.  
The primary duties of ISDP include applications  
programming and systems analysis. The following are  
textbooks descriptions of systems analysts and  
applications programmers.
In general, systems analysts must be  
able to communicate with and get information  
from employees at all levels within the  
company-- from clerks to top executives;  
they must be familiar with a wide range of  
equipment and programming support; they must  
have some background in programming; they  
must be able to develop plans, solutions, and  
systems from the available data; and if they  
have any background in accounting, statistics
Page 14
or industrial engineering, that helps too.  
(Murach, 1977)
The systems analyst must be capable not  
only of understanding the user's problem but  
also of devising various efficient methods  
for its computer-assisted solution...the  
systems analyst must become proficient from  
both the user's and the computer specialist's  
point of view. (Mader and Hagen, 1974)
Mader and Hagin [1974] further argue that during
and after specification of the system design, the  
systems analyst must interact with the programmer. It  
is the programmer who develops the software for the  
proposed system. Murach [1977] states that: The
programmer is the individual who writes the computer  
program. The programmer must understand precisely what  
the program is supposed to do and then plan the  
solution, that is the sequence of instructions required  
to transform the input into output. The programmer  
tests the program to assure it functions properly and  
then develops documentation. The programmer interacts  
primarily with personnel within the MIS department.
One difference apparent from the normative  
descriptions of ISDP is the amount of boundary spanning  
each job entails. Boundary spanning refers to the  
extent to which the role requires the interacting or  
crossing of intra and inter-organizational boundaries  
[Adams, 1976; Tushman, 1981]. The prescriptive
literature [Murach, 1977; Mader and Hagen, 1974]
suggests the systems analyst is required to interact
Page 15
constantly with individuals outside the data processing  
department necessitating the crossing of many  
intra-organizational boundaries. Additionally, systems  
analysts must translate the special languages that
evolve in the various business units into information  
requirements understandable to the DP department so  
that systems development may begin. The programmer,  
however, does very little boundary spanning,  
interacting almost solely with workers internal to the  
DP department. This difference in boundary spanning  
activities is an elegant way to contrast the
non-technical requirements of these positions.
Examining the boundary spanning characteristics of  
ISDP is important for several reasons. The career  
paths of programmers are described [Murach, 1977] as  
proceeding in one of two directions: within the
programming department to senior programmer or  
programming manager, or within the analysis group to  
systems analyst. However, if the characterisitics of  
the analyst and programmer jobs vary greatly in terms  
of boundary spanning, as the normative literature  
suggests, then a person well suited to programming may  
not be well suited to analysis. The practice,  
therefore, of promoting programmers to analysts may not  
be appropriate. Finally, there are a number of adverse  
consequences associated with boundary spanning
activities such as turnover [Mobley et al, 1982]. It
Page 16
is expected that ISDP involved in boundary spanning  
will also suffer from these adverse outcomes. An  
understanding of boundary spannning activities and its  
consequences for ISDP therefore is important in  
allowing us to intelligently develop management  
strategies meaningful for ISDP who may be engaged in  
very different activities. The remainder of this  
section will define and describe boundary spanning, as  
well as review the organizational literature regarding  
the consequences of boundary spanning.
In general there are two classes of duties  
performed by bounary spanners: informational and
representational [Aldrich and Herker, 1977; Tushman  
and Scanlan, 1981]. Informational boundary spanning  
requires the gathering, filtering and dissemination of  
information. Representational roles are concerned with  
the acquisition and disposal of organizational  
resources. The representational boundary spanner  
serves as the organization's delegate to the  
environment.
Adams [1976] describes the unique characteristics  
of boundary role incumbents as:
1. Boundary spanning role incumbents are often  
physically and psychologically distant or separate  
from other members of the organization weakening  
their organizational bonds.
Page 17
2. Boundary role incumbents serve as representatives  
of their departments to the outside and bring  
outside views and desires back to their department.
3. They may assume the role of influence or change  
agent, attempting to influence the behavior of  
other persons whose perspectives and preference  
ordering differ from their department's and this  
may lead to high levels of role conflict.
Miles [1980b], expanding on the work of Adams,
further subdivides boundary spanning activities and
develops a typology of five boundary spanning
activities. These activities include:
1. Managing the face of the organization by  
representing and protecting the organization.
2. Processing environmental information by scanning  
and monitoring the environment.
3 . Gatekeeping environmental information.
4. Managing relations with environmental elements by  
transacting with external elements.
5. Linking and coordinating the organization with  
other important groups.
Page 18
While boundary spanning activities are typically  
characterized as occurring between organizations [e.g.  
Adams, 1976;Aldrich and Herker, 1977; Leifer and  
Delbecq, 1978; Keller and Holland, 1975; Keller et  
al, 1976] these activities can also occur between units  
within a single organization [Miles, 1980a; Tushman,  
1977]. Tushman [1977] argues that boundary spanning  
must occur wherever there is a communication boundary  
and these boundaries can exist within as well as  
between organizations. Special languages and local  
views evolve within organizational units creating  
communication boundaries which require the recoding of  
information passed between these units [Tushman and  
Scanlan, 1981].
One way to deal with the difficulties of  
communicating across boundaries is to create special  
boundary roles [Tushman, 1977]. Two types of boundary  
roles described by Tushman are gatekeepers and  
organizational liasions. Gatekeepers are those  
individuals who convey information from external  
domains (the environment) to the internal  
(organizational) communication network. The
organizational liasions are responsible for the  
transmission of information across communication  
boundaries internal to the organization. Tushman
(1977) states that intra-organizational boundary roles  
are different from inter-organizational boundary roles
Page 19
only in that they operate at a lower level in the  
organization and often are not formally defined.
2.1.1 Consequences of Boundary Spanning Activities
Because boundary spanning positions require  
occupants to interact with groups whose norms may  
differ from one another [Caldwell and O'Reilly, 1982]  
conflicting and misunderstood expectations for role  
performance are often sent to boundary spanners [Keller  
and Holland, 1975]. Since both internal and external  
role senders have expectations for those who engage in  
boundary spanning activities, inconsistent and vague or  
unclear expectations may result in role conflict and  
role ambiguity [Keller et al, 1976], Role conflict  
appears to be associated with organizational linking  
roles, regardless of whether they involve the  
integration of activities across intra or inter
organizational boundaries [Miles, 1976],
In general, prior research has found that boundary  
role positions relate positively to the experience of  
role conflict [Miles, 1976; Kahn et al, 1964; Miles
and Perraults, 1976; Miles, 1980b].
Intra-organizational boundary spanners are found to  
suffer more from role conflict than their  
inter-organizational counterparts as they have
relatively less freedom to employ the coping strategies
Page 20
available to inter-organizational boundary spanners  
[Miles, 1980b; Miles and Perreault, 1976].
The findings regarding a significant relationship  
between role conflict, role ambiguity and boundary  
spanning, however, are not all in agreement. Keller
[1978], using a longitudinal cross-lagged design found  
boundary spanning to be unrelated to either role  
conflict or role ambiguity. Keller and Holland [1975]  
report that boundary spanning activities were  
negatively related to role ambiguity. Finally, Keller  
et al [1976] found that boundary spanning was unrelated  
to either role conflict or role ambiguity. These  
studies' inability to find a relationship between  
boundary spanning and role conflict and ambiguity may  
be an artifact of their operationalization of boundary  
spanning. The studies tapped only the informational  
aspect of boundary spanning; yet the representational  
duties are more strongly related to role conflict and  
ambiguity than the informational aspect [Keller, 1978].
Incumbents of boundary role positions experience  
both positive and negative outcomes as a result of  
their activities. While boundary role positions relate  
positively to the experience of role conflict [Kahn et  
al, 1964; Miles, 1980b; Miles and Perreault, 1976]  
boundary spanning activities, however, may be  
positively associated with job satisfaction, increased  
power, increased job autonomy and enhanced career
Page 21
mobility [Miles, 1980a]. Aldrich and Herker [1977]  
state that the multiple relationships with diverse role  
partners afforded to boundary spanners provide numerous  
sources of gratification and therefore boundary  
spanning may have positive consequences. Keller [1978]  
found informational boundary spanning to positively  
relate to job satisfaction as have several studies  
[Keller and Holland, 1975;Keller et al, 1976; Tushman  
and Scanlan, 1981]. The positive relationship with job  
satisfaction may be explained by Pettigrew's view that  
access to external information can be a power source  
used to obtain desired organizational outcomes [Keller  
and Holland, 1975]. Tushman and Scanlan [1981] provide  
substantiating evidence for this view as they found  
boundary spanning incumbents to have substantial  
informal power and status.
Miles [1980a] argues that the general association  
between boundary spanning activities and individual  
work outcomes appears to be moderated by a  number of  
conditioning factors. These factors include the  
environmental context, the routineness of the boundary  
spanning tasks, the nature of the units spanned, and  
the degree to which boundary role persons can be  
monitored. Thus, the relationship between boundary  
role persons and individual work outcomes are complex.
Page 22
Much evidence [Kahn et al, 1964; Miles, 1980b;  
Miles and Perreault, 1976] exists of a positive  
relationship between boundary spanning activities and  
role conflict. The empirical evidence is mixed with  
regards to the relationship between role ambiguity and  
boundary spanning. The linkage between boundary  
spanning and role stress is important and will be a  
focus of this study as role conflict and role ambiguity  
are closely related to and impact such outcomes as  
turnover, performance, commitment, and satisfaction.
In general, boundary spanning activities  
correspond closely to the duties of ISDP. ISDP serve  
as the systems area representative to other departments  
and bring outside views, desires and needs back to the  
department. ISDP can be characterized as linking the  
systems area to the various user departments and as  
agents of organizational change [Keen,1981]. An
understanding of the consequences of ISDP boundary  
spanning activities will provide a better understanding  
of how to manage ISDP.
2.2 Role Conflict and Role Ambiguity
Role conflict and ambiguity are among the
adversive outcomes of boundary spanning and have been  
related to such variables as turnover and job
dissatisfaction [Van Sell et al, 1981]. While ISDP are
Page 23
expected to experience role conflict and ambiguity as a  
result of their boundary spanning activities, there are  
several studies which also suggest that role conflict  
and ambiguity are particular problems for ISDP and thus  
important MIS research variables [Woodruff, 1980;  
Bostrom,1980; Goldstein, 1982].
For example, Woodruff [1980] examined the  
personality profiles of 202 data processing personnel  
and found that DP professionals possess significantly  
higher needs for achievement, cognitive structure,  
autonomy and a lower need for change than other workers  
in general.
The DP personnels' high need for cognitive  
structure and low need for change are indicative of  
individuals with relatively little tolerance for  
ambiguity. Additionally, Kahn et al [1964] found that  
individuals with a high need for cognition (a construct  
similar to cognitive structure) experienced a stronger  
positive relationship between role conflict and job  
related tension indicating DP personnel are prone to  
the adversities of role conflict and ambiguity. Morris  
and Snyder [1979] report that satisfaction,  
organizational commitment and the propensity to leave  
the organization are stronger negative correlates of  
inter-sender role conflict for individuals with higher  
levels of autonomy related needs, a characteristic of  
DP personnel. While the results are mixed [e.g.
Page 24
Morris and Snyder, 1979; Abdel-Halim, 1981] evidence  
exists [Johnson and Stinson, 1975] that individuals  
with high need for achievement, such as DP personnel,  
suffer more aversely from the effects of inter-sender  
conflict and task ambiguity.
Abdel-Halim [1981] reports that complex high scope  
jobs in mediating (service) technologies characterized  
by high Job Diagnostic Scores (JDS) are more vulnerable  
to role conflict and ambiguity. The JDS measures the  
extent to which the job has task variety, significance,  
identity, feedback and autonomy. Couger and  
Zawackii[1978] found that DP jobs scored high on the  
JDS, which suggests that DP positions may be  
particularly susceptible to role conflict and  
ambiguity. In sum the evidence is highly suggestive  
that systems professionals with their complex high  
scope jobs and personality profiles- high need for  
achievement, autonomy, cognition and low need for  
change- are prone to the adversive effects of role  
conflict and role ambiguity.
2.2.1 Definitions
Role conflict is defined as the incongruity of  
expectations associated with a work role [Van Sell et  
al, 1981]. Van Sell et al [1981] identify five types  
of role conflict:
Page 25
1 . Intra-sender role conflict: this occurs when the
role incumbent receives incompatible expectations  
from a single role sender.
2. Inter-sender role conflict: this occurs when
incompatible expectations are received from diverse  
role senders.
3 .  Person-role conflict: this is the incompatibility
of expectations held by the role incumbent with  
those actually experienced.
4. Inter-role conflict: this stems from pressures
associated with one role of the position that are  
incompatible with pressures arising from another  
role of the same position.
5 . Role overload: this occurs when too much is  
expected of a role incumbent in too short a time  
period.
Role ambiguity is defined as the extent to which  
clear and precise information regarding the  
expectations associated with a role, methods for  
fulfilling known role expectations, and the  
consequences of role performance are unclear [Van sell  
et al,1981].
Page 26
2.2.2 MIS Role Research
Two studies [Bostrom,1980; Goldstein, 1982] have  
directly investigated the role characteristics of  
system designers and their effects on work related  
outcomes. Bostrom examined the role conflict and role  
ambiguity of both system designers and users. He found  
that users and system designers experienced relatively  
similar levels of role conflict but that designers  
experienced significantly more role ambiguity. Bostrom  
concluded that high levels of role conflict and  
ambiguity are associated with system designers’  
positions.
Bostrom's study also investigated designer job  
satisfaction, and its relationship with role ambiguity  
and conflict. In general, he found that both ambiguity  
and conflict are negatively associated with designer  
job satisfaction. He discovered, however, a positive  
relationship between system designer’s role overload  
and job growth satisfaction which suggested that role  
overload may have some positive consequences. One  
component of designer job satisfaction, satisfaction  
with supervision, was strongly and inversely related to  
all role perceptions but role overload. Bostrom  
argued, therefore, that supervision had a very strong  
effect on designer role perceptions as supervisors and  
project leaders are involved in clarifying and  
allocating designer tasks.
Page 27
A second study examining the consequences of role  
conflict and role ambiguity, conducted by Goldstein  
[1982], reports that role ambiguity and role conflict  
are negatively correlated with general job  
satisfaction, growth satisfaction {the amount of  
personal growth and development one receives from one's  
job), satisfaction with co-workers and satisfaction  
with supervision. In general, Goldstein found that the  
correlations between job satisfaction and role  
variables are consistently higher than the correlation  
between job satisfaction and job characteristics (e.g.  
task identity, skill variety, identity, feedback and  
significance) highlighting the importance of role  
conflict and ambiguity in predicting DP personnel job  
satisfaction.
2.2.3 Antecedents and Consequences of Role Conflict and  
Ambiguity
Miles [1976] reports that role conflict and role  
ambiguity are related directly to job induced tension,  
anxiety and the propenisty to leave the organization.  
Miles' found that general role conflict and  
inter-sender conflict in particular are directly  
related to boundary spanning activities. Role  
ambiguity, on the other hand, is inversely related to  
boundary spanning but Miles [1976] believes this
Page 28
finding to be an artifact of the research and  
development sample.
Dubinsky and Mattson [1979] conclude that the  
preponderance of research has found role conflict to be  
negatively related to employee job satisfaction. In a  
study or retail salespeople [Dubinsky and Mattson,
1979] they found that both role conflict and role  
ambiguity are inversely related to job satisfaction,  
job performance, and organizational commitment. The  
authors attributed the role conflict and ambiguity  
experienced by the retail salespeople to their boundary  
spanning activities.
Morris and Koch, [1979] found that role conflict  
and role ambiguity are associated with reduced  
organizational commitment and job involvement. Role  
conflcit and role ambiguity are able to account for 14%  
of the variance in organizational commitment and 12% of  
the variance in psychosomatic complaints. However,  
when the data is further analyzed using partial  
correlations it is revealed that while organizational  
commitment is related to both conflict and ambiguity,  
psychosomatic complaints are related only to role  
conflict.
A path analysis of the consequences of role  
conflict and role ambiguity [Bedeian and Armenakis,  
1981] reports that role conflict and role ambiguity are
Page 29
related to job dissatisfaction, job induced tension,  
lower organizational commitment, and the propensity to  
leave the organization. The direct link, however,  
between role conflict and role ambiguity and the  
propensity to leave is found to be an artifact of the  
role stress variables shared correlation with job  
satisfaction. Thus, role conflict and role ambiguity  
have only an indirect effect on propensity to leave.  
Additionally, Bedeian and Armenakis conclude that role  
conflict and role ambiguity have most of their impact  
on job satisfaction via job induced tension rather than  
directly.
Pearce[1981] reviews the role ambiguity literature  
and finds strong support that role ambiguity causes  
stress. Pearce notes that the results regarding role  
ambiguity and job performance are very mixed and thus  
we should draw no conclusions regarding the  
relationship between these two variables. While there  
is considerable evidence that job dissatisfaction  
relates to role ambiguity Pearce believes this to be an  
artifact of the role ambiguity measure.
In conclusion, role conflict and ambiguity are  
associated with unpleasant and dysfunctional outcomes  
for the organization, work group, and individual. Van  
Sell, et al [1981] report the most consistent findings  
with regards to role conflict is the relationship  
between role conflict and job dissatisfaction and job
Page 30
related-tension, Less consistently, role conflict is  
related to slower and less accurate group performance,  
lower organizational commitment, lower performance  
evaluations, voluntary turnover, and the propensity to  
leave. Role ambiguity is linked to lower group  
productivity, less involvement, lower job satisfaction  
and turnover.
2.2.4 Moderating Factors
While role conflict and role ambiguity have been  
linked to a number of outcomes the strength of these  
relationships depends upon a number of moderating  
factors. Many studies have been conducted to determine  
what some of these factors are. For example, older and  
less educated people have been found to experience more  
severe negative effects due to role ambiguity and role  
conflict [Dubinsky and Mattson, 1979], High abi lity  
employees were less adversely affected by role  
ambiguity [Schuler, 1977] and one study [Abdel-Halim,  
1981] reported a positive relationship between role  
ambiguity and intrinsic satisfaction. Employees  
reporting a good match between their abilities and job  
were more satisfied under conditions of high role  
ambiguity and role conflict than their poor match  
counterparts [Abdel-Halim, 1981]. Additionally,  
Abdel-Halim [1981] found the more educated the employee
Page 31
the more satisfied he/she was under conditions of role  
conflict. Mossholder [1981] determined that high  
self-esteem moderated the detrimental effects of role  
ambiguity on satisfaction and moderated the effects of  
role conflict on performance.
Supervisory support, group cohesion, and ability  
all were found to have negative relationships with role  
ambiguity [Randolph and Posner,1981]. Randolph and  
Posner [1981] also found a negative relationship  
between these variables and tolerance for conflict.  
Finally, leader consideration was reported to reduce  
the negative effects of role ambiguity [Valenzi and  
Dessler, 1978]. A substantial body of literature  
exists, therefore, regarding moderators of role  
conflict and ambiguity. A number of the studies  
discussed [Bostrom, 1980;Goldstein, 1982; Woodruff,
1980] provide considerable evidence that ISDP are  
particularly susceptible to the adverse effects of role  
conflict and ambiguity.
2.3 Job Satisfaction
Job satisfaction is defined as a pleasurable or  
positive emotional state resulting from the appraisal  
of one's job or job experiences [Locke, 1976]. Job  
satisfaction results from the perception that one's job  
fulfills or allows fulfillment of one’s  important job
Page 32
values which are compatible with one's needs [Locke,  
1976]. Job satisfaction is included as an outcome in  
this study for several reasons.
First, a number of design methodologies such as  
sociotechnical systems design [Mumford, 1981] place  
great importance on the quality of working life and the  
job satisfaction of the IS user; little attention  
though, is paid to the job satisfaction of IS  
development personnel.
Second, job satisfaction is related to many  
important outcome variables. Job satisfaction is  
demonstrated to relate causally to absenteeism and  
turnover, two organizationally costly variables and job  
dissatisfaction may have negative consequences for the  
employees’  health, attitudes, and grievances [Locke,  
1976]. Additionally, satisfaction and performance are  
concomittantly related [Schwab and Cummings, 1970].  
Finally, job satisfaction has been related to  
organizational commitment [Brief and Aldag, 1981],  
another variable of interest to this study.
Third, antecedents of job satisfaction include  
boundary spanning, role ambiguity and conflict. The  
individual consequences of role conflict and ambiguity  
are demonstrated to include job dissatisfaction[Kahn et  
al, 1964], Boundary spanning is found to correlate  
positively with job satisfaction [Miles,1980b],  yet
Page 33
boundary spanning also correlates positively with role  
ambiguity and conflict [Miles and Perreault, 19763.  
The relationship between job satisfaction and boundary  
spanning therefore appears to be complex. Miles[1980b]  
argues that boundary spanning activities which expose  
employees to role conflict may lead to job satisfaction  
regardless, if the employees perceive these activities  
as career enhancing. Research is necessary to  
understand the impact of boundary spanning on ISDP job  
satisfact ion.
In conclusion, job satisfaction is included as a  
salient outcome for several reasons. Job satisfaction  
relates to a number of relevant organizational outcomes  
such as commitment and turnover and its antecedents  
include boundary spanning, role conflict, and role  
ambiguity. Job satisfaction is a variable of interest  
in its own right as it is an important component of the
quality of working life for ISDP, A discussion of the
antecedents and consequences of job satisfaction is
incorporated into the other sections of this chapter.
2.4 Organizational Commitment
Organizational commitment, in general, is a
variable of interest because of the belief that  
increased commitment levels lead in some way to  
increased organizational effectiveness [Steers,
Page 34
1977;Scholl,  1981].
Commitment is a variable of interest to the MIS  
field, in particular, for several reasons. First, the  
measurement of MIS department productivity or  
effectiveness is extremely difficult. The MIS
department provides services to which it is difficult  
to attach monetary value, yet may be indispensible to  
the organization (see Matlin [1979] for a discussion of  
valuing MIS projects). It is therefore often
impossible to evaluate the MIS department in the profit  
center terms familiar to top management. Commitment  
may serve as a useful surrogate measure for MIS  
department effectiveness. Additionally, Angle and
Perry [1981] have found that commitment relates
positively to organizational adaptability. MIS
departments need to encourage adaptability as they  
operate within a  rapidly changing environment and could  
quickly lose their ability to service the organization  
if they do not take advantage of the emerging  
technologies. Finally, ISDP commitment has been found
[Taylor and Tanniru, 1981;Bartol, 1982] to be an
important factor in limiting the turnover of ISDP.  
Taylor and Tanniru [1981] report that committed DP  
personnel who had a number of alternative job offers  
were less likely to leave than their less committed  
counterparts. A study of the turnover process by  
Bartol [1982] found, also, that organizational
Page 35
commitment was a significant deterrent to DP personnel  
turnover. In sum, commitment is an important MIS  
research variable as it may explain variance in ISDP  
turnover behavior, and at a more macro level, provide a  
measureable indicator for the effectiveness of the MIS  
department.
Scholl [1981] reviewed the research on  
organizational commitment and concluded that it is  
divided into two distinct schools. One school, which  
Scholl refers to as the rational-attitudinal (or  
psychological) school views commitment as an employee  
attitude characterized by the intention to exert high  
levels of effort on behalf of the organization and by  
identification with organizational goals. The outcomes  
of these intentions are increased performance, reduced  
absenteeism, and reduced turnover. The second school,  
which Scholl terms the behavioral (or exchange-based)  
school, views commitment as a force tying the  
individual to a specific organization.
Morris and Sherman [1981] also note the dichotomy  
in the organizational literature and conclude that the  
behavioral school views commitment as the outcome of  
inducements/contributions transactions between the  
organization and the employee. The more favorable the  
exchange for the employee the greater the individual's  
commitment. Morris and Sherman argue that the exchange  
approach is limited as it provides information about
Page 36
the propensity to leave but provides little information  
regarding other salient behaviors such as performance.  
Morris and Sherman describe the psychological approach  
to commitment as a more active and positive orientation  
to the organization which has been related to a number  
of behaviors besides turnover.
Stevens, Beyers and Trice [1978] discuss the  
differences between psychological and exchange based  
commitment. The authors conclude, after reviewing the  
available research, that managers who are economically  
(exchanged-based) committed but not psychologically  
committed may remain with an organization but shift  
their energies to interests outside the organization,  
suggesting economic commitment is a more limited  
concept than psychological commitment. Therefore, this  
study will utilize the psychological approach to  
commitment.
Organizational commitment is, in this study,  
defined as an attitude that indicates the relative  
strength of an individual's identification with and  
involvement in a particular organization. Commitment  
is characterized by three factors [Mowday et al, 1982]:
1. A strong belief in and acceptance of organizational  
values,
Page 37
2. A willingness to exert considerable energy on  
behalf of the organization,
3. A strong desire to maintain membership in the  
organization.
2.4.1 Consequences of Commitment
Porter, Crampton and Smith [1976] found  
organizational commitment a better predictor of  
eventual turnover behavior than the measures of the  
various facets of job satisfaction. The study reports  
that when a marked decline in commitment starts to  
occur it is probably signalling a volunatry termination  
on the part of that employee. The authors suggest that  
with an "early warning system" employing commitment  
data, organizations may be able to take steps to retain  
some of their employees who would otherwise leave.
Steers [1977] examined the antecedents and  
outcomes of commitment and found a positive  
relationship between commitment and the desire and  
intention to remain with the organization as well as an  
inverse relationship to actual turnover. Commitment  
was also found to be significantly related to some of  
the performance measures such as quantity of work and  
promotion readiness but unrelated to the overall  
performance measure.
Page 38
Angle and Perry [1981] gathered objective
performance measures and commitment data from a large  
metropolitan bus service. They found the two objective  
measures- the operating expense measures to be
unrelated to commitment. However, organizatinal  
commitment was significantly related to organizational  
adaptibilty. Angle and Perry [1981] conclude that any  
impact of employee commitment may depend on the  
specific behaviors to which the employee is committed  
and the effects of such behaviors on organizational  
outcomes, thus the limited relationship between  
commitment and performance.
In a  study of re-enlistment behavior among  
National Guardsmen, H o r n  et al [1979] found that  
organizational commitment was a better predictor of  
intention to re-enlist and actual re-enlistment  
behavior than the linear sum of the Job Descriptive  
Index ( JDI)  [Smith et al, 1969] job satisfaction  
scores. However satisfaction with the work itself
predicted turnover almost as well as commitment.
An excellent review of the literature on  
commitment by Mowday et al [1982] argues that  
organizational commitment is an important variable as  
it has been shown to relate to turnover,tardiness,  
absenteeism, tenure, and job performance. The strength  
of these relationships vary considerably however.  
Mowday et al [1982] report that several studies at the
Page 39
individual and group level found few significant  
correlations between performance and commitment. In  
general, according to the Mowday et al review [1982]
the strongest support exists for a relationship between  
commitment and turnover. They report that several  
studies including two longitudinal designs have found a  
consistent and strong relationship between commitment  
and turnover.
2.4.2 Antecedents of Commitment
Attempting to uncover the antecedents and outcomes  
of organizational commitment, Steers [1977] found
personal characteristics, job characteristics, and work  
experience to be related to commitment. In particular,  
five antecedent variables were identified as positively  
impacting commitment: need for achievement, positive
group attitudes toward the organization, organizational  
dependability, personal importance to the organization  
and task identity; a sixth variable, education, was  
inversely related. Some support, though weak, was
found for a relationship between commitment and  
opportunities for optional interaction, age, met
expectations, and feedback.
Page 40
Kidron's [1978] study reported significant
positive associations between age, tenure, income and  
conunitment.  Data concerning task characteristics and  
demographics did not reveal consistent significant
relationships however. Angle and Perry [1981] found  
commitment to be positively correlated with age and
female gender and negatively related to educational  
level.
Stevens, Beyer, and Trice [1978], employing the  
exchange based view of commitment found work overload,  
attitudes toward change and years in current position  
all to be significant negative antecedents of  
commitment. Additionally, the reported years in the  
organization, job involvement, and skill level are all  
positive antecedents of commitment. In general  
however. Steers et al [1978] found the role-related  
factors to be the most important predictors of  
organizational commitment. Work overload had the most  
significant negative influence on commitment.
Morris and Sherman [1981] examined the  
relationship of age, education, sense of competence,  
role conflict, role ambiguity, initiating structure and  
leader consideration with commitment. Sense of  
competence, initiating structure, age and consideration  
all are positive predictors of commitment while role  
conflict and education are negative predictors. Role  
ambiguity did not significantly relate to commitment.
Page 41
Finally, Morris and Sherman examined the extent to  
which job level, job focus and organizational
membership moderated these relationships; they  
reported no effects of these variables on the seven
predictor variables.
Looking at the antecedents of organizational
commitment, Brief and Aldag [1980] predicted that job  
satisfaction would lead to organizational commitment.  
Their study found that satisfaction with the work
itself, supervision, promotion opportunities, and  
co-workers are positively related to organizational  
commitment, as are age and Protestant work ethic.  
Family care responsibility and education are negatively  
related. They reported the strongest affective  
correlate of organizational commitment was satisfaction  
with the work itself.
Mowday et al [1982] codified much of the  
literature on commitment and concluded that its  
antecedents can be grouped into four categories:  
personal characteristics, job or role related  
characteristics,  work experience, and structural  
characteristics. The following summary of the findings  
regarding each of these four categories based on the  
Mowday et al [1982} review of the empirical literature  
is presented below:
Page 42
1} The personal characteristics studied included  
age, tenure, education, gender, race, and personality  
factors. Age and tenure are found to relate positively  
to commitment but may not be direct correlates of  
commitment. Education, with some inconsistent  
findings, is inversely related to commitment. Women  
tended to be more committed than men. And finally,  
achievement motivation, sense of competence, higher  
order needs, and strong personal work ethic are  
reported to positively relate to commitment.
2) Job scope or challenge, a job related  
characteristic, is reported to positively relate to  
commitment. Several studies of role conflict and role  
ambiguity reported that role conflict negatively  
impacted commitment with mixed results regarding  
ambiguity.
3) Structural characteristics such as size, union  
presence, span of control, and centralization of  
authority are among the variables investigated. In  
general, size, organizational level and span are not  
related to commitment. Formalization,
decentralization, functional dependence, and worker  
ownership all impact organizational commitment.
4) Of the work experience correlates, studies  
report that the extent to which employees felt the  
organization could be counted on, the employees’
Page 43
feelings of personal importance to the organization,  
the extent to which employees' expectations are met,  
positive attitudes toward the organization, perceived  
pay equity, and personal norms of hard work all relate  
positively to commitment.
2.5 Turnover
Turnover is defined as the degree of individual  
movement across the membership boundary of a social  
system [Price,1977]. More specifically, employee  
turnover is the cessation of membership in an  
organization by an individual who receives monetary  
compensation from the organization [Mobley,1982].  
Cessation of membership is either voluntary or  
involuntary.
Voluntary turnover is a significant problem facing  
MIS departments [Miller,1980] with the average rate  
running as high as 20% [Gray, 1982]. Indeed, even in  
the recession year of 1983 a  number of the study  
companies reported that ISDP turnover was near or above  
20%. The importance of the ISDP turnover problem is  
also evidenced by turnover being named a critical issue  
by the Society for Information Management and is  
further reflected in the relative ease by which this  
researcher was granted access to ISDP within several  
organizations. ISDP turnover is a time-consuming and
Page 44
costly issue with which IS management must grapple.
Given the importance of turnover and the current  
turnover problem facing the IS profession, it is  
suprising that only a handful of studies have explored  
turnover and its antecedents among DP professionals.  
The most comprehensive of these is a study by Bartol  
[1983]. Bartol explored the effects of
professionalism, professional reward criteria, job  
satisfaction and organizational commitment on actual  
turnover among DP professionals. Job satisfaction and  
organizational commitment are found to have the most  
significant direct effect on DP turnover. Professional  
reward criteria also have a significant, though more  
moderate, direct effect on turnover with an indirect  
effect on turnover via satisfaction and commitment.  
While the professionalism measure has no direct effect  
it has a modest negative effect on turnover via the  
satisfaction and reward variables. The findings of  
Bartol are in agreement with a majority of the  
organizational behavior findings which conclude that  
job satisfaction and organizational commitment are two  
of the prime determinants of turnover behavior.
The importance of job satisfaction as a predictor  
of DP turnover is further substantiated by Awad [1977],  
Awad reports that while adverse economic conditions can  
greatly reduce the likelihood that dissatisfied DP  
personnel will leave, the personnel who did leave all
Page 45
had significantly lower satisfaction scores than  
stayers.
Another study exploring the antecedents of  
turnover among DP personnel conducted by Taylor and  
Tanniru [1981] found that organizational commitment is  
a very important variable in reducing turnover for  
individuals who had a number of alternative job offers.  
Additionally, satisfaction with pay and satisfaction  
with the work itself are found to be both significantly  
and negatively ’elated to turnover. The authors are  
unable to find any relationship between computer system  
features and turnover.
Cournoyer [1983] was able to account for 28% of  
the variance in programmer turnover using five  
predictor variables. Having received a promotion in  
the last year, actual salary, being in the upper  
quartile of the salary range, occupational level, and  
organizational tenure all are significant negative  
predictors of programmer turnover. When Cournoyer  
conducted a similar analysis on systems analysts  
however, he was able to explain only 7% of the variance  
in turnover. He found that a promotion in the last  
year and salary are both negative predictors of analyst  
turnover. Additionally, he found that the career stage  
also has a significant impact on turnover. Junior  
analysts are less likely to leave while senior analysts  
are more likely to leave.
Page 46
In sharp contrast to the paucity of MIS turnover  
research over 1,000 behavioral or organizational  
studies on turnover have been conducted. During the  
past 25 years at least thirteen review articles on  
turnover have appeared identifying job satisfaction,  
organizational commitment, job attitudes, demographic  
variables, availability of alternative jobs, and  
behavioral intentions as key determinants of turnover  
[Arnold and Feldman, 1982]. In general, turnover is  
thought to be a function of negative job attitudes  
combined with an ability to secure employment elsewhere  
[Steers and Mowday, 1981],
While economics play an important role in  
determining the supply of alternative jobs and thus can  
enhance or reduce an individual's ability to secure  
alternative employment some people will leave even when  
alternative jobs are not available. Additionally,  
Steers and Mowday [1981] report that if an individual  
has few or no alternative job opportunities, he or she  
may be less likely to quit but may engage in other  
forms of withdrawal behaviors. These alternative  
behaviors include absenteeism, drug abuse, alcoholism,  
sabotage and work slowdowns. Therefore, it can be  
concluded that even if economic conditions limit actual  
turnover behavior an understanding of the antecedents  
of turnover is important as these variables can lead to  
a number of organizationally dysfunctional outcomes
Page 47
when actual turnover is not economically feasible.
2.5.1 Antecedents of Turnover
Steers and Mowday [1981] posit that poor job  
attitudes may cause an individual to engage in efforts  
to change his or her current situation either by  
leaving or transferring. This belief is substantiated  
by empirical work [e.g. Jamal, 1981] that found  
reduced job satisfaction and reduced organizational  
commitment lead to intentions to leave.
Arnold and Feldman [1982] conducted a multivariate  
analysis of the determinants of turnover and found  
intention to search for a new position, organizational  
tenure, age, job satisfaction, organizational  
commitment, and perceived job security as all having  
significant relationships with turnover. In a proposed  
model of turnover and its antecedents developed by  
Arnold and Feldman, age, job satisfaction, tenure, and  
organizational commitment, all have a direct impact on  
the intention to search for alternative positions.  
Intention to search, in turn, has a direct impact on  
turnover. Therefore, organizational commitment and job  
satisfaction, while important antecedent variables, are  
viewed as having only an indirect influence on  
turnover, acting solely via behavioral intentions.
Page 48
Muchinsky and Tuttle [1979] provide an excellent  
review of the empirical turnover literature. They  
found that personality differences have very marginal  
impacts on turnover and that the findings regarding  
intelligence, aptitude and ability are too diverse to  
be of use. Variables such as age and tenure are  
negatively related to turnover by most of the studies  
they reviewed. The studies reviewed also report that  
primary family care responsibity is positively related  
to turnover while being the primary wage earner is  
negatively related to turnover.
Nearly every study reviewed by Muchinsky and  
Tuttle reported a negative relationship between job  
satisfaction and turnover. Work unit size and task  
repetitiveness both positively relate to turnover. Job  
autonomy, recognition and people-oriented leadership  
are all negatively associated with turnover while  
production oriented leadership is positively correlated  
with turnover. Realistic employement expectations are  
also found to decrease turnover. Both behavioral  
intentions such as intention to quit and organizational  
commitment are found to be good predictors of turnover.  
Commitment is found to be a better predictor of  
turnover than job satisfaction.
Page 49
Mobley’s [1982] review of the literature related  
turnover to a number of organizational, individual, end  
integrative (both individual and organizational)  
variables. A summary of the review findings follows:
1) The only strong generalization regarding  
organizational variables is that turnover is higher in  
lower paying industries. There is evidence however,  
that turnover is positively associated with large work  
groups, low skilled jobs, routinization, low  
supervisory consideration, high centralization, low  
integration and low communication.
2) With regard to individual variables, age and  
tenure are strongly and negatively associated with  
turnover.
3)Mobley reported overall job satisfaction, which  
he terms an integrative variable, is strongly and  
negatively correlated with turnover. Other integrative  
variables such as availability of attractive  
alternative jobs, career expectations, and the relative  
importance of non-work values also affect turnover.  
Satisfaction with pay, promotion, supervision,  
coworkers, and working conditions are correlated,  
though less consistently, with turnover. Additionally,  
strong evidence exists that organizational commitment  
is related to turnover and is one of the most important  
individual level determinants. The findings of a
Page 50
relationship between job stress, expectations of  
finding another job and turnover is weak and  
inconclusive. Finally, the individual's intention to  
quit or stay has been shown to be one of the best  
predictors of turnover. Turnover is also positively  
related to role ambiguity and role conflict.
j
2.5.2 Outcomes of Turnover
The outcomes of voluntary turnover are both  
negative and positive. Mobley [1982] identifies a  
number of possible positive outcomes including infusion  
of new knowledge and better career enhancement for the  
leaving employee. Both Mobley [1982] and Price [1977]  
argue that if the leaving employee is a poor performer  
then his departure will have positive effects for the  
department. The negative effects of turnover are  
described extensively elsewhere in this document and  
include the expense and time required to replace an  
employee,
2.6 Plan of Attack
In general, the literature regarding boundary  
spanning, role conflict, role ambiguity, job  
satisfaction, commitment, and turnover suggests these  
varibles are all interrelated having both direct and
Page 51
indirect effects. However a number of problems exist  
with the current literature and will be addressed by  
this study.
First, the concept of role ambiguity will be  
expanded. Work conducted by Schuler et al [1982]  
suggests that the current definition of role ambiguity  
is limited; they argue for an extension of the concept  
to include role, task, and reward ambiguity. They  
state: Role ambiguity includes the goals, objectives,
performance standards and levels of authority and  
responsibility. Task ambiguity involves the tasks to  
be performed and how to perform them. Reward ambiguity  
includes what rewards exist for what behaviors.
This expanded definition of ambiguity is a more  
precise definition of the phenomena of interest and may  
help explain some of the inconsistencies surrounding  
the findings with regard to role ambiguity.
Second, it has been stated that DP personnel are  
often more committed to their technology than the  
organization [Martorelli, 1982]. If this is indeed  
true then commitment as it is currently defined may be  
too narrow. The definition of commitment, therefore,  
will be expanded beyond the organization to include the  
department. It is possible that DP personnel,  
particularly those who are entirely internal to the DP  
department may be significantly committed to the
Page 52
department but not the organization.
Third, the behavioral literature [e.g. Morris and  
Koch, 1979] highlights the need to look beyond simple  
correlations and develop causal models to fully  
understand the impacts of role variables on job  
outcomes. Many of the MIS studies concentrate on only  
one outcome variable [Bostrom, 1980;Goidstein, 1982]  
and fail to develop causal models [Bostrom, 1980]  
limiting our understanding of this complex phenomena.  
The development of a causal model with regards to ISDP  
turnover and multivariate analysis is an important aim  
of this research.
Fourth, turnover will be measured via intention to  
quit. The decision to use an intention to quit measure  
was made for several reasons. First, the time between  
the administration of the survey and the gathering of  
actual turnover data is relatively brief:  
approximately three to six months. This interval may  
be inadequate. One company indicated voluntary  
turnover occurs only in January and Februrary due to  
their bonus system. Intention to quit may thus be a  
better measure for the purposes of this study. A  
follow up study to assess the actual turnover behavior  
of the subjects over several time periods is planned  
but is beyond the scope of this thesis. Second, given  
the poor economic climate at the time of this study  
there is concern that actual turnover may be very low
Page 53
due to the unavailability of alternative positions.  
Thus, intention to quit was felt to be a superior  
measure to turnover for the purposes of this study.  
Additionally intention to quit has been demonstrated to  
be strongly related to turnover [Mobley et al, 1982]  
and is therefore an appropriate surrogate measure given  
the constraints of the study. The concept of intention  
to quit as a surrogate measure for turnover will be  
supplemented by an intention to transfer measure. If  
an employee leaves the department by transferring to a  
new department that employee must still be replaced and  
is still a cost to that department. It is appropriate,  
therefore, to measure both intention to quit and  
intention to transfer.
Finally, a number of the MIS studies [Courveyer,  
1983;Goldstein, 1982; Bostrom, 1980] examine only one  
company greatly reducing the generalizabi1ity of their  
findings. This study will employ a multiple  
organization design to assure generalizability of the  
findings across organizations.
Page 54
CHAPTER THREE
3.0 Model and Hypotheses
3.1 The Causal Model
Building upon the literature presented in chapter  
2  the model in figure 3.0 is proposed. While many of  
the linkages between the variables in the model have  
been examined by prior studies -the full model as  
presented in figure 3.0 is unique to this study. The  
model is intended to explain the process whereby ISDP  
develop intentions to leave the IS department.  
However, the model in figure 3.0 could be applied to  
any occupational group where boundary spanning plays an  
important role in their job assignments and where role  
conflict and ambiguity are expected to be severe  
problems either due to the nature of the job or because  
of the personality characteristics of the employees.
The building of causal models such as the one in  
figure 3.0 is important in order to understand the  
dynamics by which ISDP develop intentions to leave.  
Once this process is understood strategies to reduce  
turnover can be developed. Detailed explanation and
Page 55
supporting literature for each hypothesized linkage is  
presented next.
Page 56
Vi 03 
13 O  P  c
( f tc
U )
o3  3  3  O ' H* P>
O
O s
o,
O sW  -i-v n  *
c t
O
Page 57
HI: The greater the boundary spanning
activities ISDP are engaged in, the greater  
their intentions to leave.
As ISDP span boundaries they are exposed to a  
greater number of alternative job opportunities both  
within and without the organization. Increased  
awareness of alternative employment opportunities  
should also enhance ISDP intentions to leave either by  
quitting and accepting a position in another  
organization or by transferring to another department  
where they are known due to boundary spanning  
activities. HI is also based on the work of Adams  
[1976] which suggests that boundary spanning incumbents  
experience weakened organizational bonds (e.g.  
commitment) due to their physical and psychological  
distance from other organizational members and thus  
should be linked to intention to leave.
H2:  The greater the boundary spanning
activities ISDP engage in, the greater their  
job satisfaction.
Prior research [Miles, 1980b; Keller and Holland,  
1975; Keller et al, 1976] has reported a positive  
relationship between boundary spanning activities and  
job satisfaction. The hypothesized positive
relationship is based partly on the belief that  
boundary spanners have inherently more interesting work  
and thus should be more satisfied.
H3: The greater the boundary spanning
activities ISDP engage in, the greater their  
role conflict.
Page 58
H3a: The greater the boundary spanning
activities ISDP engage in, the greater their  
role ambiguity.
Boundary spanners often assume the role of change  
agent attempting to influence the behavior of  
individuals whose preferences may differ; this can  
lead to role conflict for the change agent [Adams,  
1976]. Keller and Holland [1975] posit that  
conflicting and misunderstood expectations for role  
performance are often sent to boundary spanners.  
Additionally, Keller et al [1976] state that since both  
internal and external role senders have expectations  
for boundary spanners these expectations may be  
inconsistent and result in role conflict or be vague  
and unclear resulting in role ambiguity. A large body  
of empirical work exists substantiating the position  
that boundary spanning activities lead to role conflict  
[Miles, 1976; Kahn et al, 1964; Miles and Perrault,  
1976; Miles, 1980b].
H4: The greater the boundary spanning
activites ISDP are engaged in, the less their  
feelings of commitment to the department and  
organizat ion.
Similar to HI, this hypothesis is based on the  
work of Adams [1976] which argues that boundary  
spanners experience weakened organizational linkages.  
Commitment is one form of linkage. Therefore, the more  
boundary spanning activities the weaker the  
organizational linkages and the individual's
Page 59
commitment.
H5: The greater the ISDP experience of
role conflict, the less their job  
sat isfaction.
H5a: The greater the ISDP experience of
role ambiguity, the less their job  
satisfaction.
Dubinsky and Mattson [1979] report that the  
preponderance of the evidence indicates quite clearly  
that role conflict is negatively related to job  
satisfaction. This finding is further punctuated by  
the work of Morris and Koch [1979] and Van Sell et al  
[1981], Additionally, two MIS studies [Bostrom, 1980;  
Goldstein, 1982] found clear evidence of a relationship  
between DP personnel role conflict and ambiguity and  
job dissatisfaction.
H6: The greater the ISDP role conflict,
the greater their intention to leave.
H6a: The greater the ISDP role
ambiguity, the greater their intention to  
leave.
It is expected that as ISDP experience role
conflict and ambiguity they will seek to reduce this by
withdrawing. Two of the primary withdrawl mechanisms  
are transferring to a new department or leaving the  
organization. This position is supported by the work  
of Miles [1976] which found that both role conflict and  
role ambiguity are directly related to the propensity  
to leave the organization.
Page 60
In their review of the literature, Van Sell et al  
[1981] report that while inconsistent findings exist,  
role conflict and role ambiguity appear to be  
positively related to an individual’s propensity to  
leave the organization. Finally, Mobley's [1982] 1982
review of the literature reports that intention to quit  
was positively related to role ambiguity and role  
conflict.
H7:  The greater the ISDP role conflict,
the less their commitment.
H7a: The greater the ISDP role
ambiguity, the less their commitment.
Just as role conflict and ambiguity enhances an  
individual's intention to leave, it is expected that  
role conflict and ambiguity will also weaken an  
individual's attachment to either his department or  
organization, and this should result in reduced  
commitment. The findings of Dubinsky and Mattson  
[1979] corroborate H7; they report that both role  
conflict and role ambiguity are negatively associated  
with organizational commitment. Morris and Koch  
[1979], Bedeian and Armenakis [1981], Morris and  
Sherman [1981], Mowday et al [1982] and Van Sell et al  
[1981] all found role conflict and ambiguity to be a  
significant and important detractor of organizational  
commitment.
H8:  The greater the ISDP job
satisfaction, the less their intentions to  
leave.
Page 61
Jamal [1981] found that poor job attitudes such as  
job dissatisfaction are related to increased intention  
to leave. Arnold and Fielder [1982], employing a  
multivariate analysis, found that job satisfaction has  
a direct and inverse relationship with intention to  
search for alternative positions. Similarly, Steers  
and Mowday [1981] conclude that reduced job  
satisfaction enhances an individual's intention to  
leave by either transferring to a new department or  
leaving the organization. In general, strong support  
exists for this hypothesized relationship.
H9: The greater the ISDP job
satisfaction, the greater their commitment.
It is believed that job satisfaction leads to  
commitment for several reasons. First it has been  
argued that commitment is a more global and stable  
linkage between the organization and the individual,  
less likely to fluctuate as rapidily as satisfaction  
[Porter, Crampton and Smith, 1976], Second, Porter,  
Crampton and Smith [1976] believe that organizational  
commitment includes job satisfaction as a component.  
Finally, Brief and Aldag [1980] view the facets of job  
satisfaction- work, promotions, supervision, people and  
pay- as antecedents of commitment. Brief and Aldag's  
empirical results are supportive of this view.
H10: The greater the ISDP commitment,
the less their intentions to leave.
Page 62
This hypothesis is consistent with the literature  
that views organizational commitment as an  
organizational linkage. The more strongly linked an  
individual is to an organization the less likely that  
individual will plan to leave that organization. This  
view is strongly supported by the empirical literature  
[Morris and Sherman, 1981; Steers, 1977; H o rn et al,  
1979; Steers and Mowday, 1981; Arnold and Feldman,  
19821 .
3.2 Individual Differences
The principal concern of this study is the impact  
of role variables; boundary spanning, role conflict  
and role ambiguity on individual and organizational  
work related outcomes such as job satisfaction,  
commitment, and intention to leave. However, it is  
known that individual differences can also predict  
work-related outcomes. For example, Abdel-Halim [1980]  
found highly educted people to be more satisfied with  
their jobs under conditions of high role conflict than  
their less educated counterparts. Education level, on  
the other hand, is inversely related to commitment  
[Steers, 1977; Angle and Perry, 1981]. Older workers  
tend to be more committed than younger workers [Kidron,  
1978;Angle and Perry; Morris and Sherman, 1981]. Age  
is also inversely related to intention to search for a
Page 63
new job [Arnold and Feldman, 1982; Muchinisky and  
Tuttle, 1979] and actual turnover [Mobley, 1982].  
Tenure in the organization has been found to be  
positively related to commitment [Kidron, 1978;  
Stevens, Beyers, and Trice, 1978] and negatively  
related to turnover [Mobley, 1982].
To determine the impact of individual differences
of ISDP such as age, education level, tenure, years of
DP experience, and gender on job satisfaction,
commitment and intention to leave the following
relationships are hypothesized based on the prior
empirical research.
Ha; Age will be positively related to
ISDP job satisfaction.
Hal; Age will be positively related to  
ISDP commitment.
Hb; Age will be negatively related to
ISDP intention to leave.
He; Organizational tenure will be
positively related to ISDP job satisfaction.
Hcl: Organizational tenure will be
positively related to ISDP commitment.
Hd: Organizational tenure will be
negatively related to ISDP intention to  
leave.
He: Educational level will be
negatively related to ISDP job satisfaction.
Hel: Educational level will be
negatively related to ISDP commitment.
Page 64
H f :  Educational level will be
positively related to ISDP intention to  
leave.
Hf is expected because job satisfaction and  
commitment are both inversely related to intention to  
quit and are also expected to be negatively related to  
education level.
Hg; Years of ISDP experience will be  
positively related to ISDP job satisfaction.
Hgl: Years of ISDP experience will be
positively related to ISDP commitment.
Hh: Years of ISDP experience will be
negatively related to ISDP intention to
leave.
Hypotheses g, gl and h are based on the belief  
that an individual not well suited for and unhappy in
DP would self-select out.
3.3 Task Differences
Randolph and Posner [1981] argue that when  
examining role-related variables and their consequences  
it is important to examine task characteristics,  
particularily task differences. Indeed, given the  
different tasks involved in developing and implementing  
a system it is expected that task differences will have  
a significant effect on iSDP's experience of role  
characteristics and outcomes. The two general
Page 65
categories of tasks and duties involved in the design,  
development and implementation of a system are systems  
analysis and programming. The following descriptions  
of systems analysis and programming tasks are described  
by Gray [1982] and highlight explicit task differences.
Systems Analysis: Confers
with users to define and formulate  
logical statements of business  
problems and devise procedures for  
solutions through the use of DP  
systems.
Applications Programming:
Develops, designs, and prepares  
computer programs.
Murach [1977] describes the systems analyst as  
being able to communicate and get information from  
employees at all levels and from various departments of  
the organization. The analyst, he states, must be  
familiar with computer equipment and programming and be  
able to develop plans, solutions and systems from the  
information gathered. The programmer Murach [1977]  
describes as the individual who writes the computer  
code, that is the sequence of computer instructions  
required to transform the input into output. The  
programmer must test the program to assure it is  
functioning properly and prepare documentation for the
Page 66
program. The programmer is described as interacting  
primarily with personnel internal to the MIS  
department.
Further highlighting the differences between  
analyst and programming duties are the following two  
studies. Benbasat,  Dexter and Mantha [1980] examined  
the skills that information systems managers and  
systems analysts identified as important to their jobs.  
The results of the study indicated that systems  
analysts view organizational skills as more important  
than specialist (technical) skills. The organizational  
skills were defined as the following: the analysts'
ability to communicate and interact with  
non-computer-oriented people, their ability to identify  
the key issues and problems of a functional area, and  
the ability to understand the impact of computers on  
industrial, clerical, and managerial positions. The  
specialist skills included the systems analysts'  
competence in preparing user documentation for a given  
system, the capacity to develop structured programs,  
and competence in formulating and solving complex  
simulation models.
In a related study, Cheney and Lyons [1980] asked  
IS managers to rank the importance of various skills  
required of programmers, analysts, and data processing  
managers. The top five skills required of systems  
analysts and programmers are reproduced in figure 3.1.
Page 67
t o
+ -jT 3  ft>,C 0 )k i d  C o  o o C  
P  £ 0 ‘H  O 
C ) P i -P U ^  4> 03  TD+1  S f i  
O 3  C C J  
Pj f t  O  -F + - >  ' H  t f J  C O C > %H  U  M  tOC OB0 1  t f l P  O C O  - H >>Pc £ b f l C / 1  C Ob O o e* H * H  * H  © b 0  Ut o -paw £ U4 ) < d  1 W ) ■ H  PQ a o f  t d P  W• H  ^ 3 < 0 e r f0> r- 4 bD U f l £ Ui —t f t  o c 4 1  t O* H f t  U a s f t f tft o  o
p aoa
E - *
9 5o
Puo
8a«of t
in ^ E  L O WEh h5 C Q  < C H S 5t o  < cT J> »  cC Opf t0 )^  ( f l  f i  o  o o £P  01 'H Qo  ^+»o0  0 )  C r ft3  -h 6  e o £ E a>  
(h ft O  P + ?  g  «h m 
£  O  C  >>  
H U H MCt k O* r (0 1a )Q
e 0 ) 
p  CQ > » 
C OcW )* H
010 )a
f tnco
*p-l
p  p
cd to £  
H S 0 ) a )  u e  
05 P  ft  W OC
£  C O  03s  >
0 £ 01 W<HQ
C O<
. - 3
wto£<0 5
0 5p aE - i
Z  C O  
W  05  o p a
« <  < Je *  a <  < a  sT 3 > l  Ct opf ta ?U e r f  £ O  O  o £ 
p  01 -h  a  O P i  P  O  0 4 >  t O  _
*0 P  E  eO 3 H ®  b f t  O P  
-p  B 'h  w 
C o  £  >»
M O H W01
PoD
c o(BM U O f t
S’ r H W•H O  S C  U H I
5 £ + *S 3  E l  ( 0( H O  > iPkomc " \
t o1 £a oO U >i * HU  0 1  P P  PP  - H c d  t o  £t £ <  C > H  B ( Dc 0 1 * H o >  c i  6* H  O  P f t  P  f t> U t o  o0 ^ 0 £ > > r H£ o i  - o c d  v i  o iftP o s _ >B 2 U 0 £ 0 >M  f t  f t ft*H Q
cBC
Software PacK- 5  '  Applications 5  Database  
a g e  Analysis Programming Management
Languages Systems
Page 68
These two studies illustrate the skill differences  
required of the analyst and programmer. The analyst  
works with both technically naive users and computer  
department specialists and as such needs strong human  
relations skills, an understanding of user area needs,  
and good technical skills. It has been argued  
[Dearden,1972] that such an individual, expert in all  
these areas would be a "superman" and cannot exist.  
Nevertheless, the systems analyst requires both user  
and technical orientations. The programmer, on the  
other hand, needs only a strong technical orientation  
to successfully carry out his/her job duties. While  
most MIS literature [Murach, 1977; Cheney and Lyons,  
1980] discusses individuals as being either systems  
analysts or applications programmers it is recognized  
that few individuals are employed solely as either  
analysts or programmers. Rather, most systems  
positions involve some combination of both tasks.  
Subjects in the study included individuals with only  
analytic tasks, only programming tasks, and  
combinations of both tasks. It is expected that  
individuals will report different magnitudes of role  
characteristics and work outcomes dependent upon their  
mix of tasks and duties. The following hypotheses  
examine the consequences of different tasks on ISDP.
Haa: Individuals serving primarily as  
systems analysts will exhibit greater  
boundary spanning characteristics than
individuals serving primarily as programmers.
Page 69
Due to the expected boundary spanning nature of  
the systems analyst positions and the correlation found  
in the literature between boundary spanning and role  
conflict, it is expected that:
Hbb: Individuals serving primarily as
systems analysts will perceive more role  
conflict to be associated with their jobs  
than will individuals serving primarily as  
programmers.
Additionally, the process of designing information  
systems is, at least in part, an art. Information is  
vague regarding the methods for analyzing systems and  
the consequences of design activities are often  
uncertain. Programmers experience little ambiguity  
regarding either the methods of performing or the  
consequences of their tasks. Therefore it is expected  
that:
Hcc: Individuals serving primarily as
systems analysts will perceive more role  
ambiguity than will individuals serving  
primarily as programmers.
Boundary spanning characteristics have been found  
to relate negatively to organizational commitment, and  
as analysts are expected to exhibit more boundary  
spanning characteristics it is hypothesized that:
Hdd: Individuals serving primarily as
systems analysts will indicate less
commitment than individuals serving primarily
as programmers.
Hee: Individuals serving primarily as
systems analysts will intend to leave more  
frequently than individuals serving primarily  
as programmers.
Page 70
CHAPTER FOUR
4.0 Methodology
This chapter is divided into five sections. The  
first section describes the various measures that are  
used, the process of selecting or developing the  
measures, and how each measure is scored. Section two  
presents the ordering of the measures on the survey  
instrument. Section three presents the results of the  
pre-test. Section four describes the companies and  
subjects that participated in the study, while section  
five outlines the actual administration of the  
questionnaire.
4.1 The Measures
In order to test the model and hypotheses,  
information regarding a number of variables was  
gathered. The following sections detail the  
development and adaptation of the various measures  
employed by this study.
Page 71
4.1.1 Boundary Spanning
Only two measures of boundary spanning activities  
have been developed [Keller et al, 1976; Miles and  
Perrault, 1976]. The first is a measure of the  
informational aspects of boundary spanning and is used  
by Keller [1978] and Keller et al [1976]. This scale  
measures the extent to which the individual has served  
as an information source for other members of the  
organization. This measure ignores, however, the  
representational aspects of boundary spanning greatly  
limiting its utility. The representational aspect  
includes the extent to which an individual serves as a  
representative of his or her department to other  
departments or organizations. These are expected to be  
duties particularly relevant to ISDP. Therefore, this  
measure of boundary spanning is not acceptable for the  
purposes of this study.
The second measure, developed by Miles and  
Perrault [1976], is used to investigate the boundary  
spanning activities of laboratory research and  
development personnel. This measure investigates  
several aspects of boundary spanning, including  
representational, and is superior to the Keller  
measure. This measure however, was specifically worded  
for laboratory personnel making it necessary to  
generalize the context of the questionnaire. The  
following process was employed to adapt the Miles and
Page 72
Perrault measure.
1) All references to the laboratory setting were  
replaced with non-situation specific terminology. For  
example, "laboratory/directorate" was replaced by  
"department".
2) The reworded items were reviewed for face  
validity by an expert familiar with the boundary  
spanning concept. Minor changes were made to a few of  
the items.
3) The items were reviewed by two MIS experts for  
their relevancy to the DP environment.
4) Minor changes were made to the items based on  
the comments of the MIS experts. These changes were  
reviewed by the expert familiar with boundary spanning  
and deemed acceptable. This process should insure the  
items are construct valid with meaning for ISDP and the  
DP environment. The Miles and Perrault items along  
with the reworded items used by this study are  
presented in table 4.0.
Page 7
BOUNDARY SPANNING ITEMS
MILES AND PERREAULTi
Represent your directorate/ 
laboratory to outsiders.
Review plans with agencies 
outside the laboratory.
Travel at least 30 days per 
year as a representative 
of your organization.
Inspect or review projects 
under contract.
Integrate or coordinate 
interdependent activities 
of others.
Prepare reports from govern­
mental agencies outside 
the laboratory.
Request performance obliga­
tions from persons outside 
your immediate unit.
Prepare and give several 
briefings per month.
Write or dictate at least 
10 letters per month.
Prepare contracts for approval 
by a superior.
Act as a liaison with other 
units of the organization.REWORDEDi
Represent my department or 
work group to outsiders.
Review plans with groups or 
individuals who are not 
members of my department.
Travel as a representative 
of my department or 
organization.
Inspect or view projects 
which are under contract 
to outside groups.
Dropped from measure as one 
expert objected to this 
item.
Prepare reports for other 
departments or organiza­
tions .
Depend on individuals in 
other departments or 
organizations to complete 
tasks which arB necessary 
for the completion of my 
job.
Prepare and give several 
presentations or briefing 
per month.
Write or dictate at least 
10 letters per month.
Prepare contracts or pro­
posals (such as with 
computer vendors) for 
approval by a superior.
Act as a liaison with other 
departments.
Table 4.0
Page 74
The boundary spanning questionnaire is scored by
summing the ten items. Each item is scored on a five
point scale and uses the anchors "not at all a part of  
my job" to "a significant part of my job" developed by  
Miles and Perrault.
4.1.2 Role Ambiguity and Role Conflict
Role ambiguity and role conflict were measured on  
the scales developed by Rizzo et al [1970], These  
scales have been shown to exhibit sound psychometric  
properties such as validity and reliability [Schuler et  
al, 1977; House et al, forthcoming] and are standard  
measures of role ambiguity and role conflict. The use  
of standard measures allows the comparison of ISDP role  
conflict and role ambiguity scores to other  
occupational groups. This provides information  
regarding the comparative magnitude of the role  
conflict and role ambiguity problem for ISDP.
The Rizzo et al scale [1970] measures the role
incumbents' perceptions of ambiguity and conflict  
associated with their positions. Schuler et al [1982]  
suggest, however, that the current operationalization  
of role ambiguity is inadequate and argue for its  
extension to include reward and task ambiguity. Task  
ambiguity refers to the ambiguity associated with the  
tasks to be performed and how to perform them. Reward
Page 75
ambiguity refers to the ambiguity regarding what  
rewards exist for what behaviors [Schuler et al, 1982],  
The extended definition of ambiguity to include role,  
tasks and rewards is employed by this study.
The task and reward scales were built by  
decomposing Schuler's definition into several items for  
each of the two constructs. An expert familiar with  
the literature on role ambiguity reviewed the items and  
suggested certain modifications. The items were  
reworded and reviewed by Schuler for construct  
validity. Schuler's revisions were reviewed by the  
organizational expert and deemed acceptable. The items  
measuring the reward and task ambiguity constructs are  
presented in table 4.1.
Page 76
TABLE 4.1
Task items;
It is always clear to me what tasks I  must perform  
for my job.
The reason(s) why I  am suppose to perform each of  
the various parts of my job is very unclear to me.
It is always clear to me when I  am finished with  
a job task.
My job has a number of tasks associated with it that  
are very unclear or ambiguous.
It is always clear when I  should do each of the  
various parts of my job.
It is not at all clear to me how I  should perform  
my various job tasks.
Reward items:
I  understand what I  must do to get promoted.
I  do not know what it takes to get special or  
favored treatment in this department.
I  do not understand what I  must to get ahead in  
this department.
I  know what it takes to get rewarded in  
this department.
I  understand what I  must do to keep my job.
Page 77
Each of the two constructs is measured by multiple  
items to insure reliability of measurement and to allow  
calculation of reliability via Cronbach's alpha. A  
number of the items are reverse coded. Scoring of the  
role conflict and role ambiguity variables is on a  
seven point scale with the anchors "very false" to  
"very true" used by Rizzo et al [1970]. The score for  
each scale- role conflict, role ambiguity, task  
ambiguity, and reward ambiguity- is the sum of the  
items comprising that scale. A new role ambiguity  
measure is computed by summing the averages of the  
role, task, and reward scales to adjust for the  
disparity in the numbers, of items used to measure each  
component,
4.1.3 Job Satisfaction
Two different measures of job satisfaction, the  
Minnesota Satisfaction Questionnaire (MSQ) [Weiss et  
al, 1967] and the Job Descriptive Index {JDI) [Smith et  
al, 1969], were reviewed for use in this study. Both  
are standard measures which allow the comparison of  
ISDP job satisfaction to other occupational groups.  
The JDI and MSQ both have lengthy histories of use and  
are shown to exhibit sound psychometric properties  
[Robinson et al, 1969; Weiss et al,1967] both measure  
several facets of job satisfaction a feature which  
allows for a more detailed understanding of the job
Page 78
aspects ISDP are satisfied or dissatisfied with.
After comparing the JDI and the MSQ, the JDI was  
chosen because the JDI was substantially shorter than  
the MSQ. As several measures were being included on  
one questionnaire particular importance was placed on  
limiting the length of each measure.
The JDI was scored in the standard fashion by  
assigning a 3  for each "Y" or yes response, a 1  for a
and a 0 for a "N" or no response. Each facet's  
score was the simple sum of the items comprising that  
facet while overall satisfaction was the sum of the  
five facet scores.
4.1.4 Commitment
Two types of psychological commitment are measured  
in this study: organizational and departmental.
Organizational commitment is measured via the
Organizational Commitment Questionnaire (OCQ) developed  
by Porter and Smith [Mowday et al, 1979]. Desirable  
psychometric data, that is strong reliability and
evidence of validity, is reported for this measure  
[Mowday et al, 1982]. However, the questionnaire  
purports to measure three dimensions which comprise
commitment. The multidimensionality of the
questionnaire along these three proposed factors has  
yet to be demonstrated. As a standard measure the OCQ
Page 79
allows the comparison of ISDP organizational commitment  
to other occupational groups. Unfortunately no  
standard measure of departmental commitment exists  
necessitating the development of such a scale.
To develop a measure of departmental commitment  
the OCQ was reworded by changing "organization" to  
"department" for each item. These items were reviewed  
for construct validity by an expert familiar with the  
literature on commitment and considered acceptable.  
However, in a test administration of the questionnaire  
(see section 4.3) the two test subjects indicated three  
of the items were confusing as worded. These items  
were reviewed and revised by the organizational expert.  
The original OCQ items and the adapted departmental  
items are presented in table 4.2.
Page 80
ORGANIZATIONAL AND DEPARTMENTAL COMMITMENT ITEMS
ORGANIZATIONAL ITEMi
I am willing to put in a great 
deal of effort beyond that 
normally expected in order to 
help this organization be 
successful.
I  talk up this organization 
to my friends as a great 
organization.
I feel very little loyalty to 
this organization.
I would accept almost any type 
of job assignment in order to 
keep working for this 
organization.
I find that my values and the 
organization's values are 
very similar.
I  am proud to tell others that 
I  am part of this organization.
I  could just as well be working 
for a different organization 
as long as the type of work 
were similar.DEPARTMENTAL ITEM:
I  am willing to put in a great 
deal of effort beyond that 
normally expected in order to 
help this department be 
successful.
I talk up this department to 
my friends as a great 
department.
I feel very little loyalty to 
this department.
I  would accept almost any type 
of job assignment in order to 
keep working for this 
department.
I  find that my values and the 
department's values are very 
similar.
I am proud to tell others that 
I am part of this department.
I  could just as well be working 
for a different department 
in this company as long as 
the type of work were similar.
This organization really in­
spires the very best in me 
in the way of job perfor­
mance .
It would take very little 
change in my present cir­
cumstances to cause me to 
leave this organization.This department really in­
spires the very best in me 
in the way of job perfor­
mance .
It would take very little 
change in my present cir­
cumstances to cause me to 
leave this department.
Table 4.2
Page 81
I  am extremely glad that I  
chose this organization to 
work for over others I  was 
considering at the time I  
joined.
There's not too much to be 
gained by sticking with this 
organization indefinitely.
Often, I find it difficult to 
agree with this organization's 
policies in important manners 
relating to its employees.
I  really care about the fate of 
this organization.
For me this is the best of all 
possible organizations for 
which to work.
Deciding to work for this 
organization was a definite 
mistake on my part.1 am extremely glad that I  
chose this department to 
work for over other employ­
ment opportunites I  was 
considering at the time I  
joined.
There's not too much to be 
gained by sticking with this 
department indefinitely.
Often, I  find it difficult to 
agree with this department's 
policies in important matters 
relating to its employees.
I really care about the fate of 
this department.
For me this is the best of all 
possible departments in this 
organization for which to 
work.
Deciding to work for this 
department was a definite 
mistake on my part.
Figure 4.2 Continued
Page 82
Each item was scored on a seven point scale using  
the anchors "strongly agree" to "strongly disagree"  
employed by Porter and Smith [Mowday et al, 1979].  
Both commitment scores were calculated by summing the  
fifteen items which comprised each scale. It was  
decided to combine the two commitment scores into an  
overall score by summing the thirty items. As the  
correlation between the department and organizational  
scores was .67 and significant at the .001 level this  
indicated the scores measured similar if not identical  
constructs, thus the combination of these scales was  
appropr iate.
4.1.5 Turnover
There are three types of turnover: involuntary
termination, voluntary termination, or transfer to a  
different department. This study focuses attention on  
only the latter two types of turnover. Turnover is  
measured via an individual's intention to leave.
Intention to leave has two facets: intention to
quit and intention to transfer. Intention to quit is  
measured via three items developed by Mobley et al  
[1978] and are combined to form one scale as discussed  
in Awal [1981]. Intention to transfer is adapted from  
the intention to quit measure. The relevant items are  
presented in table 4.3.
Page 83
Intention to quit:
How frequently do you think of quitting your job?
1  2  3  4 5
Never Constantly
I  intend to leave this organization.
1  2  3  4  5
Definitely Definitely
Not Yes
I  plan to search for another job.
1  2  3  4 5
Definitely Definitely
Not Yes
Intention to transfer:
How frequently do you think of transfering to a different  
department in this company?
1  2  3  4  5
Never Constantly
I  intend to transfer to another department within  
this company.
1  2  3  4 5
Definitely Definitely
Not Yes
I  plan to search for a job in another department of  
this company.
1  2 3  4 5
Definitely Definitely
Not Yes
TABLE 4.3
Page 84
A number of the study participants indicated,  
however, that their companies do not offer them  
opportunities for internal transfer. Therefore, the  
inclusion of the intention to transfer measure may be  
inappropriate for this study. To determine this, a  
variable which measured the number of departments which  
the employee perceived he/she could transfer to and  
still perform similar duties was examined. This  
variable revealed that one third of the companies had  
either none or very few perceived transfer  
possibilities. Therefore, it was decided to drop  
intention to transfer from this study.
4.1.6 Individual Differences
Information regarding age, sex, education,  
departmental tenure, organizational tenure, and years  
of DP experience was gathered. The scales are  
presented in table 4.3.1.
Age (check one)
 under 20 _ ________ _ _ _ _ 40-49
 20-29  50-59
 30-39 _ _ _ _ 60 or over
Education (check one)
 Some high school
 High School degree
 Technical school experience
 Some college experience
 College degree
 Some graduate work
 Master's or higher degree
Sex: Male  Female _ _ _ _
Years experience in EDP: _ _ _ _
Years with company: _ _ _ _
Years in current department: _ _ _ _
TABLE 4.3.1
Page 86
4.1.7 Job Tasks
To determine which of a variety of programming and  
systems development tasks an individual was engaged in,  
an unpublished measure developed by Zmud was used. To  
validate Zmud's measure it was compared against a  
review of the literature. The convergence between  
Zmud's programming items and the review was perfect.  
Tremendous overlap existed between the analytic  
literature review items and Zmud's items. Zmud's items  
were then reviewed by two MIS experts and deemed  
representative of ISDP job tasks. It was believed,  
therefore, that Zmud's items adequately represented the  
programming and analytic job duties and were adopted  
for use. The job duties items are presented below.
Programming duties:
Program design  
Program coding  
Program testing
Analytic duties:
Determine system requirements  
System design  
System  testing
Evaluate an operational program/system  
Evaluate system feasibility
To validate the job task items the development  
manager from the first study company was asked to  
identify which of the subjects were primarily
programmers, programmer/analysts, and systems analysts.
Page 87
This information was compared to the job task score  
derived from the Zmud items. The more negative the job  
task score the more programming the individual was  
engaged in while the more positive the the score the  
more analytic duties engaged in. The average score for  
those individuals (n=5) the manager identified as  
programmers was -2.1. The average score for  
programmer/analysts (n=ll) was -1.4, the score for  
senior programmer/analysts (n=6) was +.8 while the  
single systems analyst had a score of +2.1. The  
average job task score became more positive as  
individuals were identified by the manager as having  
more analytic tasks. This suggests Zmud's items were  
able to effectively discriminate between the different  
posit ions.
As boundary spanning was a type of job duty  
similar to programming and analysis all three types of  
job duties were placed in the same section and scored  
similarly. Each item was scored on a five point scale  
using the anchors "not at all a part of my job" to "a  
most significant part of my job". The programming duty  
score was the average of the three programming items  
while the analytic duty score was the average of the  
five items. Averages were used to keep the programming  
and analytic scores comparable in magnitude. Each  
individual had a score for programming duties and a  
score for analytic duties. These scores were used to
Page 88
compute a single score to classify the individual and  
is explained in chapter 5  section 5 .
4.2 Ordering of Measures
As several questionnaires were being combined to  
form one survey instrument, the ordering and placement  
of scales was an important issue. Scales that  
requested less sensitive information were placed first.  
The scales were ordered as follows:
1)Job Duties
2)Boundary Spanning Activities
3)Role Stress
4)Job Satisfaction
5)0rganizational Commitment
6)Departmental Commitment
7)Biographical and General Information
8 )Miscellaneous Data not part of this study
9)Intention to Leave
The boundary spanning and job duties scales  
required no subjective evaluation of the subject’s  
company or job thus these items were placed at the
Page 89
beginning of the survey. The role stress scale  
required the individual to respond to evaluative  
information regarding his/her job tasks; the job  
satisfaction measure asked questions regarding  
supervisors, co-workers, pay, the work and promotions  
and was considered to be more sensitive information  
than role stress. The organizational and departmental  
commitment measures request an individual to evaluate  
her/his company and departments and thus were placed  
after the satisfaction measures.
People who do not wish to be identified in a  
survey often will not provide biographical information.  
Therefore, the biographical and general information was  
placed following the commitment measures.
Several pages of the qiiestionnaire asked  
information regarding technology and project  
organization that was to be used by a later study and  
was not a part of this thesis. Information regarding  
intention to leave was placed near the end of the  
survey as intention to leave was the most sensitive  
information gathered.
Page 90
4.3 Pre-Test
To assess how clear the instructions and the  
wording of the items were, the questionnaire was  
pre-tested on two individuals. Since the goal of the  
pre-test was to evaluate the clarity of the instrument,  
two individuals with substantially different  
backgrounds were felt to be sufficient to assess this.  
One individual was 35 with substantial DP work  
experience while the other was 24 with little DP work  
experience. Both found the instructions clear;  
however, both noted that three of the departmental  
commitment items were vague. These items were revised  
as described in section 4.1.4. The complete survey  
instrument can be found in appendix A.
4.4 The Sample and Selection
A field study was considered to be the most  
feasible and economical method to investigate* the  
complex phenomena of interest. Sixteen companies,  
primarily from the metropolitan New York area, were  
contacted requesting their participation in the study.  
These companies comprised a convenience sample.
Each company received a letter explaining the  
requirements and benefits of participating in the  
study. A copy of the letter can be found in Appendix
Page 91
B. Followup telephone calls were made to each company  
and three companies were personally visited by the  
researcher to outline the study in detail. Of the  
sixteen companies, four declined to participate citing  
top management policy or poor timing due to heavy  
workloads. One company which had agreed to participate  
has yet to forward the necessary data. Two were  
eliminated from consideration as they had no ISDP or  
their systems development personnel were decentralized:
there were fewer than ten ISDP in a single work unit.
In total, nine companies participated in the study with  
data collected from 229 individuals. The nine
companies had each agreed to supply 30 individuals for  
a total of 270 subjects. However, due to vacations,  
illness and schedule conflicts not all thirty were able  
to participate. The 229 subjects represents an overall  
response rate of 85 percent.
The decision was made to include only centralized  
DP groups as decentralized ISDP were found to exhibit  
very different characteristics from their more
centralized counterparts [Olson, 1981]. The study  
participants included applications programmers,  
programmer/analysts, analysts, and project leaders.  
Additionally, to assure the study participants were  
engaged in comparable tasks, only those individuals  
working on internal systems development projects were  
included.
Page 92
The participating companies varied in size from  
approximately 30 ISDP to over one thousand. The  
different industries are outlined below.
Page 93
NUMBER OF INDUSTRY NUMBER OF
COMPANIES SUBJECTS
COMMERCIAL
1  BANKING 24
3  INSURANCE 85
2  BROKERAGE 41
PUBLIC
1  ACCOUNTING 27
INVESTMENT
1  BANKING 26
ELECTRONICS
1  MANUFACTURING 26
9 229
With the exception of one firm located outside the  
metropolitan New York area, the study companies were  
competing in the same labor market. This was  
substantiated during informal discussions with the  
study personnel when a number revealed that they had  
been employed in one or more of the other study  
companies. Descriptive information regarding the  
individual participants is presented in table 4.4,
Paqe 94
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS
AGE
RANGE NUMBER PERCENT
20-30 96 42#
30-40 98 43#
40-50 30 13#
5 0 -6 0
229 100#
GENDER
Female 92 40#
Male 1 2 260#
229 100#
YEARS EXPERIENCE IN DATA PROCESSING 
Mean 6. 1  years
Minimum 1.0 years
Maximum 27 years
S.D. 4.5 years
YEARS WITH COMPANY
Mean 4.332 years
Minimum 1.0 years
Maximum 2 5. 0  years
S.D, 4.9 years
Table 4,4
Page 95
EDUCATION
High School Degree 6 2> %
Technical School Experience 8 4 ? S
Some College 37 16$
College Degree 99 4 3%
Some Graduate Worlc 35 15#
Master’ s or Higher Degree 44 1%
229 100%
Table 4.4 Continued
Page 96
4,5 The Procedure
To eliminate selection bias the companies were  
asked to randomly select thirty individuals involved in  
the analysis, design, programming, and management of  
internal information system projects. Only one company  
was unwilling to provide a random sample and in one  
case thirty ISDP represented the entire development  
staff.
Once individuals were selected by a company for  
inclusion in the study they were sent a letter from  
either the vice president of information systems or the  
director of personnel requesting their involvement. It  
was explained they would be participating in an  
attitude survey conducted by New York University  
regarding how they felt about their jobs and companies.  
The letter also informed the subjects that the survey  
was completely confidential and would require  
approximately 45 minutes to complete.
To gather the data from each company one hour  
sessions were scheduled for on site administration of  
the survey. Approximately ten participants were  
scheduled for each hour session. Due to illnesses,  
vacations, and schedule conflicts approximately twenty  
five subjects per company completed the survey.
Page 97
Before beginning the survey each individual was  
given a cover letter signed by the researcher which  
explained the study, emphasized that their individual  
responses were completely confidential, and requested  
they include their name on the front page to allow the  
collection of followup data. A copy of the cover  
letter may be found in Appendix C. Once all the  
subjects had arrived at a session the researcher  
introduced himself, reiterated the information  
contained in the cover letter and answered questions  
from the subjects.
The survey was completed in the presence of the  
researcher. Four questionnaires from the on site  
administrations were discarded by the researcher: one
for excessive missing data, one at the request of the  
participant, and two because the subjects had been  
incorrectly identified as ISDP.
One company would not permit the researcher to  
conduct an on-site administration of the questionnaire.  
Rather, company staff distributed and collected the  
questionnaires at training sessions. These
participants received the same cover letter as the  
other subjects but were requested to place the  
questionnaire in a sealed envelope addressed to New  
York University. The sealed envelope was returned to  
the individual in charge of the session who then  
forwarded the survey to NYU. A copy of this letter can
Page 98
be found in Appendix D. Of the 24 sealed envelopes  
received from this company six contained blank  
questionnaires or questionnaires with excessive missing  
data and were discarded from the study. The remaining  
eighteen questionnaires were carefully scrutinized by  
the researcher to ascertain the validity of the data.  
The questionnaires revealed no abnormal patterns of  
responses when visually compared to the other  
responses.
Summary
This chapter describes the process of building the  
questionnaire, selecting subjects for inclusion in the  
study, and the administration of the questionnaire.  
The careful manner by which the questionnaire was built  
and administered should help assure reliability of  
measurement and the validity of the items. The diverse  
industries and random selection of individuals should  
assure the generalizabi1ity of the findings and guard  
against selection bias. The following chapter  
describes the findings of the data collection process.
Page 99
CHAPTER FIVE
5.0 Results and Discussion
This chapter outlines the procedures used to test  
the model and hypotheses presented in Chapter Three.  
The results of the data analysis are presented and  
discussed. Path analysis [Kenny,1979 ;Billings and  
Worten,1978] was used to test the model proposed i n  
figure 3.0 while multiple regression and correlational  
analysis [Cohen and Cohen,1975 ]  were used to test the  
hypotheses regarding ISDP task and individual  
differences. The data were first tested, however, for  
reliability. Descriptive statistics for each variable  
and correlation coefficients were also generated.
5.1 Reliability and Descriptive Statistics
The reliability for each variable was determined  
by calculating Cronbach's Alpha. The reliabilities are  
reported in table 5.0. All of the reliabilities are  
above the .70 level suggested as acceptable [Nunnally,  
1967].
Page 100
Descriptive statistics for each variable were  
calculated. The means, standard deviations, minimum  
and maximum values, and skew for each variable are  
presented in table 5.1. Finally, the zero-order  
correlations were calculated among the study variables.  
The correlations are presented in table 5.2.
Page 101
RELIABILITIES
Boundary Spanning Alpha = .60
Role Conflict Alpha = .79
Role Ambiguity Alpha = .85
Job Satisfaction Alpha = .91
Commitment Alpha = .
Intention to Quit Alpha = ,89
Table 5.0
Page 102
. u*\ V T i cm cma * * * * ■ *w n0 H C O C M vr\ cm(A cm C M
1 o o o M 3 •a o
h+ « # • * •
X O r*- C M ©«c cm r - v> C M NO H
2a
H»•aJ
OM
ss O o O O o o
O  H» * » * ■ * •
X  X o © NO vO \A
X  < vr> H eg H r l
& 4 £ C M eg
£
£ O O © vn C O o
M ■ * ■ • * ■
z O C M Q C D H C M
M H cm C M
£
S3
oHI
g S
2  £ o o O o O O
O  M • « * • ■ •
w  z o o 00 cm o C M
2  M H C M
£
1H eg
cm oC M *-t H C T v C M
z| • • * * • •
< On v> O 00
sH o <m T -J H
£
tuj +*
C T c *H
o P
c >* •rl c r
5 +* +»
rt <J *H <J o
A *H p cd +»m 4* Gb Cm
G iH n c
W > i Q > c .O *H o
HI a Q a »rl
m A ■ H O < a +f
< -o C O G
HI c B Q )
« 7 B H r-t ,o ■e< O O O o o G
> X © « cc * ~ 3 HI
Tab l e  5-1
Page 103
PEARSON CORRELATIONS
BS COMM
BS 1.0
COMM .164* 1.0
RC .275* -.272*
RA -.075* -.499*
JS .047 . 618*
IQ -.161* -.692*RC RA JS IQ
1.0
.359* 1.0
-.391* -. 509* 1.0
.24* .359* -436* 1.0
•significant at the .05 level
Legend BS = Boundary Spanning
COMM = Commitment 
RC = Role Conflict 
RA = Role Ambiguity 
JS = Job Satisfaction 
IQ = Intention to Quit
Table 5.2
Page 104
5.2 Assumptions of Path Analysis
Path analysis is a regression based data analytic  
technique that permits the testing of causal models  
using cross-sectional data. Path analysis assumes the  
data conform to five specific characteristics. These  
five assumptions are outlined in Billings and Wroten  
[1978] and are presented below.
1 ) The relationships between the variables are  
linear.
2 )  The relationships among the variables (i.e.  
the regression equation) are additive.
3 )  The measures have interval scale properties.
4) The model is recursive, no variable feeds back  
onto itself.
5) The model is fully defined, that is, no  
variable has been omitted that could account for the  
observed relationship between two variables.
The data were tested and found to conform to the  
above five characteristics. The procedures used to  
test each assumption follows.
To test assumption one scatterplots were generated  
between each pair of variables. The scatterplots were  
visually examined and no non-linear relationships were  
detected.
Page 105
As the review of the literature revealed no  
evidence of multiplicative or quadratic relationships  
assumption two was assumed to have been met.
As described in chapter 4, this study employed  
carefully constructed measures which used a reasonable  
number of values and contained multiple items. Such  
measures yield data with acceptable interval scale  
properties [Billings and Wroten, 1978]. Assumption 3  
was therefore met.
Recursiveness requires the model causality to be  
in one direction only. The review of the literature in  
chapter two revealed no evidence of feedback loops  
which would violate the assumption of recursiveness.  
Based on this literature the model built for testing is  
recursive.
Demonstrating that assumption five has been  
satisfied is difficult. There are a host of variables  
that could potentially effect any model. Based on the  
review of the literature however, the important  
variables have been included. Additionally statistical  
evidence was generated to determine if important third  
variables were ignored which would make the observed  
relationships in the model spurious. Testing for third  
variables was done once the path analysis was concluded  
by residualizing the variables and then computing the  
correlations among the residuals. The results of the
Page 106
residual analysis are presented in section 5.4 and  
provide evidence that no important third varaibles were  
omitted.
5.3 Testing the Proposed Model and Building a Trimmed  
Model
To test the relationships hypothsized by the model  
path coefficients were calculated and tested for  
statistical significance at the .05 (two-tailed) level.  
The coefficients are presented in table 5.2.1.
Of the fourteen hypothesized paths seven were not  
significant at the .05 level. Employing theory  
trimming [Heise, 1969], these paths were deleted from  
the model resulting in a new trimmed model. The  
trimmed model is presented in figure 5.0.
The path coefficients for the trimmed model were  
computed and are presented in table 5.2.2.
The trimmed model beta coefficients were all  
tested for significance at the .05 level. All of the  
betas were significant at the .05 level, therefore  
further theory trimming was not performed. The final  
trimmed path model with the respective beta weights for  
each path is presented in figure 5.1.
Page 107
PATH 
BS to RA 
BS to RC 
BS to JS 
BS to COMM 
BS to IQ 
RA to JS 
HA to COMM 
RA to IQ 
RC to JS 
RC to COMM 
RC to IQ 
JS to COMM 
JS to IQ 
COMM to IQ
LegendiMODEL PATH COEFFICIENTS
PATH COEFFICIENT 
r BS, RA 
r BS, RC
beta JS, BS. RA, RC
beta COMM, BS.  RA,  RC,  JS
beta IQ, BS. RA, RC,  JS, COMM
beta JS,  RA.  BS
beta COMM, RA. BS, JS
beta IQ, RA. BS,  JS,  COMM
beta JS, RC.  BS
beta COMM, RC. BS,  JS
beta IQ, RC. BS, JS, COMM
beta COMM, JS. BS,  RA, RC
beta IQ, JS. BS, RA, RC,  COMM
beta IQ, COMM. BS, RA,  RC,  JS
r refers to the correlation between two variables.
beta refers to the beta weight that results from 
the regression of the specified variables.
For example, beta JS, BS.  RA, RC is the beta 
weight resulting from regressing BS on JS 
(dependent variable) partialing RA and RC.
Table 5.2.1
Page 108
P  ‘H
< u  <y
ON
o
r \■p
o
N o t  Significant
Page 109
TRIMMED MODEL PATH COEFFICIENTS
PATH PATH COEFFICIENTS
BS to RC r BS, RC
BS to COMM beta COMM, BS. RC, JS
RC to JS r RC, JS
RA to JS r RA, JS
RA to COMM beta COMM, RA. JS
JS to COMM beta COMM, JS. BS, RC
COMM to IQ r IQ, COMM
Table 5.2.2
Paqe 110
0■ H+ *  - H 
C 3 < u  at • p
u
C T >
C M
+ >
Spanning * Conflict
Page 111
One path not included in the original path model,  
which would imply a zero path coefficient, was found to  
be significant. This was the path between role  
ambiguity and role conflict. The finding of a non-zero  
path between role ambiguity and role conflict suggests  
that the path should have been included in the original  
model. However, this study does not provide any  
evidence regarding the causal direction of this path.  
This path was not included in the original model for  
two reasons. First, while the literature review  
revealed that role conflict and role ambiguity tend to  
be correlated; this was believed to be the result of a  
covariation with a third variable. Boundary spanning  
was expected to account for this covariation. Second,  
the model was based on previous research which did not  
hypothesize a causal link between these variables. For  
the above two reasons a path between role conflict and  
ambiguity was not included in the original model.
5.4 Testing the Residuals and
Reconstructing the Correlation Matrix
Two statistical tests which can be applied to  
determine how well the trimmed model captures the  
relationships in the sample data include testing for  
omitted third variables and reconstructing the  
correlation matrix. First, the correlations among the
Page 112
residuals were computed and are presented in table 5.3.
None of the correlations were significant at the  
.05 level. This provides evidence satisfying  
assumption five that the trimmed model had not omitted  
any important third variables.
Paae 113
Intention 
to Quit 
ResidualRole Conflict 
ResidualJob Satis­
faction 
Residual
*Intention 
to Quit 
Residual
Role
Conflict
Residual1.00
.0815  
P = -117
Jab
Satisfaction .0258
Residual p = .363
Commitment .0272
Residual p = .3561.00
. 0 0 1 ^  
P = .492
-  .0086  
P = -4531.00
.0031 
P = .483
.3* .
Table 5.3Commitment
Residual
1.00
Page 114
The final test used to determine the adequacy of  
the trimmed model was the rebuilding of the orginial  
correlation matrix from the trimmed path model  
[Kerlinger and Pedazhur, 1973]. To reproduce each  
correlation coefficient the direct, indirect and common  
cause effects were calculated and summed.
The direct effects were measured by calculating  
the standardized regression coefficient for each path.
An indirect effect was calculated by determining  
the product of the path coefficients along the path  
from the causal variable, through the intervening  
variables, to the effected variable. For example, the  
indirect effect of boundary spanning on job
satisfaction was the product of the path coefficients
from boundary spanning to role conflict and the path  
coefficient from role conflict to job satisfaction or
.275 times -.391.
A common cause effect is the amount of spurious  
covariation between two variables. For example, role  
conflict and commitment have one common cause effect  
because boundary spanning effects both commitment and  
role conflict. The common cause effect is the product  
of the path from boundary spanning to commitment  
(.16269) and the path from boundary spanning to role  
conflict (.27582). A more detailed description of each  
of these effects and how to calculate them can be found
Page 115
in Stumpf and Hartman [1982],
Table 5.4 presents the three effects, the original  
correlations, and the amount of unexplained residual  
for each reconstructed correlation coefficient. The  
difference between the original and reconstructed  
correlation (the sum of the direct, indirect and common  
cause effects) should be no more than .05 if the model  
effectively captures the relationships present in the  
data [Billings and Wroten, 1978],
Page 116
i - 3po 'a Cl WH- Q ( D* 1  OH) * 1  o< D < 5  3h- t oOp c t3oH‘C< t > o o3 ctI I
o  o# T >P*
O * 1 I I
n >  h*w  aK  D H> H*P P J H>HJc t  M f D  ( 9H* O OODrt rh
i +
Ci 50 M  WO f t > Hj 3oHj p.
* 1  o < D  H'n >  5 o ^H t oft ( 9P rt O
s t ac t
o  o 3  H - ( 5at*j oH >  o g c t >  3O  Q ct 3
OPcma >a e-» C - l 50 w 50 50 50 53 W 00 os 00o C/3 W O o a > > > w w w c n
H ct ct ct ft rt ft et c+ ft ft ft ct
O O O o o o O O o o o ortO M O H o u M O •h 50 C - , o M
£3 o £3 o w JD O w n U 1 o £>
W 3 2 jg
3 i
1
b1
b* os ro1
fo1
W1
V1
Cn to © H*1
i- »
sO U) »-* -F* -s3 so sO o -O O' Os
ro Os Oa ro »-* vO s£> SO ^3 «p- i-*
Os ■fr Os i— * *-* VjT ro h* H -s
SO o I-* o * r SO ■P- sO o M o H*
|SJ O ' > 0 \wJ h-» sO SO V_n - 0
oooooocoooooooG No- S 0On
oo0 3
1o oo 1o ii O O
ON o ■ p -oou> b r oy j i rooh* OsO o o o so o p- o-0 o0sO
ro 03 h* 03 sO On. A3
o i o io 1oo 1 1 i
o o  ■ I —1 o rooo o o
oV ^ J o ro COo- p *■ p - o oo ' O
sO-0 I-* ■ P - *0 ro a s
o i 1 . aoa o o o o o• ■ * mo « ■ * * * < 1 » •aoH*o 4r o ooooo o oo W U) ■ F * o ooao o o o
Ov SO I-*P A T H  ORIGINAL RECONSTRUCTED DIFFERENCE DIRECT INDIRECT COMMON 
CORRELATION CORRELATION EFFECT EFFECT CAUSE 
      EFFECT
Page 117
The effects not explained by the model are  
generally below the .05 level, however there are four  
residuals large enough to warrant further attention.  
The two largest deviations between the observed and  
recomputed correlations involve role conflict and  
commitment and role conflict and intention to quit.  
These two deviations can be explained by the failure to  
include a path from role conflict to role ambiguity.  
Had a path from role conflict to role ambiguity been  
included the indirect effect of role conflict on  
commitment would have been more negative and reduce the  
difference between the observed and recomputed  
correlations. Similarly, if this path had been  
included the large difference between the observed and  
recomputed correlation between role conflict and  
intention to quit would also have been reduced as role  
conflict's indirect effect on intention to quit would  
have been greater.
The differences between the observed and  
reconstructed correlations for boundary spanning and  
job satisfaction and boundary spanning and intention to  
quit cannot be explained as a failure to include a path  
between role conflict and role ambiguity. rt appears  
that the trimmed model does not adequately capture the  
effects of boundary spanning on job satisfaction and  
intention to quit. However, this "failing" of the  
model is quite small, with the unexplained difference
Page 118
between the original and reconstructed correlations  
being just above the .05 cutoff level.
In general, the failure to find large correlations  
between the residuals and the generally small amounts  
of variation between the original correlation  
coefficients and the reconstructed correlation  
coeffiencts provides evidence that the trimmed model of  
figure 5.1 adequately models the relationships observed  
in the data with further research needed to fully  
understand the relationships between boundary spanning,  
intention to quit and job satisfaction.
5.5 The Original and Trimmed Models
Table 5.5 lists the fourteen paths that were  
hypothesized by the original model and whether support  
was found for these paths by the path analysis.
PATH HYPOTHESIZED
RELATIONSHIP
BS to RA +
BS to RC +
BS to JS +
BS to COMM
BS to IQ +
RA to JS
RA to COMM
RA to IQ +
RC to JS
RC to COMM
RC to IQ +
JS to COMM +
JS to IQ
COMM to IQ
N.R. = No RelationshipACTUAL
FINDING
N ,  R ,
+
N.R.
+
N.R.
N.R.
N.R.
+
N.R.
Table 5.5
Page 120
This section examines the failings of the orginal  
model and re-examines the literature in light of the  
relationships posited by the trimmed model.
One of the major shortcomings of the orginal model  
involved the hypothesized relationships between  
boundary spanning, role ambiguity, role conflict and  
job satisfaction with intention to quit. The path  
analysis found no such direct paths and accordingly  
they were removed from the trimmed model. In the  
trimmed model these variables impacted intention to  
quit indirectly operating via commitment.
Commitment and intention to quit measure very  
similar constructs. One of the three factors which  
characterize commitment is a strong desire to maintain  
membership in the organization and a number of the  
commitment scale items measure this desire. Therefore,  
when commitment is partialled from the relationships  
between intention to quit and the other study variables  
it is not suprising that no relationships are found.  
The failure to find a direct relationship between  
intention to quit and the other variables may therefore  
be due to the item overlap between the intention to  
quit and commitment measures.
The second failure of the model involved the  
relationship between boundary spanning and the other  
model variables. No direct relationship was found
Page 121
between boundary spanning and job satisfaction contrary  
to expectations. This finding runs counter to the  
prior literature [Tushman and Scanlan, 1981; Keller  
and Holland, 1978] which suggests boundary spanners  
have inherently more interesting work and substantial  
informal power and status due to their access to  
external information [Keller and Holland, 1978]. The  
failure to find a relationship between ISDP boundary  
spanning and job satisfaction may be due to the nature  
of ISDP boundary spanning. From the normative job
descriptions of ISDP tasks [Murach, 1977] it appears
that the majority of ISDP boundary spanning activities  
are intra-organizational rather than
inter-organizational. For example, ISDP when engaged  
in designing systems must cross departmental boundaries  
to gather information from the relevant user areas.  
ISDP are rarely required to cross organizational
boundaries for the development of a new system.  
Intra-organizational boundary spanners such as ISDP may  
not, because of the intra organizational nature of  
their job, have the easy access to external job
opportunities that their inter-organizational
counterparts havn. Additionally, evidence exists that  
intra-organizational boundary spanners have closer  
supervision than inter-organizational boundary spanners  
[Miles, 1980b; Miles and Perrault, 1976], This  
closeness of supervision may further reduce the  
boundary spanner's power, autonomy and status. These
Page 122
two factors may account for the failure to find a link  
between ISDP boundary spanning and job satisfaction.
Boundary spanning was found to have a  direct  
positive relationship with role conflict but no  
relationship with role ambiguity, contrary to  
expectations. The prior empirical evidence [Keller,  
1978; Keller et al, 1976] also found that while  
boundary spanning was related to role conflict it did  
not relate to role ambiguity. The relationships  
identified by the trimmed model are therefore  
consistent with the prior literature.
A rather suprising finding was that boundary  
spanning related positively to commitment in the  
trimmed model rather than negatively as had been  
hypothesized by the original model. This relationship  
is probably, a result of the individuals, due to their  
boundary spanning activities, being exposed to more of  
the organization. This exposure may provide them with  
a better sense of the mission and purpose of the  
organization and their role within the company. This  
may increase their identification with the company and  
therefore their commitment.
In summary, six of the fourteen paths hypothesized  
by the original model were supported. Some evidence  
therefore exists for the causal ordering of variables  
proposed by the original model. Employing theory
Page 123
trimming [Heise, 1969] a refined or trimmed model was  
built. This refined model was subjected to a post-hoc  
analysis and was found consistent with much of the  
prior empirical literature and as such probably more  
accurately describes the true relationships among the  
variables. The trimmed model, however, reflects a  
hypothesized causal ordering of variables which while  
consistent with the sample studied must be tested in  
other samples to establish it generalizabi1ity.
5.6 Hypothesized Task Differences
Between Programmers and Analysts
In this study, very few individuals were employed  
solely as either analysts or programmers but rather had  
some combination of both duties. Therefore, each  
individual was assigned a  job task score which captured  
the possible combinations of duties. The job score was  
computed for each subject by subtracting the average of  
the three programming items from the average of the  
five analytic items. This produced a continuum of  
scores running from a  possible minimum of -4 to a  
possible maximum of +4. An individual who had more  
programming than analytic duties would have a negative  
score while an individual with more analytic duties  
would have a positive score. A score of zero would  
indicate an individual whose position was equally
Page 124
weighted between analytic and programming duties.  
Descriptive statistics for the job task score are  
presented in table 5.6.
Page 125
MEAN
-0.95DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS 
JOB TASK SCORE
MINIMUM MAXIMUM S.D.
-3.67 3.0 1.50
Table 5.6
Page 126
In Chapter Three, six hypothesized differences  
based on ISDP job tasks were outlined. To test the  
hypothesized relationships Pearson correlations were  
computed between the job task score and boundary  
spanning, role conflict, role ambiguity, job  
satisfaction, commitment, and intention to quit. As  
the correlational analysis employed assumed a linear  
relationship between the two variables scattergrams  
were first computed to determine if the relationships  
were linear. All of the scattergrams were then  
visually checked. None of the graphs revealed a  
non-linear relationship. Table 5.7 lists each  
hypothesized task difference, the Pearson correlation  
for the variables of interest and whether the data was  
supportive, non-supportive or ran counter to the  
hypothesized relationship.
Page 127
HYPOTHESIS
Haat ISDP with more analytic 
duties will have more 
boundary spanning duties.
Hbbi ISDP with more analytic 
duties will experience 
more role conflict.
Hoci ISDP with more analytic 
duties will experience 
more role ambiguity,
Hddt ISDP with more analytic 
duties will experience 
less commitment.
Heet ISDP with more analytic 
duties will experience 
greater intention to 
quit.CORRELATION
.5812
p = ,000
.2172
p = .001
.0537
p = .218
.1318
p = .02
-. 1670
p = .006SUPPORT
Supported
Supported
Not
Supported
Counter
Counter
Table 5>?
Page 128
The analysis revealed that analytic duties related  
positively to boundary spanning and role conflict.  
Therefore, systems analysts will span more boundaries  
and experience role conflict than their programmer  
counterparts. Contrary to expectations, boundary  
spanning was not found to relate to role ambiguity.  
These findings are in agreement with the trimmed model  
which suggested that boundary spanning would lead to  
role conflict but was unrelated to role ambiguity.
Relationships counter to those hypothesized were  
found for Hdd and Hee. Individuals with more analytic  
duties were found to be more committed and less likely  
to have intentions to quit than those ISDP with fewer  
analytic duties. These findings are also consistent  
with the trimmed model. Individuals with more analytic  
duties also tend to be boundary spanners as suggested  
by Haa. The model would predict that these  
individuals, due to their boundary spanning activites,  
would have enhanced commitment and reduced intentions  
to quit.
The task difference analysis demonstrated that  
boundary spanning is an elegant and powerful way to  
describe many of the duties of the systems analyst as  
boundary spanning and the job task score share 25% of  
their variance. Finally, contrary to expectations, it  
is the programmer and not the systems analyst who is  
the high risk employee as programmers are more likely
Page 129
to intentd to leave the organization. This is  
consistent with the finding that systems analysts span  
more boundaries and are more committed than  
programmers.
5.7 Individual Differences
Chapter three outlined fifteen hypothesized
relationships between ISDP individual difference  
variables: age, tenure, education, and experience, and
three work related outcomes: job satisfaction,
commitment, and intention to quit. All of the
hypothesized relationships were tested using
correlational analysis. All of the hypothesized  
relationships were tested for significance at the .05  
level. Table 5.8 presents the hypothesized  
relationships, the correlations and whether the  
hypotheses were supported or not.
Page 130
HYPOTHESIS CORRELATION
Hat ISDP age will positively
relate with ISDP job -.1276
satisfaction, p * .07
Halt ISDP age will positively .0415
relate with ISDP commitment. p = .541
Hbt ISDP age will negatively
relate with ISDP Intention -.1758
to quit. p = .008
Hct ISDP organizational
tenure will positively .0301
relate to ISDP commitment. p = .650
Hcl:  ISDP organizational
tenure will positively
relate to ISDP job -.0958
satisfaction. p = .175
Hdi ISDP organizational
tenure will negatively
relate to ISDP intention -.1207
to quit. p = .068
Hei ISDP educational level
will negatively relate to -.0352
ISDP job satisfaction. p = .619
Heli ISDP educational level
will negatively relate to -.1434
ISDP commitment. p ■ .03
Hfi ISDP educational level
will positively relate to .1334
ISDP intention to quit. p = .044
Hgi ISDP years of DP experience
will positively relate to -.1196
ISDP job satisfaction. p = .090
Table 5-8SUPPORT
Not
Supported
Not
Supported
Supported
Not
Supported
Not
Supported
Not
Supported
Not
Supported
Supported
Supported
Not
Supported
/
t
Page 131
HYPOTHESIS CORRELATION
Hgli ISDP years of DP experience
will positively relate to .1117
ISDP commitment. p = ,099
Hhi ISDP years of DP experience
will negatively relate to -.1920
ISDP intention to quit. p = .004SUPPORT
Not
Supported
Supported
Table 5-8 Continued
Page 132
Unlike other populations studied it appears ISDP  
individual differences have little power in explaining  
ISDP job satisfaction, commitment and intention to
quit. Of the fifteen hypothesized relationship  
involving ISDP individual differences only four were  
supported. The data do reveal that older, less
educated ISDP with more years of DP experience have
fewer intentions of quitting than their younger, more  
educated, less experienced counterparts. Additionally  
it was found that the more educated the ISDP the less  
commited they are. These relationships are weak  
however accounting for little variance with
correlations running from .1324 to -.1920. The failure  
to find large and significant relationships between  
ISDP individual differences and work outcomes indicates  
that individual difference variables will not  
significantly moderate the relationships described by  
the trimmed model.
Summary
This chapter described the results of the data  
analysis with regards to the path model and the  
differences hypothesized on the basis of individual and  
task characteristics. The implications of these  
results for management and future IS research will be  
discussed in the following chapter.
Page 133
CHAPTER SIX
6.0 Conclusions
This chapter presents and discusses the major  
findings of the study. As this study was unable to  
account for the origins of ISDP role ambiguity,  
research propositions addressing possible sources are  
presented. Recommendations are made regarding the  
management of ISDP and the appropriateness of ISDP  
career paths. Finally, recommendations for future  
study are made.
6.1 Findings of the Study
1) Analysts span more boundaries than programmers.  
The major hazard faced by analysts when they span  
boundaries is role conflict which negatively impacts  
their job satisfaction, commitment, and intention to  
quit.
2) Boundary spanning is positively related to  
commitment, which reduces ISDP intention to quit. The  
overall effect of boundary spanning is to reduce ISDP  
intention to quit despite its positive relationship to  
role conflict.
Page 134
3 )  Analysts and programmers are both intolerant of  
role ambiguity. Of the variables studied role  
ambiguity is the most detrimental, having a strong  
negative effect on job satisfaction, commitment, and  
intention to quit.
4) Programmers are less committed than analysts  
and more likely to express intentions to leave.
5 ) Role ambiguity was not related to boundary  
spanning nor was it related to analytic or programming  
duties. Unfortunately this study does not provide  
information as to the sources of ambiguity.
6 )  The individual difference analysis found that  
only age, education, and years of DP experience had a  
significant impact on ISDP intention to quit. The  
relationships, however, are very weak and as such  
provide very few useful guidelines for IS management.
6.2 Potential Sources of ISDP Role Ambiguity
Given the strong detrimental effect of ambiguity  
on ISDP job satisfaction, commitment, and intention to  
quit it is important to identify the potential sources  
of ISDP role ambiguity. Unfortunately good theory  
regarding the antecedents of ISDP role ambiguity does  
not exist. Operationally, role ambiguity refers to the  
extent to which clear and precise information is
Page 135
lacking regarding task, reward, and role. This section  
will, therefore, examine the structure of ISDP jobs and  
how this could potentially impact ISDP role ambiguity.  
Finally, research propositions are developed for future  
test ing.
One possible source of ISDP role ambiguity is the  
structure of the project teams. ISDP may be assigned  
to permanent teams or rotated to different teams with  
different members. It is expected that ISDP who are  
assigned to permanent project teams will experience  
less ambiguity as they will be familiar with the other  
team members, and have a clearer idea of their  
responsibilities and the expectations of the team  
leader thus increasing the clarity of their role. This  
may not be true where team membership changes  
frequently as these individuals will have less time to  
establish precisely what their role is.
It is expected that the type of project and  
technology may also impact ISDP role ambiguity. ISDP  
who are working on "state of the art" projects that  
involve unfamiliar technology may experience role
ambiguity as it will be less clear how to use this  
technology than familiar "routine" technology.  
Therefore it is expected that the type of technology  
will effect the clarity of ISDP tasks.
Page 136
Systems development is inherently more ambiguous  
than corrective and adaptive maintenance. Corrective
and adaptive maintenance involves making a change to an  
existing system with the change clearly specified.  
Development projects, on the other hand, are normally  
larger and may have objectives which are unclear.
The number of projects to which ISDP are  
simultaneously assigned may also impact ISDP role  
ambiguity. As ISDP serve on more projects they have to  
balance the demands of these different projects. It
may not be clear how the team member should allocate  
their time and resources among the different projects.  
Serving on more projects may also result in an increase  
in the number of individuals and leaders to whom one  
has to interact or report.
The size of the project team may effect ISDP role  
ambiguity. As ISDP are expected to interact with more  
people on a  project it becomes more difficult to
coordinate efforts and communication. Additionally,  
the larger the team the less access each team member  
will have to the team leader whose job is to direct and  
clarify their efforts.
The design of a system can be very unstructured.  
By using a structured methodology, clear guidelines are  
set for the design and programming process. It is  
expected that the use of structured design and
Page 137
programming techniques will help clarify the ISDP  
programming and analysis tasks.
It is expected that the extent to which formalized  
standards exist and are enforced will reduce ISDP role  
ambiguity. Standards should reduce ISDP role ambiguity  
as the behavior expected of ISDP are now clearly stated  
and known.
The above can be codified into a series of  
testable research propositions. These propositions are  
presented below.
Pi: Individuals assigned to permanent
project teams will experience less role  
ambiguity than ISDP who are assigned to  
project teams with changing membership.
P 2 :  The more innovative the technology
employed by the project the greater the ISDP  
role ambiguity.
P3: ISDP involved in systems
development will experience more role  
ambiguity than ISDP involved in corrective  
and adaptive systems maintenance.
P4:  The greater the number of
simultaneous projects ISDP are assigned to  
the greater their role ambiguity.
P5: The more ISDP assigned to each
project team the greater will be their role
ambiguity.
P6: The greater the use made of
structured design and programming tools the  
less ISDP will experience role ambiguity.
P7:  The greater the extent to which
formal standards are used and enforced the  
lower the ISDP role ambiguity.
Page 136
6.3 Recommendations for IS Managers
This section presents recommendations for IS  
management regarding two general areas. First, given  
the severely dysfunctional outcomes associated with  
role ambiguity suggestions are made on how to reduce  
the ambiguity associated with management practices.  
Second, the findings of the task difference analysis is  
discussed regarding what it implies about the  
appropriateness of ISDP career paths.
6.3.1 Role Ambiguity and ISDP Management
This section provides a number of suggestions  
regarding the management of ISDP. Many of these  
suggestions are basic tenets of good management that  
could have been made without the information provided  
by this study. However, the importance of these tenets  
for ISDP are reinforced by the findings that ISDP are  
very sensitive to role ambiguity. Until research is  
conducted to empirically evaluate these sources of ISDP  
role ambiguity IS management may wish to evaluate their  
own policies and practices to determine if they clarify  
or create ambiguity for ISDP. One such area to  
investigate is their reward and promotion practices.
IS management can examine their reward system and  
determine if the system clearly specifies how ISDP are  
evaluated and what rewards exist for what behaviors.
Page 139
For example, are the performance criteria used to  
evaluate ISDP clearly stated and known by the ISDP;  
are rewards tied to these performance criteria or other  
clearly well known standards. If poor economic  
conditions make it impossible to equitably allocate  
rewards or reward on the basis of performance then IS  
management may wish to make these reasons known rather  
than allow ISDP to perceive rewards as being randomly  
distributed. The clearer the reward and evaluation  
process the less potential for ISDP role ambiguity.
IS management can also evaluate how clearly  
defined the ISDP tasks and roles are. Job assigments,  
objectives and tasks should, to the extent possible, be  
clearly specified. Each employee should know clearly  
who they report to and what their authority is. By  
accomplishing the above IS management will have  
succeeded in reducing much of the potential for ISDP  
role ambiguity.
It is recognized, however, that the above  
recommendations may not be feasible for all ISDP or all  
projects. There may be assignments that evolve over  
time making it difficult to unambiguously specify the  
objectives and the methods to achieve these as yet  
unclear goals. Additionally, because DP is a dynamic  
field with rapidly changing technology and tools it may  
be impossible or undesirable to eliminate all role  
ambiguity for ISDP as companies attempt to take
Page 140
advantage of these new and unfamiliar technologies.  
However, IS management should be cognizant of the  
dangers of role ambiguity and attempt whenever feasible  
to identify and control or reduce the ambiguity.
6.3.2 Appropriateness of ISDP Career Paths
While the task analysis did not reveal significant  
differences in role ambiguity for analysts and  
programmers it did find several other significant  
differences which provide important information  
regarding ISDP career paths. Given that ISDP with more  
analytic duties span boundaries and tend to experience  
more role conflict than their programmer counterparts  
these positions are quite dissimilar.
Indeed, boundary spanning and the analytic task  
score share 25% of their variance suggesting that a  
tremendous amount of the job duties analysts are  
responsible for involve boundary spanning activites.  
These results challenge the approriateness of promoting  
programmers to analytic positions without first  
evaluating how well the programmer will function as a  
boundary spanner.
Just as it may be inappropriate to promote the  
best technician to a management position because the  
job responsibilities are quite different, it may also  
be inappropriate to promote the best programmer to an
Page 141
analyst position as these jobs are also quite
different. While this finding may not surprise
seasoned veterans of the MIS community, this study does  
provide some of the first empirical evidence regarding  
what some of these differences are (i.e. boundary  
spanning activities). In general, the selection and  
promotion process should consider the potential  
analyst’s capability for spanning boundaries as well as  
their ability to serve as the IS department's
representative to other departments.
The differences between programmers and analysts  
also suggests that it may be inappropriate to have a  
single career path for both analysts and programmers.  
For example, systems programming and support has  
emerged in many companies as a separate career path  
from applications work; perhaps there should also be  
distinct career ladders for systems analysis and for  
programming. It is necessary though to consider the  
ramifications of separate ISDP career ladders. For  
example, will the company be able to recruit  
individuals for a programming position that does not  
offer the possibility of promotion to an analytic  
position. Also, separate career paths may prove to be  
costly as analysts are in general much more expensive  
than programmers. It may be cheaper to train  
programmers as analysts rather than attempt to buy such  
talent. Much work is needed into this area.
Page 142
6.4 Recommendations for Future Research
This study was able to identify a number of  
variables that contribute to the process whereby ISDP  
develop intentions of quitting. This study also  
provides a better understanding of some of the  
differences between analysts and programmers. Several  
limitations exist to this study however.
First, while the study employed carefully  
constructed measures, many with lengthy histories of  
reliability and validity, and employed powerful  
statistical techniques, the data were cross sectional  
in nature. Although path analysis allows us on the  
basis of strong theory to test the causal ordering of  
variables using cross sectional data, future  
researchers are encouraged to use longitudinal designs  
to more fully address the issue of causation.
Second, the model was able to account for only a  
portion of the variance in ISDP intention to quit;  
attempts to more fully define the model are needed.  
Exploratory research to uncover consistent themes or  
common factors that may account for ISDP turnover not  
previously explored is needed. Variables that may play  
an important role include: Career paths- do clearly
articulated career paths exist, are some preferrable to  
others. Peformance appraisals- are formal periodic  
appraisals made of ISDP and communicated to the
Page 143
effected employees. Training- are the skills of the  
ISDP being upgraded and kept current. Sophistication  
of the DP shop- are the tools used "state of the art"  
and are project assignments innovative and interesting.  
Each of these variables may play a role in determing  
ISDP job satisfaction, commitment and ultimately effect  
their intention to quit.
Third, a major limitation of this study was its  
failure to relate the variables studied to ISDP  
performance. While this study provides information  
that role conflict is detrimental in terms of ISDP  
intention to quit its effects on performance are  
uncertain. It is possible that role conflict may be  
necessary for the performance of certain ISDP  
positions. For example, in order to design a good  
system it may be necessary for the analyst to  
experience the role conflict that comes from  
interviewing different users and then balancing these  
opposing needs with the limited resources of the DP  
department. This role conflict may result in a better  
system than a system where the analyst remains isolated  
within the DP department, unexposed to role conflict,  
designing a system without gathering the actual user  
requirements.
Page 144
A programmer’s  experience of role conflict,  
however, may result in poorer performance. The coding  
of a system should be clearly specified with all  
conflict resolved before the specifications are  
presented to the programmer. Therefore, the experience  
of role conflict by the programmer may result in a  
poorer system while role conflict may be a necessary  
component of the analyst's job.
Additionally, while this study was able to  
describe many of the dynamics whereby ISDP intend to  
quit, it would be helpful to know if those ISDP
planning to leave are the high or poor performers. If  
the turnover of the DP staff is largely among the high  
performers then turnover becomes an acute problem.
Fourth, another limitation of this study was its  
inability to determine the extent to which the ISDP are  
different or similar to other personnel. While this  
study found that role ambiguity is very detrimental in  
terms of ISDP job satisfaction, commitment and
intention to quit it did not determine if ISDP
experience more or less role ambiguity than other
employees. However, as standard measures were used the  
scores for ISDP can be compared against the scores for  
other samples and is planned for a future study. This  
comparison will provide information regarding how  
unique the IS environment is. This information will  
also provide a realistic job preview for perspective
Page 145
employees in terms of ISDP job satisfaction,  
commitment, role conflict, role ambiguity, and  
likelihood of desiring to quit.
Fifth, indepth research into ISDP career paths is  
needed as this study suggests that the skills required  
for analytic and programming work are quite different.  
The assumption of a need for separate ISDP career paths  
{one for analysts and one for programmers) needs to be  
more elaborately explored. Research into this area  
should include the cognitive processing differences,  
attitude differences, and skill differences required of  
analysts and programmers. Once adequate information  
has been generated to determine the appropriateness of  
ISDP career paths then selection and training  
guidelines can also be developed to more effectively  
select, promote and manage the careers of ISDP.
6.5 Major Contributions of the Study
This concluding section highlights the major  
contributions made by this study.
1 )  A number of variables salient to the MIS  
setting not normally explored by MIS research were  
identified and examined by this study. These included  
task and attitude variables.
Page 146
2 ) A model of ISDP turnover was built and  
subjected to empirical testing. This model describes  
much of the dynamics by which ISDP intend to leave an  
organizat ion.
3) It was demonstrated that boundary spanning is  
an important way to describe many of the activities  
required of an analyst and suggested that it may be  
inapproriate to promote programmers into analytic  
funct ions.
4) It was determined that ISDP role conflict with  
its dysfunctional outcomes is related to ISDP analytic  
duties and boundary spanning while ISDP role ambiguity  
was not. Potential sources of ambiguity were  
identified and research proposed.
5 ) Important ISDP individual differences were  
identified and tested for their impact on ISDP  
intention to quit. They accounted for only 5% of the  
overall variance in intention to quit and provided  
little important guidance to IS management.
Perhaps the most important contribution of this  
study is to highlight how little is known about the IS  
professional. While this study has been a useful step  
in forwarding our understanding of the dynamics by  
which ISDP develop intentions of quitting this study
Page 147
has also left us with many questions. Questions  
regarding the sources of ISDP role ambiguity and the  
appropriateness of ISDP career paths were raised but  
left unresolved by this study. However, even more  
fundamental questions must be asked. Given the  
rapid growth of end user computing, the explosion of  
micro computers in the workplace, and the increasing  
sophistication of the user community we must ask does  
the IS profession have a future and will the future IS  
professional have a  career.
Page 148
REFERENCES
1 . Abdel-Halim, A., A Reexamination of Ability as a  
Moderator of Role Perceptions-Satisfaction  
Relationship,Personnel Psychology, Volume 34, 1981.
2 . Abdel-Halim, A., Effects of Person-Job
Compatibility on Managerial Reactions to Role
Ambiguity, Organizational Behavior and Human
Performance,  Volume 26, 1980.
3 .  Abdel-Halim, A., Effects of Role Stress-Job
Design-Technology Interaction on Employee Work  
Satisfaction, Academy of Management Journal,  Volume  
24, Number 2 , 1981.
4. Adams, J . ,  The Structure and Dynamics of Behavior
in Organizational Boundary Roles, In M.D. Dunnette  
(ed), Handbook of Industrial and Organizational
Psychology,  Chicago: Rand, 1976.
5 .  Aldrich, H. and Herker, D.,  Boundary Spanning
Roles and Organizational Structure, Academy of
Management Review,  April, 1977.
6. Angle H.,  and Perry, J., An Empirical Assessment of
Organizational Commitment and Organizational  
Effectiveness, Administrat ive Science Quarterly,
Volume 26, March, 1981.
Page 149
7. Arnold, H.,  and Feldman, D.,  A Multivariate  
Analysis of the Determinants of Job Turnover,  
Journal of Applied Psychology,  Volume 67, Number 3 ,  
1982.
8. Awad, E.,  Job Satisfaction as a Predictor of
Tenure, Computer Personnel,  Volume 7, Number 1-2,  
Autumn 1977.
9. Awal, D.,  Organizational Climate: A Study in
Construct Validation, NYU Graduate School of
Business Administration, Unpublished dissertation,  
1981.
10. Barocci, T.,  and Cournoyer, P., Make of Buy:  
Computer Professionals in a Demand Driven  
Environment, MIT Center for Information Systems  
Research, Unpublished Working Paper No. 93,  
September 1982.
11. Bartol, K.,  Professionalism as a Predictor of
Organizational Commitment, Role Stress, and  
Turnover: A Multidimensional Approach, Academy of
Management Journal,  Volume 22, Number 4, 1979.
12. Barol, K.,  Turnover Among DP Personnel: A Causal
Analysis, Communications of the ACM,  forthcoming,  
October 1983.
Page 150
13. Bartol, K . ,  and Martin, D . ,  Managing Information
Systems Personnel: A Review of the Literature and
Managerial Implications, MIS Quarterly,  Special  
Issue, 1982.
14. Bedeian, A., and Armenakis, A., A Path-Analytic
Study of the Consequences of Role Conflict and
Ambiguity, Academy of Management Journal,  Volume  
24, Number 2, 1981.
15. Benbasat, I., Dexter, A., and Mantha, R.,  Impact of  
Organizational Maturity on Information Skill Needs,  
MIS Quarterly,  Volume 4, March, 1980,
16. Billings R.,  And Wroten, S., Use of Path Analysis
in Industrial/Organizational Psychology:
Criticisms and Suggestions, Journal of Applied  
Psychology,  Volume 63, Number 6, 1978.
17. Birnbaum, J . ,  Computers: A Survey of Trends and
Limitations, Science,  Volume 215, February 1982.
18. Bostrom, R.,  Role Conflict and Ambiguity: Critical
Variables in the MIS User-Designer Relationship,  
SIG-CPR Conference Proceedings,  Association for  
Computing Machinery, 1980.
19. Brief, A. and Aldag, R . ,  Antecedents of  
Organizational Commitment Among Hospital Nurses,  
Sociology of Work and Occupations,  Volume 7, Number  
2, May, 1980.
Page 151
20. Caldwell, D. and O'Reilly, C. ,  Boundary Spanning
and Individual Performance: The Impact of
Self-Monitoring, Journal of Applied Psychology,  
Volume 67, Number 1 , 1982.
21. Cheney, P., and Lyons, N.,  Information Skill  
Requirements, MIS Quarterly,  Volume 4, March, 1980.
22. Cohen, J. and Cohen, P., Applied Multiple
Regression/Correlation Analysis for the Behavioral  
Sciences,  Hillsdale N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, 1975.
23. Couger, J.,  and Zawacki, R.,  What Motivates DP  
Professionals, Datamation,  September, 1978.
24. Cournoyer, P., Mobility of Information Systems
Personnel: An Analysis of a Large Computer Firm's
Experience, MIT Sloan School of Management,  
Unpublished dissertation, February 1983.
25. Dearden, J., MIS is a Mirage, Harvard Business  
Review,  Volume 50, Jan-Feb.,  1972.
26. Dubinsky, A. and Mattson, B., Consequences of Role  
Conflict and Ambiguity Experienced by Retail  
Salespeople, Journal?  of Retailing,  Volume 55,  
Number 4 , Winter 1979.
Page 152
27. Goldstein, D., A Further Examination of the
Determinants of Job Satisfaction in
Programmer/Analysts, MIT Center for Information  
Systems Research, Unpublished working paper Number  
96, November 1982.
28. Gray, Stephen, DP Salary Survey, Datamat ion,  
October, 1982.
29. Hamilton, S., Ives, B., and Davis, G . ,  MIS Doctoral
Dissertations: 1973-1980, MIS Quarterly,Volume 5 ,
June, 1981.
30. Heise, D.R., Problems in Path Analysis and Causal  
Inference, In B.F. Borgatta (ed.), Sociological  
Methodology,  Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, 1969.
31. H o r n ,  P., Katerberg, R.,  and Hulin, C., Comparative  
Examination of Three Approaches to the Prediction  
of Turnover, Journal of Applled Psychology,  Volume  
64, Number 3 , 1979.
32. House, R.,  Schuler, R., and Levanori, E.,  Role
Conflict and Ambiguity Scales: Reality or
Artifacts?, Journal of Applied Psychology,
forthcoming.
33. Ivancevich, J.,  and McMahon, J., The Effects of
Goal Setting, External Feedback on Outcome
Variables: A Field Experiment, Academy of
Management Journa1,  Volume 25, Number 2 , 1982.
Page 153
34. Ives, B., Hamilton, S., and Davis, G., A Framework  
for Research in Computer-Based Management  
Information Systems, Management Science, 1980.
35. Ives, B. and Olson, M . ,  Manager or Technician?  
The Nature of the Information Systems Manager's  
Job, MIS Quarterly,Volume 5,Decemeber, 1981.
36. Jamal, M.,  Shift Work Related to Job Attitudes,
Social Participation and Withdrawal Behavior: A
Study of Nurses and Industrial Workers', Personnel  
Psychology,  Volume 34, 1981.
37. Johnson, T., and Stinson, J., Role Ambiguity, Role
Conflict, and Satisfaction: Moderating Effects of
Individual Differences, Journal of Applied  
Psychology,  Volume 60, Number 3 ,  1975.
38. Kahn, R.,  Wolfe, D.,  Quinn, R.,  and Snoek, J.,
Organizational Stress:  Studies in Role Conf1ict
and Ambiguity,  New York: John Wiley, 1964.
39. Kaiser, K.,  and King, W . ,  The Manager Analyst  
Interface in Systems Development, MIS Quarterly,  
Volume 6 , March, 1982.
40. Keen, P., Information Systems and Organizational  
Change, Communications of the ACM,  Volume 24,  
January, 1981.
Page 154
41. Keller, R.,  Boundary-Spanning Activity, Role
Dynamics, and Job Satisfaction: A Longitudinal
Study, Journal of Business Research,  Volume 6,  
1978.
42. Keller, R.,  and Holland, W . ,  Boundary-Spanning  
Roles in a Research and Development Organization:  
An Empirical Investigation, Academy of Management  
Journal,  Volume 18, Number 2 , 1975.
43. Keller, R.,  Szilagyi, A., and Holland, W . ,
Boundary-Spanning Activity and Employee Reactions:  
An Empirical Study, Human Relations, Volume 29,  
Number 7 , 1976.
44. Kenny, D., Correlation and Causality,  New York:  
John Wiley, 1979.
45. Kerlinger, F., and Pedhazur, E.,  Multiple
Regression in Behavioral Research,  New York: Holt,
Reinhart, and Winston, 1973.
46. Kidron, A., Work Values and Organizational
Commitment, Academy of Management Journal,  Volume  
21, Number 2 , 1978.
47. Leifer, R., and Delbecq, A.,
Organizational/Environmental Interchange: A Model
of Boundary Spanning Activity, Academy of  
Management Review,  January, 1978.
Page 155
48. Locke, E., The Nature and Causes of Job  
Satisfaction, In M.D. Dunnette (ed), Handbook of  
Industrial and Organizational Psychology,  Chicago:  
Rand, 1976.
49. Mader, C., and Hagin, R. ,  Information Systems:
Technology, Economics,  Applications,  Chicago: SRA,
1974.
50. Martorelli, W.,  Firm Cuts Turnover with Human  
Resources Aides, Information Systems News,  
September, 6 , 1982.
51. Matlin, G.,  What is the Value of Investment in  
Information Systems?, MIS Quarterly,  Volume 3 ,  
Number 3 ,  September 1979.
52. Miles, R., Macro Organizational Behavior,  Santa
Monica: Goodyear Publishing, 1980a.
53. Miles, R.,  Organizational Boundary Roles, In C.C.
Cooper and R. Payne (eds), Current Concerns in  
Occupat ional Stress,  Chinchester: John-Wiley,
1980b.
54. Miles, R.,  Role Requirements as Sources of  
Organizational Stress, Journal of Applied  
Psychology,  Volume 61, Number 2 ,  1976.
Page 156
55. Miles, R.,  and Perreault, W . ,  Organizational Role
Conflict: Its Antecedents and Consequences,
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance,  
Volume 17, 1976.
56. Miller, W..Building an Effective Information  
Systems Function, MIS Quarterly,  Volume 4, June,
1980.
57. Mobley, W , ,  Employee Turnover:  Causes,
Consequences,  and Control,  Reading: Massachusetts,
Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1982.
58. Mobley, W . ,  Horner, S., and Hollingsworth, A., An  
Evaluation of the Precursors of Hospital Employee  
Turnover, Journal of Applied Psychology,  Volume 63,  
1978.
59. Morris, J., and Koch, J., Impacts of Role  
Perceptions on Organizational Commitment, Job  
Involvement, and Psychosomatic Illness Among Three  
Vocational Groupings, Journal of Vocat ional  
Behavior,  Volume 14, 1979.
60. Morris, J., and Sherman, J.D., Generalizability of  
an Organizational Commitment Model, Academy of  
Management Journal,  Volume 24, Number 3, 1981.
Page 157
61. Morris, J., and Snyder, R.,  A Second Look at Need  
for Achievement and Need for Autonomy as Moderators  
of Role Perceptions-Outcome Relationships,  Journal  
of Applied Psychology,  Volume 64, Number 2, 1979.
62. Mossholder, K.,  Bedeian, A., and Armenakis, A.,
Role Perceptions, Satisfact ion, and Performance:  
Moderating Effects of Self-Esteem and
Organizational Level, Organizat ional Behavior and  
Human Performance,  Volume 28, 1981.
63. Mowday, R.,  Porter, L., and Steers, R. ,
Employee-Organizat ional Linkage,  New York:
Academic Press, 1982.
64. Mowday, R.,  Steers, R.,  and Porter, L .,  The  
Measurement of Organizational Commitment, Journal  
of Vocational Behavior,  Volume 14, 1979.
65. Muchinsky, P., and Tuttle, M . ,  Employee Turnover:  
An Empirical and Methodological Assessment, Journal  
of Vocat ional Behavior,  Volume 14, 1979.
66. Mumford, E., Participative Systems Design:  
Structure and Method, Systems,  Object ives,  and  
Solutions,  Volume 1 ,  1981.
67. Murach, M.,  Business Data Processing, Chicago: SRA,
1977.
Page 158
68. Oldham, G., and Hackman, J., Work Design in the
Organizational Context, Research in Organizational  
Behavior,  Volume 2 , JAI Press, 1980.
69. Nunnally, J., Psychometric Theory,  New York:  
McGraw Hill, 1967.
70. Olson, M.,  User Involvement and Decentralization of
the Development Function: A Comparison of Two Case
Studies, Systems,  Obj ectives, and Solut ions,  Volume  
1 , 1981.
71. Pearce J., Bring Some Clarity to Role Ambiguity
Research, Academy of Management Review,  Volume 6,
Number 4 , 1981.
72. Porter, L., and Crampton, W.,  Organizational
Commitment and Managerial Turnover: A longitudinal
Study, Organizational Behavior and Human  
Performance,  Volume 15, 1976.
73. Price, J., The Study of Turnover,  Ames: Iowa State
University Press, 1977.
74. Randolph, W., and Posner, B.,  Explaining Role  
Conflict and Role Ambiguity via Individual and  
Interpersonal Variables in Different Job  
Categories, Personnel Psychology,  Volume 34, 1981.
Page 159
75. Rizzo, J., House, R.,  and Lirtzman, S., Role  
Conflict and Ambiguity in Complex Organizations,  
Administrative Science Quarterly,  Volume 15, 1970.
76. Robinson, J., Athanasiou, R.,  and Head, K.,
Measures of Occupational Characterist ics,  Ann
Arbor: Institute for Social Research, University
of Michigan, 1969.
77. Scholl, R.,  Differentiating Organizational
Commitment From Expectancy as a Motivating Force,  
Academy of Management Review,  Volume 6 , Number 4 ,  
1981.
78. Schuler, R., The Effects of Role Perceptions on  
Employee Satisfaction and Performance Moderated by  
Employee Ability, Organizational Behavior and Human  
Performance,  Volume 18, 1977.
79. Schuler, R.,  Aldag, R.,  and Brief, A., Role  
Conflict and Ambiguity a Scale Analysis,  
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance,  
Volume 20, 1977.
80. Schuler, R.,  Todor, W.,  and Podsakoff, P.,  
Clarification and Extension of the Path-Goal Theory  
of Leadership, Unpublished paper draft 2 ,  1982.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.Page 160
Schwab, D., amd Cummings, L.,  Theories of  
Performance and Satisfaction:  A Review, Industrial
Relations, Volume 9 , 1970.
Smith, P., Kendall, L.,  and Hulin, C., The  
Measurement of Sat isfact ion in Work and Ret i  rement,  
Chicago: Rand, 1969.
Steers, R.,  Antecedents and Outcomes of  
Organizational Commitment, Administrative Science  
Quarterly,  Volume 22, March, 1977,
Steers, R. and Mowday, R.,  Employee Turnover and  
Post-Decision Accommodation Process, Research in  
Organizational Behavior,  Volume 3 , 1981.
Stevens, J., Beyer, J., and Trice, H.,  Assessing  
Personal, Role, and Organizational Predictors of  
Managerial Commitment, Academy of Management  
Journal,  Volume 21, Number 3 ,  1978.
Stumpf, S., and Hartman, K., Individual Exploration  
to Organizational Commitment or Withdrawl,  
Unpublished Working paper, March, 1983.
Taylor, S., and Tanniru, M., ***f  SIG-CFR
Proceedings,  Association of Computing Machinery,
1981.
80.
89.
90.
91.
92.
93.Page 161
Tushman, M. ,  Special Boundary Roles in the  
Innovation Process, Administrative Sc ience  
Quarterly,  Volume 22, December, 1977.
Tushman, M . ,  and Scanlan, T.,  Boundary Spanning  
Individuals: Their Role in Information Transfer
and Their Antecedents, Academy of Management  
Journal, Volume 24, Number 2 , 1981’ .
Valenzi, E.,  and Dessler, G., Relationships of  
Leader Behavior, Subordinate Role Ambiguity and  
Subordinate Job Satisfaction, Academy of Management  
Journal,  Volume 21, Number 4, 1978.
Van Sell, M., Brief, A., and Schuler, R., Role  
Conflict and Role Ambiguity: Integration of the
Literature and Directions for Future Research,  
Human Relations,  Volume 34, 1981.
Weiss, D.,  Dawis, R.,  England, G.,  and Lofquist,  
L.,  Manual for the Minnesota Sat isfact ion  
Quest ionnai re,  Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota, Industrial Relations Center, Minnesota  
Studies in Vocational Rehabilitation 22, 1967.
Wiener, Y.,  Commitment in Organizations: A
Normative View, Academy of Management Review,  
Volume 7 ,  Number 3 ,  1982.
Page 162
94. Wiener, Y.,  and Vardi, Y.,  Relationships between  
Job, Organization, and Career Commitments and Work  
Outcomes-An Integrative Approach, Organizational  
Behavior and Human Performance,  Volume 26, 1980.
95. Woodruff, C., Data Processing People-Are They  
Really Different?, Information and Management,  
Volume 3 ,  Number 4, October 1980.
APPENDIX
Page 164
Moms; ___________________________
On the following pages you will find a number of questions about you and 
your job. Specific instructions are given at the start of each section. 
Please read then carefully.
The questions are designed to obtain your perceptions of your job and your 
reactions to it.
There are no "trick" questions. Your individual answers will be kept 
completely confidential. Please answer each item as honestly and frankly 
as possible. The questions are generally answered by circling a number or 
filling in a blank. Many of the questions ask you to circle one of five 
numbers, for example:
What was the weather like todayT (please circle one)
1  2 3 (7) 5
Cold Hot
If you thought it was warm you might circle a "4". Please work rapidly and 
answer all the questions.
Thank you for your cooperation.
PLEASE NOTE:
Copyrighted m aterials in this document 
have not been filmed at the request of 
the author. They a re  available for 
consultation, however, in the author's 
university library.
These consist of p ages:
1 6 5 - 1 7 3 , APPENDIX "A"
University
Microfilms
International
300 N Zeeb Rd., Ann Arbor, Ml 48106 (313) 761-4700
Page 174
Biographical Background
Age (check one> :
  under 20   40-49
  20-29   50-59
30-39 __ 60 or over
Education (check one): 
some High School
  High School Degree
Technical School Qeperienee 
Some College Experience
  College Degree
  Some Graduate Work
Master'9 or higher degree 
Was college or graduate work computer or information systems related?
Yea  bio
Sex:  Mala Female
Page 175
General Information
Years experience in EDP: ___
Years with company: ____
Years in current department: __
Please check the phrase below which best describes your 
job duties (check only one):
  Analyte user requests, evaluate alternative
solutions and prepare solution specifications.
  Code and test computer programs from
predefined specifications.
 Analyze user requests, evaluate alternative
solutions, prepare solution specifications and 
code and test computer programs from solution 
specifications.
Hhat is your official job title? ____________________
Please indicate the percentage of the time you spent during the last 12
months working on each of the following types of computer-baBed systems:
Applications software development _ _ %
Applcations software enhancement _____________ ___ %
Applications software maintenance __ %
Technical support or systems software 
(development, enhancements, or maintenance) ___ %
To what extent during the past 12 months have you served as a project 
leader(i.e. you were responsible for managing and coordinating the efforts 
of personnel involved in the project)? Circle the appropriate response.Total 100 %
1 2 3 4 5
Never About Half 
the timeA11 the time
Page 176
Approximately how many people 
work in your department?
Does your department provide services for: (please check 
the one answer which best describes your department's work)
v
 the entire company
 a division of the company
a sub-unit within a division
How many levels are there between the director 
of His or Systems and the lowest level coder 
including both the top and bottom levels? ____
' ! ■
Does your department use project teamB?
Yes   No
If you answered yes to the prior question do you: (check one)
 always work with the same team members regardless
of the project
y _____ work with different team members depending
2 on the project
 neither (please describe):
How many projects, on average, do you work on at
the same time?
How many people are on an average project team? _______
(Enter a zero if you are not assigned to project teams)
What is the average duration of a project in months?
(enter n/a if you do not work on projects) ___
Page 177
Whoa are you required to report to: (check all that apply)
 A functional manager within your department
such as the programming manager or systems 
development manager
 A manager in charge of a particular system or
set of systems such as the manager of accounting 
aystems
 A project or team leader
 Someone within the user department
 None of the above
Please describe:
Which of the following hardware do you work with? 
(check all that apply)
  Large mainframes
Minicomputers
  Micro's or Personal Computers
Briefly describe the type of hardware systems you use: 
(manufacturer and modal number)
please use the fallowing scale to describe your 
level of use of the following items:
1  2 3 4 5
No use Extensive use
Structured Design Techniques (e.g. Yourdon,
Warnier, Jackson design, SADT, etc.) 1 2  3 4
Structured Programming 1  2 3 4 5
Paqe 178
Do you consider, on average, the projects you have 
been involved with (circle oneji
1 2  3 4 S
Boring and Innovative and
Routine State of the Art
please list the three computer languages (e.g. COBOL, 
APL, PASCAL, BAL, EMPIRE, etc.) and/or automated 
design tools that you use most frequently and the 
approximate percentage of total work time you use each.
2.     %
3.     %
How sophisticated are the tools available to you 
to support programming or systems development? (circle one)
1  2 3 4 5
Very Very
Unsophisticated Sophisticated
How extensive are the formalized standards that you are 
expected to follow when designing or programming a system? 
(circle one)
1  2 3 4 5
Ho standards A great many
standards
To what extent are these standards enforced? (circle one)
1  2 3 4 5
Hot enforced Strictly
at all enforced
When programming or designing a system do you have 
online programming or entry capability (e.g. TSO)? 
(check one)
No YesB
Ho
Tools
Page 179
On averga do you find the users you work with?
1  2  
Unmotivated4 5
Motivated
Interested4 5
Uninterested
1
Dumb Intelligent
1
Hostile Friendly
l  2
Appreciative 
of your 
effortsUnappreciative 
of your 
efforts
1  2  3 4 5
Resist Eager for
new systems new systems
(PLEASE GO ON THE THE NEXT PAGE)
Page 180
In the following questions, please circle the number that best represents your 
present situation.
How frequently do you think of quitting your jab?
1  2 3 4 5
Never Constantly
I intend to leave this organisation.
1  2 3 4 5
Definitely Definitely
Not Yes
I plan to search for another jab.
1  2 3 4 5
Definitely Definitely
Not Yes
In how many other departments of this company could you 
do the same kind of work you presently do?
1  2 3  4 5
None Many
How frequently do you think of transfering to a different 
department in this company?
1  2 3  4 5
Never Constantly
I intend to transfer to another department within this company.
1  2 3 4 5
Definitely Definitely
Not Yes
I plan to search for a job in another department of this company.
1  2 3 4 5
Definitely Definitely
Not yes
Page 181
Please describe briefly your last two jobs, not including your current position. 
If either job was not in data processing, please indicate the department it was 
in. If this is your first job or you have had fewer than two prior positions 
please indicate this.
Job 1  (most recent prior position)
Job Ti tie :_ ____________________________________ _____ ____________
job Duties: _______  ________________ ___________________________
Job 2
Job Title 
Job Duties:
Please describe briefly what you expect your next two positions to be. If you 
expect either position not to be in data processing, please indicate the 
department it will be in.
Job l  (next position)
Job Title:
job Duties: _________________________ _____________________________
Job 2
Job Title:_ 
Job Duties:
If you started a job search today how easily could you 
find a job similar to the one you have today.
1  2 3  4 5
Very Only With
Easily Great Difficulty
It would be very easy for me to find another job comparable 
to my present job.
1  2 3 4 5
Definitely Definitely
Hot Yes
APPENDIX
Page 183
New Y o r k  U n i v e r s i t y
- A  p r i r u l r  umvrrmy i n  i h t p v b t u  <  rtu  f 
G raduate Sdwol o f  Duj>nrs> A dm inhlraliofi
100 Trinity P i n t  
New York, N Y. 10006 
Telephone: (212) 285-6123
C a m p u u r  A p p lic a n t ns a n d  In fo rm a liu ri S y :lc m r A rea 
January 10, 1983
Dear Hr.
The Center for Research on Information Systems at the NYU Graduate School, 
of Business Administration is beginning s research project on the 
management of information systems personnel. This research is aimed at 
under a tending the reasons for turnover among information systems 
personnel. Ultimately we hope to use this information to develop 
management strategies to control turnover and improve the job 
satisfaction and commitment of information systems personnel- With the 
recruitment and retention of qualified personnel becoming increasingly 
difficult each year, we believe this study will be of substantial 
interest to you.
In order to conduct this study we would like to survey approximately 
twenty numbers of your staff: systems analysts, applications programmers, 
and project leaders. Each participant will be asked to fill out a 
questionnaire which will require no more than forty-five minutes of each 
person's time. Of course, complete confidentiality is guaranteed at all 
participants and their companies. In return, all participating companies 
will receive the results of the study in summary form. In addition, the 
principal investigator will make time available to discuss the results 
and any related Issues you feel are of particular interest to you or your 
company.
Jack Baroudl will bo in contact with you over the next few weeks to 
further discuss the study and the possibility of your participating. 
Please feel free to contact us if you have any questions.
r
Sincerely,
1  1  .
Michael Ginsberg
Associate Professor and r -
Director, Affiliates Program
j u  ( U ,
Jack Baroudi 
Principal Investigator
MG i  dp
Page 184
APPENDIX C
Paqe 105
New York U n i v e r s i t y
A  p r ir a tr  u n n e M J f V  tn t h t  p u b lic
G ra d u a te  School c f  B u sin eii A d m in iilraiio ri
100 T rin iiy  Place 
N ew  Y ork, N .Y . 10006 
T elephone: (212) 285-6000
Dear Study Participant:
The Center for Research on Information Systems at Jlew York 
University's Graduate School of Business is conducting a study 
about information systems personnel. The research center is 
asking you to fill out the attached questionnaire in order to 
better understand what you do, and how you feel about your job 
and your company. All responses are strictly confidential;  
your company will not have access to your questionnaires. Your 
company will receive only a summary report with no mention of 
individual responses.
We request that you include your name on the front page 
of the questionnaire to allow us to gather follow up data. If 
you have any questions or concerns, please feel free to call 
me. Thank you for your cooperation.
Sincerely,
Q . - w t  I W X -
Jack Baroudi 
Principal Investigator,
Center for Research on Information 
Systems
APPENDIX
Page 187
New York U n i v e r s i t y
A  p r i ta l r  u n i r tr j t t y  iff th e  p u b lic  Im t c t
□ r a d u ite  School of B u tin c it A d m in istratio n
100 T rinity PU ce 
N ew  Y ork. N Y. 10006 
T elephone: (212) 285-6000
Dear Study Participant:
The Center for Research on Information Systems at Mew York 
University's Graduate School of Business is conducting a  
study about information systems personnel. The research 
center is asking you to fill out the attached questionnaires 
in order to better understand what you do, and how you feel 
about your job and your company. All responses are strictly 
confidential ■ .  your company will not have access to the 
questionnaires or to your individual answers.  Only the 
research staff at New York University will have access to 
your questionnaires. Your company will receive only a summary 
report with no mention of individual responfts.
We request that you include your name on the front page 
of the questionnaire to allow us to gather follow up data.
If you have any questions or concerns, please feel free 
to call.
When you have completed the questionnaire please fold it and 
seal it in the envelope provided. Return the envelope to the 
designated party and it will be forwarded to NYU. Thank you 
for your cooperation.
Sincerely,
ack Baroudi
Principal Investigator,
Center for Research on Information 
Systems
