--- PAGE 1 ---
© Academy of Management Journal
1981, Vol. 24, No. 1,83-98.
Characteristics and
External Orientations of
Boundary Spanning Individuals^
MICHAEL L. TUSHMAN
THOMAS J. SCANLAN
Columbia University
This field study investigates the characteristics of in-
ternal communication stars, the characteristics of
boundary spanning individuals, and the extent to which
boundary spanning individuals span multiple communi-
cation boundaries. The characteristics of boundary
spanning individuals were found to be contingent on
f their subunit's work and on the information boundary
they span. There is substantial boundary role overlap.
Substantial research indicates that boundary spanning individuals are
an important mechanism for linking their organization or subunit to exter-
nal sources of information (Aldrich & Herker, 1977; Coleman, Katz, &
Menzel, 1%6; Tushman, 1977; Rodgers & Shoemaker, 1971). The re-
search reported in this paper extends the boundary spanning literature by
investigating the characteristics of boundary spanners and by exploring
the extent to which they link their subunits to more than one external area.
Although the setting for this research is an R&D laboratory, the logic will
be directed at the more generically interesting problem of characterizing
those individuals who function as boundary spanners. This study was con-
ducted at the R&D facility of a major American corporation. The labora-
tory is divided into seven departments which are, in turn, divided into
projects. The types of projects range from more universally oriented re-
search to more locally defined technical service. Details appear in the
methods section.
PRIOR RESEARCH
Several studies have found that boundary spanning individuals are an
efficient way to gather information from and transfer information to
'This work was supported by a grant from the Center for Research in Career Development at Co-
lumbia University. A portion of this research was presented at the National Academy of Management
meetings, 1979.
83


--- PAGE 2 ---
M Academy of Management Journal > . March
external areas (Allen & Cohen, 1969; Schwartz & Jacobson, 1977; Whitley
& Frost, 1973; Keegan, 1974). Although widespread communication to ex-
ternal areas is inefficient and costly (Arrow, 1974), key individuals are
able to communicate effectively across boundaries and are, therefore, an
important linking mechanism (March & Simon, 1958). Boundary spanning
individuals are those who are internal communication stars (that is, they
are frequently consulted on work related matters) and who have substan-
tial communication with areas outside their unit. Because subunits face
several distinct external information areas, boundary spanning individuals
evolve to attend to each (Miles, 1977; Tushman, 1977).
This research distinguishes between boundary spanning individuals and
those who simply have substantial boundary spanning activity (Adams,
1976; Leifer & Huber, 1977; Keller & Holland, 1975). Individuals who
have substantial boundary spanning activity (BSA) may gather informa-
tion from external areas, yet there is no evidence that this information is
disseminated within the organization (Von Hippel, 1976). Boundary span-
ning individuals, however, are strongly linked externally and internally, so
that they can both gather and transfer information from outside their sub-
unit (Scanlan & Tushman, 1979).
Although there is substantial evidence of boundary spanning individuals
from many disciplines (Coser, 1975; Crane, 1972; Sundquist, 1978;
Schwartz & Jacobson, 1977; Webster, 1970; Hirsch, 1972), there has been
less convergence on the characteristics of these key individuals. Further-
more, there has been no research to assess the extent to which boundary
spanning individuals span single or multiple communication boundaries.
Because boundary spanning individuals are internal communication stars
who are also strongly linked externally, this research investigates: (1) char-
acteristics of internal communication stars for subunits with different
tasks, (2) characteristics of boundary spanning individuals who specialize
their external communication to specific domains, and (3) the degree to
which these individuals span multiple communication boundaries.
Internal Communication Stars
Allen (1970), Farris (1972), Blau (1963), and Taylor (1972) have found
that in units with complex tasks, communication stars were more educated
and more professional (they read more, published more, had more pa-
tents) than were less active members of the organization. Furthermore,
Allen and Taylor reported that approximately 50 percent of the communi-
cation stars were supervisors. However, in organizations with more rou-
tine tasks, Pettigrew (1972) and Frost and Whitley (1971) found that com-
munication stars were more likely to be supervisors (or administrators)
and were not more educated than non-stars.
These studies, although different in setting and method, have a com-
mon thread. Internal communication stars are seen by their colleagues as
being technically competent; they are consulted more frequently because


--- PAGE 3 ---
1981 Tushman and Scanlan 85
they are perceived to have work-related expertise. This association be-
tween perceived competence and colleague consultation has been found in
a variety of settings including: research organizations (Keller & Holland,
1975); informal gangs (Whyte, 1943); academic disciplines (Crane, 1972;
Campbell, 1969); universities (Baldridge, 1971; Schwartz & Jacobson,
1977); governmental settings (Wilensky, 1967; Sundquist, 1978); and in
medical communities (Coleman et al., 1966).
If perceived competence is an important determinant of internal contact
and if different tasks require different backgrounds, skills, and orienta-
tions, the characteristics of internal communication stars may be contin-
gent on the nature of their subunit's work (for example, research projects
require information and skill to develop new knowledge; technical service
projects require skill in modifying current products given existing knowl-
edge). These ideas suggest several research questions:
1. Are the differences between communication stars and non-stars simi-
lar across different task categories? For instance, will differences be-
tween stars and non-stars in research projects be the same as differ-
ences found in technical service projects?
2. Are the characteristics of communication stars different for various
task categories? For instance, will research stars have characteristics
different from those of technical service stars?
Boundary Spanning Roles
To perform an external linking function, internal communication stars
must also be strongly connected to external information areas. Consistent
with research in a range of settings, Tushman (1977) found that communi-
cation stars had significantly more communication than did non-stars with
other areas in the laboratory, with areas in the larger corporation, and
with areas outside the organization (Allen & Cohen, 1969; Schwartz &
Jacobson, 1977; McCIure, 1978).
The boundaries between the specific project and other areas of the lab-
oratory, other organizational areas, and areas outside the organization are
each associated with specialized information requirements (Miles, 1977).
Communication with other laboratory areas focuses on technical problem
solving, communication with the larger organization focuses on project
implementation and administration, and communication with extra-
organizational areas focuses on information from suppliers, vendors, cus-
tomers, or professional areas (Rosenbloom & Wolek, 1970; Tushman,
1978). If external information areas have contrasting information needs
and demands, and if boundary spanning individuals must be able to com-
municate effectively across these boundaries, then boundary spanning in-
dividuals may have specialized characteristics to fit each area's informa-
tion requirements (Thompson, 1967; Kelly & Kranzberg, 1975).
These ideas suggest several additional research questions:
3. Are there differences in the characteristics of boundary spanning in-
dividuals who focus on particular external areas? For instance, do


--- PAGE 4 ---
tt Academy of Management Journal March
intra-iaboratory boundary individuals have different characteristics
from those individuals who link their projects to the larger organiza-
tion?
4. Do individuals specialize in a single information area, or are there
boundary spanning individuals who span severai information bound-
aries simuitaneously?
SETTING AND METHODS
This study focused on the communication activity of the technicai staff
(secretaries and administrators were not included) of the R&D facility of a
iarge American corporation (N=345). The laboratory is physically iso-
lated from the rest of the corporation and is divided into seven depart-
ments (or divisional laboratories). The departments are, in turn, organized
into separate project areas. The projects (N=61) were stable over the
course of the research, and each respondent was a member of only one
project. -
Technical Communicalion
As boundary spanning is basically an informal process, this research
focused on oral communication (Allen, i977; Keegan, i974). Aithough
written media assume greater importance for tasks that are either very rou-
tine or nonroutine, even under these conditions boundary spanning indi-
viduais direct their more iocally oriented colleagues to more formal media
(Pettigrew, 1972).
To provide communication data, individuals were asked to report their
actuai, work-reiated, oral communication for a number of selected days
(the respondents were asked not to report strictly social communication,
nor did they report written communication). These data were coliected
once a week for 15 weeks (an equal number of each of the weekdays was
chosen). The overali response rate was 93 percent; moreover, 69 percent of
all the communication reported within the laboratory was mentioned by
both parties. See Weiss and Jacobson (1960) for comparative data. The
extra-laboratory data were self-report data that couid not be corroborated
with discussion partners.
In order to identify the internal stars and boundary spanning individ-
uals, the communication activity of each professional was separated into
the following mutually exclusive communication domains: intra-depart-
ment, intra-laboratory (outside the department), organizational, and
extra-organizational. Extra-organizational communication was further
separated into professional (universities, professional societies) and opera-
tional (suppliers, vendors, customers) areas. Consistent with Allen (1970)
and Whitley and Frost (1973), internal stars were defined as those individ-
uals in the top fifth of the intra-department communication distribution,
and 50 internal communication stars were located. (One department was


--- PAGE 5 ---
1981 Tushman and Scantan 87
substantially larger and more heterogeneous than the other six. It was ex-
cluded from these analyses.) Boundary spanning individuals are those in-
ternal stars who also are in the top fifth of an external communication
distribution (i.e., laboratory, organization, extra-organization).
Project Task Characteristics
The following task categories were developed with the laboratory's
management to form a task dimension ranging from more universal (re-
search) to more locally defined (technical service).
1. Basic research: Work of a general nature intended to apply to a
broad range of applications or to the development of new knowledge
about an area.
2. General research: Work involving basic knowledge for the solution
of a particular problem. The creation and evaluation of new concepts
or components but not development for operational use.
3. Development: The combination of existing feasible concepts, per-
haps with new knowledge, to provide a distinctly new product or pro-
cess. The application of known facts and theory to solve a particular
problem through exploratory study, design, and testing of new com-
ponents or systems.
4. Technical service: Cost/performance improvement to existing prod-
ucts, processes, or systems. Recombination, modification, and test-
ing of systems using existing knowledge. Opening new markets for
existing products.
Using these definitions, respondents were asked to select one category
that best characterized the objective of their project and to indicate, on a
3-point scale, how completely the project's objectives were represented by
the selected category. The 12 possible answers to this question were ar-
ranged and scored along a single numerical scale ranging from completely
basic research to completely technical service.
As in Pelz and Andrews (1966), in a separate question, respondents also
were asked to indicate what percentage of their project's work fell into
each of the four categories. A weighted average of the percentages was cal-
culated for each respondent to yield a score comparable with the previous
question. The scored responses to these two questions were averaged
(Spearman-Brown reliability = .91).
Project measures were calculated by averaging individual members'
scores. To check for the appropriateness of pooling, a one-way ANOVA
compared within-project variance with between-project variance, and
Bartlett's A/-test examined the homogeneity of intra-project variance. Fol-
lowing these two broad tests, separate F-tests ensured that the variance
within each project was not significantly greater than the pooled variance.
Measures for 55 projects passed all three tests and clustered into the fol-
lowing task categories: research (general) =13 projects (there were no
basic research projects); development = 22 projects; and technical ser-
vice =20 projects.


--- PAGE 6 ---
gg Academy of Management Journal March
Demographic Data
Approximately 80 percent of the technical staff responded to a ques-
tionnaire that asked: (1) educational level (l=high school through
5 = Ph.D.); (2) number of technical association or trade meetings attended
over the past two years (these were meetings attended by suppliers, cus-
tomers, vendors, and other competitors); (3) number of papers presented
or published in the past five years; (4) years worked in the laboratory;
(5) formal status (1 = department manager through 4 = bench-level scien-
tist or engineer); and (6) whether or not the individual had been trans-
ferred between departments within the laboratory (scored 0 or 1).
A factor analysis was performed to identify any redundancy among the
set of demographic variables. Educational level and papers presented or
published combined to form the variable termed professional orientation
(^^65), Formal status, years in the laboratory, number of technical asso-
ciation or trade meetings attended, and number of transfers within the
laboratory remained as distinct variables.
RESULTS
Internal Communication Stars
Before addressing research questions one and two, it is instructive to
compare communication stars vs. non-stars for the entire sample. Stars
have more laboratory experience and are located at higher levels of the
hierarchy than non-stars (50 percent of the stars are supervisors). Further-
more, if the three individuals who were hired at mangerial levels are elimi-
nated, then the remaining stars have significantly (p<.08) more labora-
tory transfers than do non-stars. Communication stars also are more ex-
ternally oriented than non-stars; they are both more professionally and
operationally oriented than non-stars (Table 1). (A professional orienta-
tion refers to gathering general technical/scientific information, and an
operational orientation refers to information gathering focused on more
specific organizational objectives [Rosenbloom & Wolek, 1970].)
TABLE 1
Characteristics of Communication Stars and Non-Stars
Technical/
FormaP Years in Laboratory Professional Trade
Status Laboratory Transfer Orientation Meetings
Stars (N = 40) '^5 ^l ^^ 2:0^ ^^
Non-Stars iN= 144) 3.78 6.68 .17 K55
Significance ** [p-.U)
'Lower scores indicate higher status.


--- PAGE 7 ---
1981 Tushman and Scanlan 89
A stepwise discriminant analysis indicates that hierarchical level is the
most powerful determinant of intra-departmental communication, and
that professional orientation and laboratory tenure are other important
determinants of internal communication (standardized discriminant coef-
ficients are, respectively, .70, -.36 and -.34; overall F=\0.32, p<.Ol).
Compared to their colleagues, then, communication stars have strong and
diverse external orientations. Their internal linkages are based on both
formal (e.g., transfers, status) and informal (tenure) mechanisms.
If communication stars are those individuals who are most frequently
approached for technical consultation (Blau, 1963; Allen, 1977) and if dif-
ferent tasks require special skills, backgrounds, and information, then dif-
ferences between stars and non-stars may be specialized by task category.
To address research question one. Table 2 contrasts the characteristics of
stars and non-stars for research, technical service, and development proj-
ects.
For each task category, stars have more formal status than non-stars.
Formal status is associated with internal consultation independent of task
category. There are, however, differences by task category. Communica-
tion stars in the research projects have had significantly more intra-
laboratory transfers and have more laboratory experience than non-stars
in research projects. Furthermore, communication stars in research proj-
ects are more professionally oriented that non-stars (that is, these individ-
uals not only have more advanced degrees, but they also choose to publish
more than non-stars in research areas). A stepwise discriminant analysis
indicates that years in the laboratory and professional orientation are the
strongest determinants of being consulted in research areas. Communica-
tion with operational areas (technical/trade meetings) is inversely related
to technical consultation within research projects (Table 3).
TABLE 2
Characteristics of Communication Stars and Non-Stars by Tasit'
Research
Stars (n = 12)
Non-stars (n = 36)
Significance
Technical Service
Stars {n = 8)
Non-stars (n = 32)
Significance
Development
Stars (n=14)
Non-stars (n = 68)
SignificanceStatus
3.50
3.89
«•
2.92
3.81
«**
3.43
3.87
«••Years in
Laboratory
8.92
4.44
*••
7.13
6.69
9.86
7.06Laboratory
Transfer
.33
.11
•
.13
.06
.36
.24Professional
Orientation
2.63
1.82
•«
1.58
1.45
1.57
1.35Technical/
Trade
Meetings
2.33
2.64
5.38
2.06
••*
4.50
3.03
=Six stars and eight non-stars were upper level supervisors who spanned several task categories and
therefore are not included in this or following analyses based on task categories.
*p<-10
•*p<.05
*01


--- PAGE 8 ---
90Academy of Management Journat March
TABLE 3
Characteristics of Communication Stars and
Non-Stars by Task: Discriminant Analysis
A. For research tasks
Variable
Years in laboratory
Professional orientation
Status
Technical/trade meetings
Correctly classified: 77'>7oStars (rt = 12) vs Non-Stars (n = 36)
Standardized Discriminant F(l,43)
Coefficient
-.66
-.59
.44
.394.23*»
4.76»*
5.93**
2.73*
Overall F(4,43)= 4.90**
B. For technical service tasks
Variable
Status
Technical/trade meetings
Correctly classified: 80%Stars (n = 8) vs Non-Stars (n = 32)
Standardized Discriminant F(l,37)
Coefficient
.65
-.548.36***
2.86*
Overall F(2.37) = 5.81***
C. For development tasks
Variable
Status
Correctly classified: 83%Stars [n = 14) vs Non-Stars (n = 68)
Standardized Discriminant
Coefficient
1.00
Overall F(l,80) =6.58'
6.58'
••*p<.01
For technical service and development projects a different pattern
emerges. For technical service projects, internal communication stars have
more formal status and are more strongly connected to operational areas
than are non-stars (that is, these individuals choose to attend techni-
cal/trade meetings more than do non-stars). For development projects,
the only difference between stars and non-stars is supervisory status.
One interpretation of these results is that those with higher rank are re-
quired to communicate with their subordinates and are by definition inter-
nal communication stars. However, not all supervisors are stars. Only 48
percent of the laboratory's top management are internal communication
stars, and the percentage of supervisors who are internal communication
stars varies from 20 percent in development projects to 60 percent in tech-
nical service projects. Furthermore, throughout the laboratory, only 50
percent of the stars are supervisors. Supervisory status, then, is neither a
necessary nor sufficient condition to be an internal communication star.
Formal position, however, does facilitate internal consultation.
Research question 2 asked if communication stars in different task areas
would have different characteristics. There are significantly more stars as
supervisors in technical service projects than in research or development
projects (Chi-square = 5.32; p<.10). Evidently, supervisors in the more
organizationally defined and routine technical service projects are more


--- PAGE 9 ---
19gi Tushman and Scanlan 91
likely to have requisite task information than are supervisors in the more
universally defined and more complex research or development projects.
Besides formal status, there are no other differences in the determinants of
internal linkages for stars in different task categories (there are no system-
atic differences in years in the laboratory or internal transfers).
There are, however, differences in external orientation between stars in
different task areas. Stars in research projects are significantly more pro-
fessionally oriented than are stars in the other categories {p < .07). Techni-
cal service stars, on the other hand, are more strongly oriented towards the
operational domain than are stars in research projects (p<.04). Commu-
nication stars, then, seem to be oriented towards information areas that
are most crucial to their project's work requirements.
Boundary Spanning Individuals
Laboratory and organizational liaisons were identified by selecting
those internal communication stars who also were in the top fifth of the
laboratory or organization communication distribution (Allen, 1977;
Whitley & Frost, 1973). Of the 50 internal stars, 12 linked their depart-
ments to other laboratory areas (laboratory liaisons); 10 individuals linked
their departments to the larger organization (organizational liaisons). The
requirements of both boundary roles were satisfied by 14 individuals.
They were internal communication stars who also were strongly linked to
other departments within the laboratory as well as to areas in the larger or-
ganization. There were 14 communication stars who were not strongly
linked to either the laboratory or the larger organization. In response to
research question 4, then, there is substantial role overlap; of the bound-
ary roles identified, approximately 39 percent were individuals who
spanned both boundaries.
Communication within the laboratory deals with technical problem
solving and development. Communication with organizational areas deals
with questions of implementation and administration (Myers & Marquis.
1969; Tushman, 1978). Research question 3 reasoned that because differ-
ent information areas have different requirements and demands, bound-
ary spanning individuals who focus on particular domains may have spe-
cialized characteristics to meet those demands.
Section A of Table 4 contrasts the characteristics of laboratory and or-
ganizational liaisons. Consistent with the more universal demands of the
intra-laboratory boundaries, laboratory liaisons are more professionally
oriented than are organizational liaisons. Organizational liaisons, on the
other hand, consistent with the more organizationally defined and experi-
enced based information requirements of the laboratory-organization
boundary, are more organizationally experienced than are laboratory
liaisons.
Both boundaries were spanned by 14 internal communication stars.
They were strongly linked to other laboratory areas as well as to areas in


--- PAGE 10 ---
92 Academy of Managemeni Journal March
TABLE 4
Characteristics of Communication
A. Laboratory liaisons
Organizational liaisons
d.f. = 17
B. Laboratory liaisons
Laboratory and orga-
nizational liaisons
d.f. = 18Status
3.40
3.44
3.40
2.40Years in
Laboratory
7.1
10.3
7.1
11.1Laboratory
Transfer
.30
.22
.30
.30Liaisons
Professional
Orientation
2.40
1.33
2.40
2.65Technical/Trade
Meetings
4.30
2.89
4.30
14.60
the larger organization. These individuals had the professional character-
istics of laboratory liaisons as well as the organizational experience of or-
ganizational liaisons (section B of Table 4). The only statistically signifi-
cant difference between individuals spanning both boundaries and those
spanning a single boundary is that the former are more likely to be super-
visors.
Because stars had significantly greater extra-organizational communica-
tion than non-stars in 3 of the 6 departments, only 12 gatekeepers (that is,
internal stars who also were strongly connected to external areas) were
identified. Only 2 of the 12 gatekeepers simply tend to information areas
outside the organization (Table 5). The other 10 gatekeepers also serve as
either laboratory or organizational liaisons. Furthermore, 4 of these 12 in-
dividuals have extensive communication with all three communication
areas: intra-laboratory, organizational, and extra-organizational. One-
third of the gatekeepers, then, are individuals who link their projects to
three external information areas.
There is further gatekeeper specialization. Gatekeepers who span two
boundaries tend to link their project to a particular external area. Techni-
cal service gatekeepers (with one exception) also attend to the laboratory-
organization interface, and gatekeepers in research areas also attend to the
intra-laboratory boundary (Table 5). Although the sample size requires
caution, these data suggest the gatekeepers occupy an even more central
TABLE 5
Number of Gatekeepers Who Aiso Span
Other Communication Boundaries by Task
Task Area
Research
Technical serviceExternal Only
2
0Boundaries Spanned
External and
Laboratory
3
1External and
Organizationai
0
2External,
Laboratory, and
Organizational
3
1Total
8
4


--- PAGE 11 ---
1981 Tushman and Scanlan 93
role in the transfer of information than previously recognized. These key
individuals are sources of critical information to their own areas as well as
to the larger laboratory and organization.
Gatekeepers have the same characteristics as the individuals who span
both the laboratory and organizational boundaries. They tend to be super-
visors (30 percent are above first-line supervisor) who have the same de-
gree of professional involvement as laboratory liaisons and the same
amount of organizational experience as organizational liaisons.
REVIEW AND DISCUSSION
Boundary spanning individuals are an important mechanism by which
subunits are linked to external sources of information. These individuals
are strongly linked to their colleagues and have extensive links outside
their subunit. This research has investigated the characteristics of these
key individuals for different task areas and information domains.
Over the entire sample, communication stars had significantly more lab-
oratory experience and more transfers within the laboratory and were
higher in the hierarchy than non-stars. Although formal status was an im-
portant determinant of internal linkage, 50 percent of the communication
stars were bench-level scientists or engineers. Internal linkage, then, can be
facilitated formally via administrative action (for example, transfers and
promotion), as well as informally (for example, networks and informal
status that may evolve with experience). Consistent with substantial litera-
ture, communication stars had stronger and more diverse external linkages
than did non-stars.
The characteristics and external orientations of communication stars
and non-stars were systematically different by task area. In research proj-
ects, stars were professionally oriented, and their internal linkage was
based on laboratory transfers, laboratory experience, and formal status.
Consistent with the more universal nature of research tasks, the stars* in-
ternal linkage was established through both formal and informal mecha-
nisms. In more organizationally defined technical service projects, on the
contrary, stars were more operationally oriented, and their internal link-
age was based primarily on formal status.
The alternate internal linkage mechanisms and the different external
orientations are consistent with the idea that work-related competence is a
primary determinant of being an internal communication star. For work
in the more locally defined technical service areas, supervisors may be a
primary source of both organization and task related information (Rosen-
bloom & Wolek, 1970; Keller & Holland, 1978). These supervisors seem to
focus their external communication on technical or trade meetings because
these settings provide operational information from suppliers, vendors,
and customers. For the more universal research tasks, however, more in-
formal mechanisms for developing internal linkages (for example, transfer
and experience) are important to complement formal status. Furthermore,


--- PAGE 12 ---
94 Academy of Management Journal March
communication stars in research projects focus on professional areas be-
cause these areas will provide up-to-date information on new knowledge.
These data, then, suggest that colleague consultation is not formally pre-
scribed, but rather an emergent laboratory phenomenon; individuals ap-
proach those whom they see as technically competent regardless of formal
status.
There also were differences in the characteristics of those boundary
spanning individuals who spanned different boundaries. Consistent with
information needs of the different areas, laboratory liaisons were more
professionally oriented, and organizational liaisons were more organiza-
tionally experienced. Those individuals who spanned both laboratory and
organizational boundaries tended to be supervisors with both extensive
laboratory experience and a strong professional orientation.
This research suggests that perceived competence is an important deter-
minant of boundary role status. What is most likely is that technically
competent individuals have extensive laboratory and organizational com-
munication networks developed from both professional involvement and
from organizational experience (Allen, 1977; Pelz & Andrews, 1966; Ed-
strom & Galbraith, 1977). Perceived technical competence, in turn, stimu-
lates internal consultation and may lead to a promotion (Allen, Gersten-
feld, & Gerstberger, 1968). Promotion further facilitates both internal and
external exposure, thereby enhancing the individual's ability to serve as a
liaison between the subunit and several external information areas (Figure
1). Although these results are limited to this setting, they are consistent
with results found in a variety of settings, from Blau's (1963) state employ-
ment agency, to Lazarsfeld, Berelson, and Gaudet's (1948) communities,
to Coleman et al.*s (1966) medical communities, to Rogers and Shoe-
maker's (1971) rural settings. Together, these results provide strong sup-
port for the linkage between perceived competence, colleague consulta-
tion, and boundary role status.
FIGURE 1
Antecedents of Boundary Spanning Roles
External
LinkageProfessional
and/or
Technical
Information
Internal
LinkageOrganizational
and/or
Task InformationPromotion
or
Formal Status


--- PAGE 13 ---
1981 Tushman and Scanian 95
The final analyses investigated the extent to which boundary spanning
individuals linked their projects to more than one external area. There was
substantial role overlap; 39 percent of the boundary spanning individuals
linked their projects to both laboratory and organizational areas. Similar-
ly, gatekeeper analyses found that one third of the gatekeepers attended to
all three communication boundaries. Only two gatekeepers specialized on
a single external area; the rest served as linking persons to both an external
as well as a laboratory/organizational information area, the particular ex-
ternal information area being contingent on the nature of the project's
task.
This degree of overlap substantially increases the boundary spanning in-
dividuals* effectiveness in coupling their subunit to external areas. Rather
than having to rely on separate individuals for information from different
external areas, more locally oriented staff members can go to a small set of
individuals who can provide information from several external areas. This
network specialization decreases the number of paths necessary to explore
in order to get external information. From an organizational point of
view, the existence of boundary role overlap increases the number of link-
ages to external information areas because boundary spanning individuals
frequently serve a linking function for several areas in the organization.
On the other hand, this substantial degree of role overlap increases the
boundary spanning individual's relative importance to the organization
and enhances his or her control over the acquisition and interpretation of
external information. The benefits of this potentially more efficient infor-
mation network versus the potential costs of decreased managerial control
and political use of information must be investigated (Pettigrew, 1972).
CONCLUSIONS
This research reinforces the importance of boundary spanning individ-
uals as a key mechanism to link more locally oriented personnel to external
information sources. Boundary spanning individuals were identified who
tended to distinct external information areas. Characteristics of these indi-
viduals were specialized to meet the information requirements of both
their project as well as their information boundary. Finally, there was sub-
stantial boundary role overlap—many individuals linked their projects to
several external information areas. From these results, it can be inferred
that boundary role status is based primarily on perceived technical compe-
tence. This hypothesis, of course, must be investigated in future research.
Future research must also address the determinants of internal consulta-
tion and external exposure, track the evolution of boundary spanning in-
dividuals, and explore the extent to which boundary spanning individuals
remain in these linking roles over time. Only then can the importance of
individual differences and organizational factors on the development of
boundary spanning individuals be assessed. Finally, if boundary spanning


--- PAGE 14 ---
96 Academy of Management Journal March
individuals mediate critical information they will be relatively powerful ac-
tors (March & Simon, 1958; Pettigrew, 1972). Future research must inves-
tigate the role of boundary spanning individuals in organizational decision
making beyond that of simply transferring information (O'Reilly &
Pondy, 1979; Aldrich & Herker, 1977).
More pragmatically, this research suggests that it is possible to manage
the careers of key individuals. Indeed, the 14 internal communication stars
who were weakly connected to external information areas may represent
untapped potential for the laboratory. This research suggests specific
levers for infiuencing internal and external communication. For example,
initial job assignments, in-house training, transfers, and varied job assign-
ments might enhance an individual's intra-organizational communication
network (Edstrom & Galbraith, 1977). Furthermore, management could
encourage more extensive external networks through: selective travel al-
lowances (professional-technical meetings; university symposia), more
liberal telephone budgets, easing access to scientific and/or technicalin-
formation (books, reports, journals), or support for special education
(seminars, short courses). Managers, then, can select potential boundary
spanning individuals and facilitate the development of their internal and
external communication networks.
Finally, if formal status does not preclude continued contact with lower
level individuals, explicit recognition and promotion of boundary span-
ning individuals may enhance their external as well as their organizational
exposure. Indeed, promotion of boundary spanning individuals not only
recognizes and rewards that critical activity, but it also permits those indi-
viduals to develop a more diverse external communication network and
thereby attend to several external information areas. On the other hand,
formalizing this role may be associated with role ambiguity and role con-
flict (Miles, 1977; Keller & Holland, 1975). Future research, then, must in-
vestigate the consequences of formalizing this informal process.
This research provides further support for the importance of boundary
spanning individuals and suggests that work related competence is an ini-
portant determinant of boundary role status. Future research must expli-
citly investigate this hypothesis as well as extend our knowledge of the
informational and decisional roles of boundary spanning individuals.
REFERENCES
1. Adams, J. The structure and dynamics of behavior on organizational boundary roles. In M.
Dunnette (Ed.), Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology, 1175-1200. Chicago:
Rand McNally, 1976.
2. Aldrich, H., & Herker, D. Boundary spanning roles and organization structure. Academy of
Management Review, 1977, 2, 217-230.
3. Allen, T. J. Roles in technical communication networks. In W. Pollock & C. Nelson (Eds.),
Comrnunications among scientists and technologists. Lexington: Heath Co., 1970, 181-208.
4 Allen, T. J. Managing the flow of technology. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1977.
5. Allen, T. J., & Cohen, S. Information flow in R&D labs. Administrative Science Quarterly,
1969,14, 12-19.


--- PAGE 15 ---
1981 Tushman and Scanlan 97
6. Allen, T. J., Gerstenfeld, A., & Gerstberger, P. The problem of internal consulting in research
and development. Cambridge: Sloan School of Management Working Paper, No. 319, 1968.
7. Arrow, K. The limits of organization. New York: Norton Co., 1974.
8. Baldridge, V. Power and conflict in the university. New York: Wiley and Sons, 1971.
9. Blau, P. The dynamics of bureaucracy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1963.
10. Campbell, D. Ethnocentrism of disciplines and the Fish-scale model of omniscience, in M. Sherf
and C. Sherf (Eds.), Interdisciplinary relationships in the social sciences. Chicago: Aldine, 1969,
328-348.
11. Coleman, J., Katz, D.. & Menzel, 1. Medical innovation: A diffusion study. New York: Free
Press, 1966.
12. Coser, L. Publishers as gatekeepers of ideas. Annals of the American Academy of Political and
Social Science, 421, September 1975, 14-22.
13. Crane, D. Invisible colleges. New York: Free Press, 1972.
14. Edstrom, A., & Galbraith, J. Management transfer as a coordination and control strategy./4(/-
ministrative Science Quarterly, 1977, 22, 248-263.
15. Farris, G. The effects of individual roles on performance in innovative groups. R&D Manage-
ment, 1972, 3, 23-28.
16. Frost, P., & Whitley, R. Communication patterns in a research lab. R&D Management, 1971, I,
71-79.
17. Hirsch, P. Processing fads and fashion: An organization set analysis of cultural industry systems.
American Journal of Sociology, 1972, 72, 639-659.
18. Keegan, W. Multinational scanning—A study of information sources utilized by executives in
multinational companies. Administrative Science Quarterly, 1974, 19, 411-422.
19. Keller, R., & Holland, W. Boundary spanning roles in an R&D organization. Academy of Man-
agement Journal, 1975, 18, 388-393.
20. Keller, R., & Holland, W. Individual characteristics of innovativeness and communication in
R&D organizations. Journal of Applied Psychology, 1978, 63, 759-762.
21. Kelly, P., & Kranzberg, M. Technological innovation: A critical review of current knowledge.
Atlanta, Ga.: Advanced Technology and Science Studies Group, Georgia Institute of Technol-
ogy, 1975.
22. Lazarsfeld. P.. Berelson, B., & Gaudet, H. The people's choice. New York: Free Press, 1948.
23. Leifer, R., & Huber, G. Relations among perceived environmental uncertainty, organization
structure, and boundary-spanning behavior. Administrative Science Quarterly, 1977, 22,
235-247.
24. March, J., & Simon, H. Organizations. New York: Wiley Co., 1958.
25. McClure, C. The information rich employee and information for decision making. Information
Processing and Management, 1978, 14, 381-394.
26. Miles, R. Role set configuration as a predictor of role conflict and ambiguity in complex organi-
zations. Sociometry, 1977, 40, 21-34.
27. Myers, S.. & Marquis, D. Successful industrial innovation. National Science Foundation, 1969.
28. O'Reilly, C-, & Pondy, L. Organizational communication. In S. Kerr (Ed.), Organizational be-
havior. Columbus, Ohio: Grid, 1979, 119-150.
29. Pelz, D., & Andrews, F. Scientists In organizations. New York: Wiley Co., 1966.
30. Pettigrew, A. Information control as a power resource. Sociology, 1972, 6, 187-204.
31. Rogers, E., & Shoemaker, F. Communication of innovations. New York: Free Press, 1971.
32. Rosenbloom, R., & Wolek, F. Technology and information transfer. Boston: Harvard Business
School, 1970.
33. Scanlan, T., & Tushman, M. Boundary spanning individuals: Their role in information transfer
and their antecedents. Academy of Management Journal, 1981, in press.
34. Schwartz, D., & Jacobson, E. Organizational communication network analysis: The liaison role.
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 1977, 18, 158-174.
35. Sundquist, J. Research brokerage: The weak link. The Brookings Institute Reprint 342, 1978.
36. Taylor, R. An analysis of the two step flow process in a military R&D laboratory. Unpublished
D.B.A. dissertation, Indiana University, 1972.
37. Thompson, J. D. Organizations in action. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1967.
38. Tushman, M. Special boundary roles in the innovation process. Administrative Science Quarter-
ly, 1977, 22, 587-606.
39. Tushman, M. Technical communication in research and development laboratories: Impact of
project work characteristics. Academy of Management Journal, 1978, 21, 624-645.
40. Von Hippel, E. Dominant role of users in the innovation process. Research Policy, 1976, 5,
212-239.


--- PAGE 16 ---
98 Academy of Management Journal March
41. Webster, F. Informal communication in industrial markets. Journal of Marketing Research,
1970, 7, 186-189.
42. Weiss, R.. & Jacobson. E. Structures of complex organizations. In J. Moreno (Ed.), Sociometry
reader. New York: Free Press, 1960, 522-533.
43. Whitley, R., & Frost. P. Task type and information transfer in a government research lab.
Human Relations, 1973. 25. 537-550.
44. Whyte. W. F. Street corner society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1943.
45. Wiicnsky. H. Organizational intelligence. New York: Basic Books, 1%7.


--- PAGE 17 ---
