11 Department Store Apparel Buyers:
Relationships Among Environmental Characteristics,
Environmental Uncertainty, Boundary Spanning Activities,
Managerial Discretion and Power
Shirley A. Lazorchak
Gwendolyn S. O’Neal
Authors’ Addresses: Shirley A. Lazorchak, Department of Textiles,
Apparel, and Merchandising, West Virginia University, Morgantown,WV 26506-6124 and Gwendolyn S. O’Neal, Department of Clothing
Textiles and Interior Design, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS
66506-1405.Abstract
The purpose of the study was to explore the relationships among environmental characteristics, uncertainty,
boundary spanning activities, managerial discretion, and power of the department store apparel buyer who assumes
combination or independent buyer responsibilities. Almubarek’s Model of Organizational Boundary Spanning and
Duncan’s (1972) Model of Environmental Uncertainty were used as conceptual frameworks. A questionnaire was
mailed to buyers who purchased merchandise in the moderate-to-better sportswear areas in the top 10 department
store groups in the United States.
The results generated support for the nature of relationships found among the variables in Almubarek’s Model:
a complex, dynamic environment leads to environmental uncertainty and perceptions of uncertainty trigger the use
of boundary spanning activities which enhances the power of the buyer. In addition, the placement of apparel
retailers within Duncan’s (1972) Model should be revised to reflect a highly uncertain environment.
Key Words: retail buyers, environmental uncertainty, boundary spanning.Lazorchak, S. A., & O’Neal, G. S. (2001). Department store apparel buyers: Relationships among environmental
characteristics, environmental uncertainty, boundary spanning activities, managerial discretion and power. Clothing
and Textiles Research Journal, 19(l), 11-21.
The apparel retail industry is undergoing a revolution
(Moin, 1999a) due to uncertainty and change emanating out
of environmental sectors (Gellers, 1999). Sectors impact-
ing the industry include human resources, technology, eco-
nomic, governmental, socio-cultural, raw materials and
international (Daft, 1992). Changes underway within the
sectors include increasing consolidation among stores;
growth of private label brands at the expense of national
brands; competition from online selling; Internet siphoning
of retail sales; shifts in consumer spending patterns from
apparel to entertainment, investment and housing; embrac-
ing of the casual lifestyle and the consumer’s disinterest in
fashion (Gellers, 1999). As a result, the apparel retail envi-
ronment is more complex, uncertain and dynamic than in
the past. Although all retailers are operating in an uncertainenvironment, department stores have been most strongly
affected and are losing their share of the apparel market.
&dquo;Since 1991, apparel has lost three percentage points of
market share in department stores, representing about $8.5
billion in lost sales for 1996....Apparel’s chunk of depart-
ment store’s sales stood at nearly 20 percent in 1987, peaked
in 1990 at close to 21 percent, and has been on a steady
downtrend since 1991.&dquo; In 1996, it fell to 17 percent
(Seckler, 1997, p. 22).
Some industry consultants and vendor partners blame
the managements of department stores for current problems
(Levy,1991). Other experts (Moin, 1992; Zinn, Power, Siler,
DeGeorge, & Zellner, 1990), however, believe that depart-
ment stores have been at the mercy of certain environmental
influences out of their control. For example, economists
say billions of dollars have been eliminated from the middle
market-the department store’s target market. In addition,
environmental uncertainty and an increase in the number of
environmental sectors impacting department stores have
changed the manner in which buyers interact with upper
management. This increasing environmental complexity and
uncertainty suggests the possibility of a change in manage-

12rial strategies as well as in the amount or type of power com-
manded by the buyer.
To cope with environmental uncertainty, the buyer ini-
tiated boundary spanning activities (i.e., activities which link
the organization with other organizations relevant to goal
attainment) (Leifer, 1975). Boundary spanners engage in
activities of three types: face, process and relation. Face
activities include those that represent and protect the organi-
zation. For example, a face activity includes a buyer’s acting
as a representative of the department store in the apparel
market. The buyer becomes &dquo;the face&dquo; of the organization
to facilitate transactions. Process activities include those that
scan and monitor the environment. For example, a buyer
can scan the environment to identify influences that affect
fashion trends and then monitor changes in direction and
intensity of those influences. Relation activities include those
that transact, link and coordinate with the environment, such
as buyer and vendor negotiations (Almubarek, 1982; Miles,
1980). These activities enable buyers to gather information
about environmental contingencies to make decisions regard-
ing environmental conditions (Leifer & Delbecq, 1978).
Historically, the power amassed by the buyer was a result
of the &dquo;buyer’s monopoly of....knowledge and information
over the merchandise....for which he buys&dquo; (Dickinson, 1967,
p. 8). Therefore, upper management usually deferred to the
knowledge of the buyer (Dickinson, 1967). As a result,
buyers assumed great authority in the area of merchandise
selection (Dickinson, 1967). However, with the advent of
sophisticated information systems, the buyer no longer has
a monopoly of information. Upper level executives can now
access the information that once was the domain of the buyer.
Purposes of the Study
One purpose of this study was to describe the depart-
ment stores’ environmental characteristics, (i.e., complex-
ity and dynamism), level of environmental uncertainty, use
of boundary spanning activities (i.e., face, process and rela-
tion), use of managerial discretion, (i.e., inclination to use
boundary spanning activities) and power perceived by inde-
pendent and combination department store apparel buyers.
Independent buyers work independently regarding the se-
lection, buying and presentation of merchandise. Combina-
tion buyers work independently for some merchandise pur-
chases but with corporate buyers for others. This study also
sought to describe the relationships among these variables
and to identify variables that predict buyer power.
Current State of Department Stores
It has been suggested that customers are dissatisfied with
department stores because of poor customer service,
stockouts, poor fit and style offerings and merchandise ad-
jacencies that do not conserve shopping effort and time (&dquo;De-
partment stores,&dquo; 1995). Nestled between the specialty re-
tailers who offer coordinated assortments, good service in
an exciting atmosphere, and the off-price retailers who offer
brand name merchandise at lower prices, department stores
are trying to justify their existence with an emphasis on
fashion leadership and a broadened definition of customer
service (Standard and Poor’s Industry Survey, 1992).
Vendors have complained that buyer requests for ex-
cessive charge backs and markdown allowances result instrained working relationships. Although globalization ne-
cessitates team-oriented approaches to business partnerships,
the relation between buyers and vendors remains strained as
arguments ensue about how much money one owes the other.
These vendor-buyer arguments, along with the use of a
vendor matrix, are thought to weaken the buyer’s focus on
the selection of apparel offerings and strategy development
to build in-store excitement (Moin & D’Innocenzio, 1998;
&dquo;Stepping out,&dquo; 1998). A matrix is a list of vendors, se-
lected and approved by corporate executives, from which
buyers are to purchase merchandise. Some experts believe
the use of a matrix stifles buyer creativity, risk-taking and
autonomy while encouraging merchandise sameness by lim-
iting the number of vendors who transact business with the
store (Moin, 1999b; &dquo;Panel: Retailers need,&dquo; 1998).
One leading designer believes department stores
struggle because their managements have lost sight of the
passion that drives the industry-the &dquo;pure joy of acquiring
something that makes you feel better about yourself...&dquo;
(Socha, 1999, p. 6). A recent study (Socha, 1999) supports
that viewpoint: the format is developed according to opera-
tional considerations as opposed to the emotional compo-
nents involved in the purchase process. Buyers typically
try to evoke consumer emotions to stimulate sales by search-
ing for innovative designs, but this strategy is made diffi-
cult when protecting profits is key. The large volume ven-
dors that dominate the matrix offer the markdown monies
desired by buyers; small volume vendors cannot. There-
fore, sameness of merchandise offerings prevail. Unfortu-
nately, buyers have become accountants, not merchants who
assist consumers in feeling good about their appearance
(Moin & D’Innocenzio, 1998).
However, there is hope for the future of the department
store. One new turnaround strategy, called co-branding, is a
private label partnership between a vendor and a store. The
initial venture between Tahari and Bloomingdales elevated
private label to a collection designed by Tahari for the
Bloomingdale’s customer, giving the retailer exclusivity,
higher margins and a collection designed to meet the needs
of the targeted consumer. Because key players from both
the store and vendor partner to develop the line, markdown
money request from buyers is eliminated, as the store has as
much input in the product development process as the ven-
dor. This strategy can develop into a meaningful partner-
ship (Edelson, 1999).
Another strategy, initiated by Federated Stores, has
executives from various functional areas joining together to
lead the charge to rethink the department store of the future
by studying the current format and submitting recommen-
dations that will reposition the department store to be a major
player in the future. Topics under review include reevalu-
ating store organization and merchandise adjacencies, en-
hancing store environment, refocusing selling objectives and
incorporating music and food into the department store
shopping experience (Edelson, 1998). A third turnaround
strategy, mass customization, is a program whereby consum-
ers select apparel styles, fabrics and silhouettes to be cus-
tom designed; it will become widespread in the future
(Silverman, 1998). Finally, one approach to meeting the
needs of the consumer is being challenged. Some experts
caution that many consumers do not know what they want

13Figure 1. Framework for Assessing Environmental Uncertainty
Note: Daft (1992). Reprinted with permission.
and rely upon the store and vendor to create fashion excite-
ment. If this assertion is accurate, buyers and vendors will
be required to be more team oriented to provide fashion
leadership (Socha, 1999).
According to Thompson (1967), engaging in boundary
spanning activities enables the buyer to exert power within
and outside of the organization; engaging in these activities
suggests a high degree of managerial discretion, (i.e., buyer’s
inclination to use boundary spanning activities). As one who
once gathered, analyzed and disseminated information, the
buyer gained influence in regard to organizational decisions
(Thompson, 1967; Tushman, 1977). However, with the
upheaval in the department store format, the extent of buy-
ers’ power, use of boundary spanning activities and mana-
gerial discretion is not now known. With the advent of in-
formation systems, co-branding and the use of various team
approaches to managerial decision-making, the buyer no
longer has a monopoly on information. In addition, the
required purchase of private label goods, the adherence to a
vendor matrix and partnerships with vendors all serve to
reduce the power historically wielded by the buyer (Edelson,
1999; Moin & D’Innocenzio, 1998). The current challenges
facing apparel retailers and the untested nature of the turn-
around ~ strategies add to the complexity and uncertainty of
the apparel retail environment and may change the nature of
boundary spanning activities buyers employ as well as the
power they possess in executing their duties.Conceptual Framework
Two models were used as conceptual frameworks for
the study: Duncan’s Model of Environmental Uncertainty
(1972) (see Figure 1) and Almubarek’s Model of Organiza-
tional Boundary Spanning (1982). Duncan (1972) identi-
fied two dimensions of the environment: the simple-com-
plex dimension and the static-dynamic dimension. This
author then predicted the kinds of environments in which
different levels of uncertainty were projected to exist.
Duncan found that individuals in organizations located in
simple-static environments experience the least amount of
uncertainty whereas individuals in organizations located in
complex-dynamic environments experience the greatest
amount of uncertainty. Through observation, Daft (1992)
placed apparel retailers’ in Duncan’s third quadrant: the
simple-dynamic environment (see Figure 1). A reevalua-
tion of this assumption is appropriate in view of the docu-
mented changes within the department store environment.
Almubarek’s Model of Organizational Boundary Span-
ning (1982) consists of four premises: (1) organizations
’Daft actually used the term fashion clothing. It is clear, however, from
his writings that he is referring to retail establishments that sell cloth-
ing. Therefore, for purposes of consistency, we have chosen to use the
term apparel retailers. 

14attempt to protect themselves from environmental uncer-
tainties, (2) boundary spanning activities are responses to
perceptions of threats or opportunities in the environment,
(3) boundary spanners are responsible for reacting to envi-
ronmental uncertainties, and (4) boundary spanners who
cope successfully with uncertainties gain power within the
organization. Department store apparel buyers are consid- .
ered boundary spanners and use boundary spanning activi-
ties in the performance of their job. Because buyers oper-
ate in uncertain environments, an assessment of their per-
ceived power is appropriate. Both models have been used
in researching industrial buyers and environments
(Almubarek, 1982; Duncan, 1972). Department store buy-
ers of moderate-to-better misses sportswear apparel were
targeted for study because they control merchandise that
greatly contributes to department stores’ sales and profit-
ability (Pogoda, 1996).
Method
Sampling and Data Collection
The population consisted of department store apparel
buyers of moderate-to-better misses sportswear (both coor-
dinates and separates) from the top ten performing depart-
ment store groups published in Stores magazine (Schultz,
1993). Three hundred and twelve buyers listed in Sheldon’s
Directory (1993) were contacted for inclusion in the study.
Sixty-six questionnaires were returned; 58 were usable re-
sulting in a response rate of 19 percent.2 2
The majority of respondents were women (91%, n =
53), a female to male ratio of nearly 11:1. The majority of
buyers (n = 31, 53%) were from 35 to 55 years old. No
buyer had been employed in his or her present position more
than 15 years, with only 20% having been employed in de-
partment store retailing for more than 21 years. All reported
at least six years of employment in department store retail-
ing. The majority of buyers (n = 42, 72%) assumed combi-
nation buying responsibilities, with 28 percent (n = 16) iden-
tifying themselves as independent buyers.
Data were collected using a self-administered question-
naire. To maximize participation, a five-stage process was
followed (Dillman, 1978): (a) a pre-questionnaire postcard
was mailed one week prior to the initial mailing, (b) a ques-
tionnaire packet was sent, (c) a postcard was sent one week
after the questionnaire packet as a reminder or as a thank
you for participating, (d) a reminder letter and question-
naire packet was sent three weeks after the first question-
naire mailing, and (e) a final reminder letter and question-
naire were sent five weeks after the initial mailing. Addi-
tionally, two incentives were employed to encourage fur-
2This rate can be compared to other published studies which utilize
retail buyers as respondents (Shim & Kotsiopulos, 1991, 16.2%;
Sternquist, Tolbert & Davis, 1989, 15.4%). Small sample size is a
problem faced by researchers conducting studies using national samples
of retail buyers (Hathcote, 1989; Shim & Kotsiopulos, 1991).ther participation. One envelope of instant cappuccino mix
was included in the initial questionnaire packet; addition-
ally, buyers who returned completed questionnaires were
eligible for a $500 drawing.
Instrumentation and Data Analysis
The questionnaire included five instruments. The Duncan
(1972) Environmental Characteristics Scale measured percep-
tions about the environment’s complexity and dynamism. The
Duncan (1972) Perceived Environmental Uncertainty Scale
measured perceived level of uncertainty by apparel buyers.
Both scales were modified by Almubarek (1982). Montanari’s
(1979) Managerial Discretion Scale, modified by Almubarek
(1982) was used to measure the buyer’s inclination to use
boundary spanning activities to cope with environmental
uncertainty and Montanari’s Power Scale measured percep-
tion of buyer power. The authors factor analyzed the power
scale identifying two subdimensions: organizational power
and merchandise power. Jemison’s (1978) Boundary Span-
ning instrument measured activities of apparel buyers.
Duncan’s Environmental Characteristics Measure
(1972) was designed to measure respondents’ perceptions
of complexity and dynamism in the external organizational
environment. Environmental characteristics consist of two
levels: complexity (the degree to which factors in the
[department’s store’s] environment are few or many in num-
ber and are similar or dissimilar to one another) (Duncan,
1972), and dynamism or &dquo;the degree to which the factors of
the [department store’s]...environment remain basically the
same over time or are in a continual process of change&dquo;
(Duncan, 1972, p. 316). To operationalize complexity (i.e.,
environmental factors are few or many and similar or dis-
similar), the respondents were given a list of ten external
environmental factors and were instructed to check those of
chief importance in their decision making situations. To
calculate a score on the simple-complex dimension, the
number of factors (F) identified by the respondent was
multiplied by the square of the number of components (C)2.
Environmental dynamism (i.e., environmental stability or
change) was measured using a five-point Likert-type instru-
ment consisting of two items. The internal reliability coef-
ficients of the complexity instrument have been reported as
.84 and .83 (Almubarek, 1982). Researchers have mea-
sured and supported the construct validity of these two
measures in prior investigations (Almubarek, 1982; Cox,
1977; Duncan, 1972).
The Duncan Perceived Uncertainty Scale (1972) con-
sists of three levels: (1) &dquo;lack of information regarding the
environmental factors associated with a given decision situ-
ation, (2) not knowing the outcome of a specific decision in
terms of how much the organization would lose if the deci-
sion were incorrect, and (3) inability to assign probabilities
with any degree of confidence with regard to how environ-
mental factors are going to affect the success or failure of
the [department store] in performing its function&dquo; (Duncan,
1972, p. 318). The instrument measures perceptions of a
lack of information and knowledge about the environment.
Inability to assign probabilities, the third dimension, con-
sists of three items, as revised by Almubarek (1982). The
three dimensions were summed and averaged to produce a
total uncertainty score. Cox (1977) reported reliability co-

15efficients of .70, .76 and .78 respectively and a total uncer-
tainty coefficient of .85.
Montanari’s (1979) Managerial Discretion Measure,
modified by Almubarek (1982) for use by purchasing agents,
was used to measure the buyer’s inclination to use boundary
spanning activities to cope with environmental conditions.
Buyer discretion was measured by a seven-point Likert-type
scale consisting of three items which were summed and
averaged for scoring purposes. Almubarek (1982) reported
the internal reliability coefficient for the scale as .82.
Montanari’s Perceived Power Scale measured the
buyer’s &dquo;expressed likelihood that one or more of his or her
recommendations will be accepted by his or her colleagues&dquo;
(Almubarek, 1982, p. 9). The measure, as revised by
Almubarek (1982) to fit a population of purchasing agents,
consists of seven items. In previous research, the items were
summed, then averaged to determine a score. The internal
reliability coefficient was .88 (Almubarek, 1982). Our fac-
tor analysis of the scales (see Table 1) resulted in two di-
mensions of perceived power: merchandise power and or-
ganizational power. These two factors explained 43% of the
variance with three items loading on each factor. Subse-
quent intercorrelation and multiple regression analyses used
the merchandise power and organizational power variables.
Table 1. Factor Loadings of Items Included in Power MeasureJemison’s (1978) Boundary Spanning Scale measured
face, process and relation activities. These activities link agents
in the organization with others in the environment and are
related to the goal attainment of the organization (Leifer, 1975).
Because the larger department store will be the proto-
type of the future (&dquo;Industry says,&dquo; 1990), it seemed prudent
to study buyers associated with them. In using a sample of
department store buyers, the researcher minimized the ef-
fect of industry differences in responses to environmental
variables and types of boundary spanning activity. The in-
strument consisted of twenty-five items. The items were
summed and averaged to determine boundary spanning
scores. Almubarek (1982) reported the internal reliability
coefficient for the scale as .89.
In total, the questionnaire package consisted of scales
to measure characteristics of the environment (dynamism
and complexity), environmental uncertainty, managerial
discretion, boundary spanning activities and a question de-
termining the nature of the buying responsibilities (indepen-
dent or combination) and selected demographic questions.
A significance level of .10 was used as recommended for
studies of an exploratory nature (Gall, Borg & Gall, 1996)
to reveal preliminary relationships that may warrant further
investigation. Descriptive statistics, Pearson product mo-
ment correlations, factor analysis and multiple regression
were the statistical methods used to satisfy the purposes.
Results and Discussion
Combination and Independent Buyers: T-test Results.
The raw scores and the results of t-tests performed on all
study variables (i.e., complexity, dynamism, uncertainty,
boundary spanning, managerial discretion and power) and
buyer types (i.e., independent and combination) are reported
to determine significant differences between buyer types and
among variables.
Analysis of Duncan’s environmental characteristics (i.e.,
complexity and dynamism) measure revealed mean scores
for combination buyers as 113 and 1313 for independent
buyers. The midpoint of possible scores was 63.5; there-
fore, both independent and combination buyers reported the
environment as very complex. This finding suggests that
unlike Daft’s (1992) assumption that apparel retailers should
be classified as operating in a simple environment (see Fig-
ure 1), the buyers reported the environment as complex. A
simple environment consists of a small number of similar,
external elements. Thus, it is suggested that these businesses
could be placed in the complex quadrant of Daft’s model in
congruence with the substantial evidence that the external
environmental sectors impacting today’s department store
format are increasing in number and are becoming more
dissimilar (&dquo;Industry says,&dquo; 1990; Jacobs,1991; Morgenson,
1993; Rogers, 1991; Zinn et al., 1990).
3Results of T-tests revealed no significant differences between buyer
types among all variables.

16Both buyer types perceived the environment to be dy-
namic. Possible scores on the dynamism measure ranged
from two (never) to 10 (always). The mean score for com-
bination buyers was 8.46 whereas independent buyers’ mean
score was 8.29. Because all respondents’ scores were above
six, the midpoint, the perception of the environment was
interpreted as dynamic. This finding supports the observa-
tion of Daft (1992) who placed apparel retailers within the
dynamic end of the measure. A dynamic environment is
one in which the elements change frequently and unpredict-
ably (see Figure 1).
Both the independent and combination buyers perceived
the environment to be highly uncertain. Possible scores on
the uncertainty measure ranged from three to 15. The me-
dian of possible scores (nine) was considered the break
between high and low uncertainty. Combination buyers’
mean score was 7 whereas independent buyers’ mean score
was 6.99. Both scores fell below the midpoint of the scor-
ing range. Because lower scores indicate greater uncertainty,
both combination and independent buyers perceived the
department store environment as uncertain.
Buyers reported perceiving the environment to be com-
plex, dynamic and uncertain. The high levels of environ-
mental complexity and dynamism place the department store
environment in Duncan’s fourth quadrant: a highly uncer-
tain environment. This finding disputes Daft’s (1992) sug-
gestion that apparel retailers should reside in quadrant three:
a moderate-to-highly uncertain environment (see Figure 1).
Respondents reinforced this finding by describing the de-
partment store’s environment as highly uncertain.
Results of the analysis of the boundary spanning mea-
sure revealed similarities between buyer types. Possible
scores on the boundary spanning measure ranged from three
(never) to 15 (always). Combination buyers reported a mean
of 8.21 whereas independent buyers reported a mean of 8.44.
Combination and independent buyers perceived themselves
to be occasional users of boundary spanning activities. These
findings supported results by researchers (Leifer, 1975;
Leifer & Delbecq, 1978; Thompson, 1962) who identified
buyers as boundary spanners and users of boundary span-
ning activities. However, it is surprising to find that buyers
did not perceive themselves to be more frequent users of
boundary spanning activities.
Buyers reported being highly inclined (e.g., possessed
managerial discretion) to use boundary spanning activities
to cope with environmental uncertainty. This finding was
also true of industrial buyers (Aldrich & Herker, 1977;
Almubarek, 1982; Leifer & Delbecq, 1978). Possible scores
on the perceived discretion measure ranged from one
(strongly disagree) to seven (strongly agree). Combination
buyers reported a mean score of 5.66 whereas independent
buyers reported a mean score of 5.77.
Both buyer types perceived themselves to possess power
(i.e., likely that one or more of their recommendations would
be accepted by colleagues). This finding supported the po-
sition of Thompson (1962) who stated that boundary span-
ner power was present in a diverse and unstable environ-
ment. Possible scores on the power measure ranged between
one (absolutely not) and five (definitely). Combination
buyers reported a mean score of 3.56 whereas independent
buyers reported a mean score of 3.72.Scrutiny of the power measure suggested that power
may not be a unidimensional construct; therefore, the mea-
sure was factor analyzed. Principal component factor analy-
sis with varimax rotation was performed on the seven Likert-
type items. Two factors with eigenvalues greater than 1.0
emerged, explaining 60.9% of the total variance. Examina-
tion of the items with factor loadings greater than .40 on the
two factors indicated that the content of the items for factor
one pertained to merchandise power. Merchandise power
refers to buyer influence that surrounds decisions impacting
merchandise. The responses to these four questions were
summed and averaged to develop a merchandise power
measure. The items with factor loadings greater than .40 on
factor two pertained to organizational power. Organizational
power refers to buyer influence that surrounds decisions
impacting broader organizational issues, beyond merchan-
dise decisions. The responses to these three questions were
summed and averaged to develop an organizational power
measure (see Table 1). Perceived power subscales-organi-
zational and merchandise power-were used in assessing
correlations among the variables.
Combination Buyers: Intercorrelation Results. Pearson
product-moment correlations were performed to determine
relationships among the responses of combination buyers.
Moderate relationships were noted between complexity and
boundary spanning (r = .34, p = .03) and buyer discretion
and organizational power (r = .33, p = .04) (see Table 2).
When combination buyers perceived the environment as
complex, they used more boundary spanning activities. This
finding concurred with the literature (Almubarek, 1982; Cox,
1977; Cox, Hitt & Stanton, 1978; Leifer & Delbecq, 1978;
Thompson, 1962, 1967). As combination buyers identified
themselves as inclined to use boundary spanning activities,
they perceived an increase in their organizational power. This
finding might be explained by the combination buyer’s close
association with corporate executives in the performance of
their duties. These buyers are closer to the strategic deci-
sion-making process due to their interactions with those who
are involved in developing corporate directives.
Boundary spanning activities and merchandise power
were strongly correlated (r = .56, p = .01). As combination
buyers indicated high usage of boundary spanning activities,
they perceived themselves to possess more power over mer-
chandise decisions. The gathering of information gave these
buyers the perception of power over merchandise decisions.
A modest, significant relationship was found between
boundary spanning and buyer discretion (r = -.28, p = .09).
The less inclined a buyer is to use boundary spanning activi-
ties (i.e., managerial discretion), the more activities they
actually used. This finding seemed at first to be at odds with
the literature, however, it can be explained within the con-
text of the role of the combination buyer. Combination
buyers, by definition, assume dual buying responsibilities.
Sometimes they work independently when selecting, buy-
ing and presenting merchandise for resale to customers. At
other times, they work in conjunction with corporate buyers
to develop private label merchandise and negotiate reduced
prices for branded merchandise to be offered for sale to the
entire corporation. Therefore, it is very likely that the ebb ,
and flow of boundary spanning inclination and usage paral-
lels the independent and team approach of the combination

17Table 2. Intercorrelations Among Variables for Independent and Combination Buyers
*p:5.10, **p < .05, ***p < .01 .
Bolded Type = Combination Buyers
BSA + = Boundary Spanning Activities
buyer in the performance of his or her duties. At various
times, the buyer may be less and then more inclined to use
boundary spanning activities due to the nature of his or her
assignment in the team process. For example, during nego-
tiations, buyers may need to use more boundary spanning
activities to accomplish their goal of receiving the lowest
wholesale price, most economical delivery method and ap-
propriate seasonal and promotional discounts.
Finally, negative moderate relationships were found
between dynamism and uncertainty (r = -.43, p = .O1), per-
ceived uncertainty and boundary spanning activity (r = -.33,
p = .07), and perceived uncertainty and merchandise power
(r = -.48, p = .O 1 ). The more dynamic the environment, the
more combination buyers perceived the environment to be
uncertain; the use of boundary spanning activities enables
buyers to deal with this environment. Combination buyers
gain merchandise power as they gather information to deal
with environmental uncertainty. This finding suggests that
combination buyers were entrusted with merchandise deci-
sions in an uncertain environment.
Independent Buyers: Intercorrelation Results. Pearson
product-moment correlations were performed to determine
the relationships among the responses of independent buy-
ers. Substantial relationships were identified between dyna-
mism and buyer discretion (r = .53, p = .03), boundary span-
ning and buyer discretion (r = .58, p = .02), complexity and
merchandise power (r = .63, p = .01) and buyer discretion
and merchandise power (r = .67, p = .01) (see Table 2).
Independent buyers were inclined to use boundary spanning
activities to cope with a dynamic environment. This finding
concurs with industrial literature (Almubarek, 1982; Cox,
1977; Leifer & Delbecq, 1978). Furthermore, when buyers
felt inclined to use boundary spanning activities, (i.e., pos-
sessed managerial discretion), they increased their use of
those activities. As the environment becomes more com-
plex, independent buyers perceive themselves to possesspower over merchandise decisions; navigating successfully
multiple, diverse sectors increases merchandise power. Fi-
nally, when independent buyers perceived themselves as
inclined to use boundary spanning activities to cope with
environmental uncertainty, their perception of power over
merchandise decisions increased.
Moderate relationships were found between dynamism
and boundary spanning activities (r = .46, p = .09) and bound-
ary spanning activities and merchandise power (r = .45, p =
.09). Buyers increased their use of boundary spanning ac-
tivities in a dynamic environment. This finding concurs with
industrial literature (Almubarek, 1982; Cox, 1977; Cox et
al., 1978; Leifer & Huber, 1977; Thompson, 1962, 1967).
When independent buyers perceived a high level of bound-
ary spanning usage, they perceived themselves to have power
over merchandise decisions.
The relationships found among the variables tested in
the department store environment using combination and
independent buyers were similar to those found in the manu-
facturing/industrial environment. In other words,
Almubarek’s Model of Organizational Uncertainty (1982)
was supported in the department store environment: envi-
ronmental complexity and dynamism lead to perceived en-
vironmental uncertainty, uncertainty triggers the use of
boundary spanning activities to cope with environmental
uncertainty, and the use of boundary spanning activities
enhances the power of the buyer (Duncan, 1972; Miles,
1980; Thompson, 1967).
Combination and Independent Buyers: Areas ofsignifi-
cant Commonality Among Variables. For both independent
and combination buyers, two pairs of variables revealed
significant results: between buyer discretion and boundary
spanning activities and between boundary spanning activi-
ties and merchandise power (see Table 2). When combina-
tion buyers were less inclined to use boundary spanning
activities, they increased their usage of those activities (r =

18-.28, p = .09). This result was explained previously within
the context of the role of the combination buyer. However,
independent buyers who were inclined to use boundary
spanning activities increased their use of such activities (r =
.58, p = .02). This finding is logical given that independent
buyers work independently and must follow through in all
boundary spanning activities. There is no delegating of
activities as is possible with combination buyers.
Secondly, relationships were found between buyer types
on boundary spanning activities and merchandise power
(Combination: r = .56; p = .01; independent: r = .45, p =
.09). When both buyer types used boundary spanning ac-
tivities, they perceived themselves to possess power over
merchandise decisions.
Combination and Independent Buyers: Intercorrelations
Among Variables and Type of Boundary Spanning Activity:
Face, Process, Relation. Results of the comparisons of
combination and independent buyers perceptions of envi-
ronmental characteristics, (i.e., complexity and dynamism),
environmental uncertainty, managerial discretion (i.e., in-
clination to use boundary spanning activities), organizational
and merchandise power and types of boundary spanning
activities are presented in Table 3.
Boundary spanning includes activities of three types:
face, process and relation. Face activities represent and
protect the organization, process activities scan and monitor
the environment, whereas relation activities transact, link
and coordinate with the environment (Almubarek, 1982;
Miles, 1980).
Both combination and independent buyers used face and
relation activities when they perceived merchandise power.
Combination buyers reported a moderate relationship be-
tween face (r = .41, p = .O1) and relation (r = .31, p = .05)
boundary spanning activities and complexity. In a complex
environment, combination buyers made more frequent use
of face and relation activities than did independent buyers.
Independent buyers indicated no significant association
between type of activities and complexity. This finding
suggests that combination buyers associated representing,
transacting, linking and coordinating activities with a com-
plex environment to a greater extent than independent buy-
ers. This result is surprising, as it would seem that indepen-dent buyers would use more process activities to monitor
complex environments to a greater extent than combination
buyers, that is, independent buyers have less opportunity to
delegate boundary spanning activities to others.
In a dynamic environment, combination buyers reported
more frequent use of process activities (r = .29, p = .07)
whereas independent buyers reported more frequent use of
relation type activities (r = .64, p = .O1 ). This finding sug-
gests that combination buyers associate information pro-
cessing activities with a dynamic environment and inde-
pendent buyers associated transacting, linking and coordi-
nating activities with a dynamic environment. Independent
buyers could rely on their established relationships to help
make sense of a changing environment; they might increase
interaction with their vendor representative in the apparel
market or initiate contact with resident buyers to gain the
information to facilitate decision-making. Combination
buyers may be less concerned with outside relationships
because the team provides the interactions necessary to
complete successfully the assigned projects, whereas inde-
pendent buyers must focus on outside relationships to com-
plete their duties.
Independent buyers reported more frequent use of pro-
cess activities (i.e., monitoring and scanning) in an uncertain
environment (r = -.51, p = .06) whereas combination buyers
did not associate any one type of boundary spanning activity
with uncertainty. This difference could be attributed to the
differences in buyer orientation. Independent buyers must
gather the information necessary to aid decision-making
because they work alone; this task cannot be delegated to
others. Combination buyers, conversely, can delegate infor-
mation gathering activities to another team member, hence,
reducing their own participation in process activities.
In examining the merchandise power variable by buyer
type, combination buyers reported frequent use of all three
types of boundary spanning activities (face: r = .47, p = .01;
process: r = .47; p = .01; relation: r = .43, p = 01) whereas
independent buyers reported frequent use of face (r = .44, p
= .09) and relation activities (r = .66, p = .01). This finding
suggests that independent buyers rely on their relationships
more than information processing in merchandise decision-
making. The reasons for this could again be attributed to
Table 3. Intercorrelations Among Variables and Type of Boundary Spanning Activities
***p s .01, **p s .05, *p s .10.

19differences in buyer orientation. Because independent buy-
ers work alone, they may reach out to market representa-
tives to supplement their own information gathering activi-
ties. Conversely, combination buyers have team interaction
built into their buyer role, hence reducing the need for pri-
mary reliance on external relationships.
Combination and Independent Buyers: Multiple Regres-
sion Results. The final analysis performed attempted to
identify variables that could predict merchandise power of
all buyers. Stepwise multiple regression analysis was used
to analyze the relationships among variables. Complexity,
dynamism, uncertainty, managerial discretion and bound-
ary spanning activities represented the independent variables,
with merchandise power representing the dependent vari-
able. Table 4 reports the results of the analysis. Two vari-
ables emerged significant at alpha level < .10.
Perceived environmental uncertainty accounted for 27%
of the proportion of variance in the dependent variable, mer-
chandise power. Boundary spanning activities accounted for
15% of the variance. The predictor variables and their
multiple regression correlation coefficients explained 42%
of the proportion of variance in the dependent variables for
combination buyers.
Next, a stepwise regression analysis was performed to
identify variables that could predict independent buyers’
merchandise power (see Table 4). All variables were en-
tered in the regression equation. Two variables emerged
significant at alpha < .10. Buyer discretion accounted for
36% of the proportion of variance in the dependent variable,
merchandise power. Environmental complexity accounted
for 34% of the proportion of variance. The predictor vari-
ables and their multiple regression coefficients explained
70% of the variance in merchandise power for independent
buyers (dependent variable).
Environmental uncertainty and boundary spanning ac-
tivities were the two best predictors of merchandise power
for combination buyers. Therefore, the use of boundary
spanning activities, in conjunction with an uncertain envi-
ronment, predicted power over merchandise decisions. On
the other hand, for independent buyers, the inclination touse boundary spanning activities, coupled with environmen-
tal complexity, predicted merchandise power. Both buyer
types either extensively used boundary spanning activities
or were highly inclined to use boundary spanning activities
(i.e., possessed managerial discretion) to cope with environ-
mental uncertainty. However, the general lack of informa-
tion about the environment (i.e., perceived uncertainty), not
the degree to which factors in the organizational environ-
ment are many and dissimilar to one another (complexity),
predicted merchandise power for combination buyers.
Conclusions
Several conclusions can be drawn. First, results of this
study support Almubarek’s industrial model: a complex,
dynamic environment leads to environmental uncertainty,
perceptions of uncertainty trigger the use of boundary span-
ning activities which enhance the power of the buyer. Ad-
ditionally, different variables predict perceptions of buyer’s
merchandise power possibly because of differences in types
of responsibilities.
Combination and independent buyers indicated a pref-
erence for or reliance on certain type of boundary spanning
activity in the performance of their duties. Furthermore,
apparel buyers’ power is restricted more to power over
merchandise decisions rather than to power within the orga-
nization per se. Additionally, there is evidence to challenge
Daft’s (1992) observation that apparel retailers (which in-
cludes department stores) are located in the third quadrant
(moderate-to-high uncertainty) of Duncan’s Perceived Un-
certainty Model. Results indicate support for categorizing
them as existing in a highly uncertain environment, and
therefore, placing them in the fourth quadrant of the model.
However, caution must be used in interpretation, as depart-
ment store buyers were the only buyers surveyed. Because
combination buyers work both independently and with cor-
porate buyers, the uncertainty could spur the group to work
as a team, discussing divergent options and strategies, and
hence adding to the perception of power over merchandise
decisions. Furthermore, combination buyers may deal with
higher levels of uncertainty, as some purchases target the
Table 4. Stepwise Regression of Merchandise Power on the Independent Variables
n=30 .
***p S .01, **p S .05.
sR~ = Partial RZ 2
CuR2 = Cumulative RZ 2
F for model = 10.01, p for model = .01 1n=11 I
***p ~ .01, **p~.05.
sR2 = Partial RZ 2
CuR2 = Cumulative R2
F for model = 10.05, p for model = .01 1

20entire department store corporation. The dollar value of
corporate buys could add to the perceptions of uncertainty.
Independent buyers, conversely, work autonomously
when making merchandise decisions. Complexity of the
environment would be of concern, as the monitoring of di-
verse environmental sectors is not delegated to colleagues,
as with combination buyers. It seems that monitoring and
successfully navigating a complex environment would lead
to power over merchandise decisions.
This study addresses the observation by Hrebiniak and
Snow (1980): &dquo;Industry differences in response to environ-
mental uncertainty have not been noted currently by research-
ers&dquo; (p. 750). This study did reveal the preliminary nature
of the relationships among environmental characteristics,
environmental uncertainty, managerial discretion, boundary
spanning activities and merchandise power in a department
store environment.
The small sample size along with the low response rate
must be considered limitations of the study. The important
role that buyers play in the success of their organizations
behooves researchers to continue to study those who occupy
these roles, regardless of these limitations, to better under-
stand them and their organizations.
Future studies need to focus attention on environmental
characteristics, environmental uncertainty, managerial dis-
cretion, boundary spanning activities and merchandise power
in department store and other retail settings. Attention should
be paid to types of boundary spanning activities: face, pro-
cess, and relation. Due to the low response rate, definite
prescriptions for buyer behavior cannot be made. However,
., with a larger sample of buyers, future study results may
identify which type of boundary spanning activities would
be most appropriate to use in varied situations to guide buyer
behavior, strengthen performance and enhance the profit-
ability of the store.
References ’
Aldrich, H. E., & Herker, D. (1977). Boundary spanning
roles and organizational structure. Academy of Man-
agement Review, 2(2), 217-230.
Almubarek, M. I. (1982). Empirical analyses of the rela-
tionship among perceived environmental uncertainty,
managerial influence and boundary spanning activities
(Doctoral dissertation, Arizona State University, 1982).
Dissertation Abstracts International, 43-10A, 3364.
Cox, J. A. (1977). The relationship of boundary spanning
activity to hierarchial level, perceived environmental
uncertainty, and other variables in a university setting:
An empirical study (Doctoral dissertation, Oklahoma
State University, 1977). Dissertation Abstracts Inter-
national, 39-01A, 0355.
Cox, J. A., Hitt, M. A., & Stanton, W. M. (1978). An
examination of the relationship of boundary relevance
to hierarchical level, perceived environmental uncer-
tainty, and role stress variables. Proceedings of the 38th
Annual Meeting of the Academy of Management, pp.
175-179.Daft, R. L. (1992). Organizational theory and design (4th
ed.). St. Paul, MN: West.
Department stores: Losing the battle to keep it simple. (1995,
October 5). WWD, pp. 1, 8-10.
Dickinson, R. A. (1967). Models of department store
buyer behavior (Doctoral dissertation, Columbia Uni-
versity, 1967). Dissertation Abstracts International, 28-
02A, 0326.
Dillman, D. A. (1978). Mail and telephone surveys: The
total design method. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Duncan, R. B. (1972). Characteristics of organizational
environments and perceived environmental uncertainty.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 17(3), 313-327.
Edelson, S. (1998, July). Store of the future? WWD, p. 11.
Edelson, S. (1999, March 1). Fueled by designers, private
label moves to a higher plateau. WWD, pp. 1, 8, 20.
Gall, M. D., Borg, W. R., & Gall, J. P. (1996). Educational
research: An introduction. White Plains, NY: Longman.
Gellers, S. (1999, May 24). Theories of evolution. WWD,
pp. 9-10.
Hathcote, J. M. (1989). Impact of apparel imports on retail
profitability (Doctoral dissertation, University of Ten-
nessee, 1989). Dissertation Abstracts International, 51-
03A, 0932.
Hrebiniak, L. G., & Snow, C. C. (1980). Industry differ-
ences in environmental uncertainty and organizational
characteristics related to uncertainty. Academy of Man-
agement Journal, 23(4), 750-759.
Industry says without changes, stores doomed. (1990, Janu-
ary 11). WWD, pp. 1, 4-5.
Jacobs, B. A. (1991). U.S. adopts new textile negotiation
strategy. Bobbin, pp. 32, 34.
Jemison, D. B. (1978). The strategy-making influence of
boundary spanners (Doctoral dissertation, University of
Washington, 1978). Dissertation Abstracts Interna-
tional, 39-06A, 3688.
Leifer, R. P. (1975). An analysis of the characteristics and
functioning of interorganizational boundary spanning
personnel (Doctoral dissertation, University of Wiscon-
sin, 1975). Dissertation Abstracts International, 36-
03A, 1647.
Leifer, R. P., & Delbecq, A. (1978). Organizational-envi-
ronmental interchange: A model of boundary spanning
activity. Administrative Science Quarterly, 3(1), 40-50.
Leifer, R., & Huber, G. P. (1977). Relations among per-
ceived environmental uncertainty, organization struc-
ture, and boundary spanning behavior. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 22, 235-247.
Levy, W. K. (1991, May). Are department stores doomed?
DM, 31(5), 56-60.
Miles, R. H. (1980). Macro-organizational behavior. Santa
Monica, CA: Goodyear.
Moin, D. (1992, December 11). Federated: Aggressive again.
WWD, pp. 8-9. 
Moin, D. (1999a, May 24). Innovators 2000: The CEO sum-
mit. WWD, pp. 1, 7-8. 
Moin, D. (1999b, June 8). CEO summit: Differentiate or
die. WWD, pp. 10-11. 
Moin, D. & D’Innocenzio, A. (1998, July, WWD/Global).
Department stores: On the offensive. WWD, pp. 10-11. 
Montanari, J. R. (1979). Strategic choice: A theoretical

21analysis. Journal of Management Studies, 16, 202-221.
Morgenson, G. (1993, May 24). The fall of the mall. Forbes,
106-110, 112.
Panel: Retailers need to wake up shoppers. (1998, Septem-
ber 28). WWD, p. 17.
Pogada, D. M. (1996, October 8). Suffering from retail
neglect. WWD, p. 12.
Rogers, D. (1991). An overview of American retail trends.
International Journal of Retail & Distribution Manage-
ment, 19(6), 3-12.
Schulz, D. P. (1993, July). The top 100 retailers. Stores,75(7), 25-28, 30, 32, 40-44, 53-56.
Seckler, V. (1997, March 13). Stores in a squeeze. WWD,
pp. 1, 22-23.
Sheldon’s retail directory. (1993). Fairview, NJ: Phelon,
Sheldon and Marsar.
Shim, S., & Kotsiopulus, A. (1991, Fall). Information-seek-
ing patterns of retail apparel buyers. Clothing and Tex-
tiles Research Journal, 10(1), 20-30.
Silverman, D. (1998, November 11). Altered states: A better
fit through body scanning. WWD, p. 8.Socha, M. (1999, June 8). CEO summit: Keynote; Ralph
Lauren. WWD, pp. 6-7.
Standard and Poor’s Industry Surveys. (1992, June 4). Re-
tailing: Consumer spending machine shifts gears (Pub-
lication No. 160-23). pp. R75-R80.
Stepping out on the world stage. (1998, July 8). WWD, p. 6.
Sternquist, B., Tolbert, S., & Davis, B. (1989, Summer).
Imported apparel: Retail buyers’ reasons for foreign
procurement. Clothing and Textiles Research Journal,
7(4), 35-40.
Thompson, J. D. (1962). Organizations and output transac-
tions. American Journal of Sociology, 68(3), 309-324.
Thompson, J .D. (1967). Organizations in action. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Tushman, M. L. (1977). Special boundary roles in the in-
novation process. Administrative Science Quarterly, 22,
587-605.
Zinn, L., Power, C., Siler, J. F., DeGeorge, G., & Zellner,
W. (1990, November 26). Retailing: Who will sur-
vive ? Business Week, pp. 134-137, 140, 144.
