JOURNAL OF SERVICE RESEARCH / August 2000 Lievens, Moenaert / NEW SERVICE TEAMS
New Service Teams as
Information-ProcessingSystems
Reducing Innovative Uncertainty
Annouk Lievens
Maastricht University
Rudy K. Moenaert
University of Ghent
This article theoretically and empirically examines the an-
tecedents and consequences of project communicationduring the new financial service innovation process. Theauthors analyze project communication comprising bothintraproject communication and extraproject communica-tion (i.e., boundary spanners) and adopt the view that pro-ject teams within banks are primarily information-processing systems directed toward reducing innovativeuncertainty. The research findings indicate that the level ofcomplexity contributes to intraproject communication,whereas centralized project environments appear to be abarrier for communication within the project team.Curvilinear relationships (inverted U) are substantiatedbetween project climate and intraproject communicationand between formalization and boundary-spanning com -
munication. The authors’ findings provide support for the
fact that effective project communication is contingentupon the level of cross-functional cooperation and that therelationship with project success is an indirect one, medi -
ated by the level of innovative uncertainty reduction.The study of innovation in the financial service industry
is a relatively new research topic in marketing and adds toexisting contributions in the service innovation literature.Financial industries have changed rapidly. Not only havenew market opportunities emerged (i.e., banks now alsoengage in insurance and real estate services), but espe-cially, new technology has proliferated. The latter hasstrongly increased the rate of innovation. Telecommunica -
tion systems facilitate paper flows, make direct interac -
tions with customers possible, and foremost, make the
engineering of new products (such as loans, securities, for -
eign exchange, etc.) possible within days, sometimes even
hours (Drew 1994). Innovation in financial services com -
prises a wide range of forms in which new products and
new processes may be distinguished. Customers buy prod-
uctsfrom the organization, whereas process refers to an or -
ganized system for delivering one or more products (Drew
1994; Macdonald 1998). This categorization is often diffi -
cult. Home banking and office banking are new products,
but they also represent changes in the delivery processesand systems of the banks. Moreover, some new processesmay seem to have little direct impact on the customer (e.g.,
A preliminary version of this article was presented as a work-in-progress paper at the annual EGOS conference, Maastricht, in June
1998. We greatly appreciate the comments of Henry Robben, Piet Vanden Abeele, Filip Caeldries, Marc Jegers, and Roland Pepermanson earlier drafts of this article. Also, the comments from the journal editor and reviewers are gratefully acknowledged.
Journal of Service Research, V olume 3, No. 1, August 2000 46-65
© 2000 Sage Publications, Inc.


---PAGE---

additional and new administrative procedures or software
enhancement). However, even in these cases, indirect ben -
efits are sought in terms of faster, less expensive, or more
accurate customer service (Lievens, de Ruyter, andLemmink 1999).
Recent innovation studies have provided insight into
the factors responsible for new financial service successand failure (e.g., de Brentani 1989, 1991, 1993b, 1995b; deBrentani and Cooper 1991, 1992; Easingwood 1986;Easingwood and Percival 1990; Easingwood and Storey1991, 1993, 1994). Despite the contribution of these stud -
ies to our understanding of innovation in the financial ser -
vices industry, the role of communication has largely been
ignored in this research area. Only a few studies have indi -
cated that the effectiveness of internal communication (de
Brentani 1989, 1993b, 1995b) and external communica -
tion (Cooper et al. 1994; Easingwood and Storey 199b) is
indeed a critical condition for new service success. Com -
munication by project team members is crucial because it
provides adequate market information on competitors andcustomers. Also, technical information is often channeledinto the project team through cooperation with affiliatedcompanies. Moreover, communication does not only helpthe bank to channel external information into the projectteam. Communication and crbss-functional cooperation isnecessary to effectively integrate new banking servicesinto the existing product range and information technol-ogy infrastructure (Lievens, Moenaert, and S’Jegers1999).
Thus, we know that effective communication is essen-
tial to new financial service success, but we still lack anin-depth understanding of the antecedents and the effectsof communication flows during the innovation process ofthese services. This article will address the following ques -
tions: How effective are these communication flows in re -
ducing the level of innovative uncertainty? What are the
conditions in organizational design that enhance and im -
pede communication flows during the project life cycle?
How does the level of cross-functional cooperation moder -
ate the relationship between communication and innova -
tive uncertainty? Finally, to what extent does effective
communication (i.e., the reduction of innovative uncer -
tainty) enhance project success (i.e., the performance of
the new financial service)? First we present our theoreticalmodel, and then we discuss our research design, which hasbeen developed to test the developed hypotheses. We con -
clude this article by discussing the research results and by
evaluating the managerial implications of this study.
AN INFORMATION-
PROCESSING APPROACH
During service production and delivery, there almost al -
ways is some level of customer involvement, which givesrise to strong functional interdependencies within the fi -
nancial service organization. Simultaneous production
and consumption cannot be separated due to the presenceof the customer as part of the system; therefore, service or -
ganizations cannot separate production and marketing ac -
tivities. This creates a potential problem because, for most
financial institutions, the individuals responsible for pro -
ducing the service (i.e., the operations function) are differ -
ent from those who deal with the customer (i.e., the
marketing function). In other words, there is a functionalseparation between the so-called back office (operations)and front office (customer contact). Consequently, the in -
terface or interaction between these functions becomes
critical for a successful service offering (Chase 1981;Chase and Tansik 1983; Lovelock et al. 1988; Mahajanet al. 1994).
This functional interdependence between operations
and marketing has an important impact on the service in -
novation process. Because of the required work and infor -
mation flows between these highly interdependent
organizational functions, communication between depart -
ments becomes crucial during service development. These
organizational entities are in turn interdependent on somelarger environments (Mahajan et al. 1994; Ruekert andWalker 1987; Thompson 1967). Thus, in line with anopen-system view (see Allen 1985; Brown and Utterback1985; Daft and Weick 1984; Ebadi and Utterback 1984;Fidler and Johnson 1984; Moenaert and Souder 1990b;Smith et al. 1994; Thompson 1967; Tushman 1979a,1979b, 1979c; Weick 1969), uncertainty is introduced tothese work-related information processes. Consequently,the innovation process can be viewed as a process of un-certainty reduction as the financial service project teamdeals with work-related uncertainty (i.e., the innovationtask). Within this perspective, project teams function inthe form of information-processing organisms operatingin a complex and dynamic environment.
We define effective communication as bringing about
changes in the receiver behavior that were intended by theinformation source (Rogers and Agarwala-Rogers 1976;Rogers and Shoemaker 1971). The intended change, in ourstudy, relates to creating a change in knowledge or reduc -
ing uncertainty in the service innovation process, that is,
reducing innovative uncertainty.
Intraproject and Extraproject
Communication
We distinguish between intraproject and extraproject
communication. Intraproject communication involvescommunication flows among members of a project team.The project team can be viewed as a task force, or “a formof horizontal contact which is designed for problems ofmultiple departments” (Galbraith 1974, p. 319). For in -
stance, a task force offers a way to integrate functionalLievens, Moenaert / NEW SERVICE TEAMS 47

---PAGE---

viewpoints during new service development (Langeard et al.
1981). Extraproject communication involves communica -
tion flows between members of the project team and out -
side sources. Such flows are usually mediated by
boundary spanners (e.g., Keller and Holland 1975;Tushman 1977; Tushman and Nadler 1980). Boundaryspanners are individuals within the organization who serveas mediators of communication between the project teamand outside sources (Allen and Cohen 1969; Keller andHolland 1975; Porter and Roberts 1983; Rothwell andRobertson 1973; Tushman 1977).
Organizational Design
To innovate successfully, the organization has to gather
and process the right kind of information. Because thecommunication capacity of an organization is greatly in -
fluenced by its organizational structure (Bentley 1990;
Gupta, Raj, and Wilemon 1986; Hage, Aiken, and Marett1971; Souder and Moenaert 1992; Van de Ven andDelbecq 1974), structure is a critical determinant of the in -
formation processing involved in innovation activities. In
this study, therefore, we pay specific attention to the orga-nizational design in which the innovation takes place.
COMPLEXITY
Complexity is determined by the number of specialists
in the organization and their professionalism (Rogers andAgarwala-Rogers 1976). The number of specialists islikely to be higher for successful organizational innovatorsthat link greater complexity to innovation success (Gupta,Raj, and Wilemon 1986). As jobs become more complexand the variety of tasks within the organization increase,the extent and complexity of communication flows arelikely to increase (Hage, Aiken, and Marrett 1971; Marchand Simon 1958). Therefore, innovation performancewill, to an important degree, depend on the extent to whichan organization can tap into diverse external knowledgesources.
As organizations grow and create more highly special -
ized task-related areas, these specialized subunits develop
distinctive values, norms, language, and coding schemes(Katz and Kahn 1966; Thompson 1967; Tushman 1977;Tushman and Nadler 1980). When an organization has aheterogeneous background, such diversity offers an idealplatform for information exchange and can produce highlycreative innovations. However, such diversity in highlycomplex organizations can also hinder the flow of commu -
nication that is so vital to successful innovation. Conse -
quently, boundary spanners are needed to facilitate
communication flows across subunits in complex organi -zations (Daft and Lengel 1986; Tushman and Nadler
1980). We expect these boundary-spanning roles to en -
hance extraproject communication because they will cre -
ate a platform for more sources and channels of
information and increase the diversity of informationavailable within the organization. Consequently, we pro -
pose the following:
Proposition 1a: Intraproject communication relates pos -
itively to the level of complexity.
Proposition 1b: Extraproject communication relates
positively to the level of complexity.
FORMALIZATION
Formalization is defined as the importance the organi -
zation attaches to the idea of following rules and proce -
dures when performing one’s job (Gupta, Raj, and
Wilemon 1986). In the banking sector, both the nature ofthe business (i.e., cash resources, security) and the stronginterdependencies that result from simultaneous produc -
tion and consumption necessitate coordination and inte -
gration through formalization. In addition, in this setting
and in particular in new service development, boundary-spanning activities play a role by transferring extraorgani-zational and intraorganizational communication and con-necting the innovation team to its external environment.Conflicting research findings in the existing innovation lit-erature (e.g., Moenaert et al. 1995) suggest that there is thepossibility of a curvilinear relationship between the levelof formalization and project communication. Indeed, inthe literature on the role of organizational structure in theintegration of marketing and R&D, formalization appearsto be both a facilitator and a barrier to interfunctional inte -
gration (Hage, Aiken, and Marett 1971; Moenaert and
Souder 1990a; Moenaert et al. 1995; Ruekert and Walker1987; Souder and Moenaert 1992).
According to some researchers, formalization may pro -
hibit the search for new sources of information, which is
essential during the initiation stage of the innovation pro -
cess (Zaltman, Duncan, and Holbek 1973). On the other
hand, a higher degree of formalization also has beenshown to facilitate the implementation stage of the innova -
tion process (Rogers and Agarwala-Rogers 1976). Also,
within a banking context, higher levels of formalizationhave been associated with more active product innovationand bank performance (e.g., Johne and Harborne 1985;Reidenbach and Moak 1986).
Therefore, we expect that the level of formalization will
be curvilinearly related (inverted U) to the transfer ofintraproject information and external information medi -
ated by boundary spanners. The following propositions
are deduced:48 JOURNAL OF SERVICE RESEARCH / August 2000

---PAGE---

Proposition 2a: Intraproject communication relates
curvilinearly (inverted U) to the level of formaliza -
tion.
Proposition 2b: Extraproject communication (i.e., pro -
ject members acting as boundary spanners) is
curvilinearly related (inverted U) to the level of for -
malization.
CENTRALIZATION
Centralization is defined as the concentration of power
in organizations and the absence of participation in deci -
sion making (Van de Ven and Ferry 1980; Walton 1981). A
high degree of centralization—a high degree of hierarchyof authority combined with a low degree of participation indecision making—is likely to limit the amount of informa -
tion available in the organization and restrict the channels
of communication. Centralization will discourage organi -
zational innovativeness because a high degree of hierarchy
of authority limits the communication of negative feed -
back that might help the organization in its innovation ef -
forts (Gupta, Raj, and Wilemon 1986; Zaltman, Duncan,
and Holbek 1973). Hage, Aiken, and Marrett (1971) pointto the creation of social distance through the concentrationof power, thus inhibiting the rate of task communication,especially lateral communication, between departments.
In a highly centralized organization, subordinates typi-
cally must implement decisions and not participate in thedevelopment of these decisions. Centralization will there-fore create a less favorable climate for project members toengage in boundary-spanning activities. Thus, we expectthat a greater hierarchy of authority and a lack of participa-tion in decision making will restrict information flows.This is postulated in the following propositions:
Proposition 3a: Intraproject communication relates neg -
atively to the degree of centralization.
Proposition 3b: Extraproject communication relates
negatively to the level of centralization.
PROJECT CLIMATE
In an innovation context, we consider the organiza -
tional climate surrounding the project, or the project cli -
mate. In a services setting, improving the organizational
climate is considered to be a critical function of internalmarketing (Bowen and Schneider 1988; Grönroos 1990).Thus, the quality of the project climate may strongly influ -
ence the internal communication flows. A good project cli -
mate is likely to improve the motivation of the persons
involved (Mohr and Nevin 1990; Souder 1987) and to con -
tribute to interfunctional integration and thus to innovation
success (Souder and Moenaert 1992).Findings in the R&D management literature indicate
that a medium-quality project climate is best for effectiveproject communication. As Souder (1987) has pointed out,the “too-good friends” syndrome may occur within projectteams, which means that high-quality project climatesmay actually impede, rather than enhance, innovation suc -
cess. A very high level of integration or coherence among
team members can lead to too much conformity, therebyhindering the flow of a wide range of information andideas (Janis 1973; Katz 1982; Katz and Allen 1982). There-fore, we expect that a moderate project climate is the bestantecedent for enhancing the transfer of communicationboth within the project team and for boundary-spanningactivities undertaken by project members. The followingpropositions are deduced:
Proposition 4a: Intraproject communication relates
curvilinearly (inverted U) to the quality of the pro -
ject climate.
Proposition 4b: Extraproject communication relates
curvilinearly (inverted U) to the quality of the pro -
ject climate.
Innovative Uncertainty Reduction:
The Moderating Effect of Cross-Functional Cooperation
We have conceived the innovation process of financial
services as one of uncertainty reduction. In line withGalbraith (1974), we conceive uncertainty as the differ-
ence between the amount of information necessary to per-form a task and the amount of information alreadyavailable within the organization. We expect communica -
tion to reduce the degree of uncertainty about the project,
that is, to reduce the level of innovative uncertainty withinthe new financial service innovation team (Allen 1985; DeMeyer 1985; Fidler and Johnson 1984; Moenaert andSouder 1990b; Souder and Moenaert 1992; Zaltman,Duncan, and Holbek 1973). Four types of innovative un -
certainty can be distinguished: (a) uncertainty about user
needs, (b) uncertainty about competitors, (c) uncertaintyabout technologies, and (d) uncertainty about the re -
sources required to accomplish the financial service pro -
ject. Project team members attempt to reduce the first three
types of innovative uncertainty by sharing information andby building knowledge that originates from the externalenvironment (e.g., information about customers, competi -
tors, and technologies). The fourth type of innovative un -
certainty, resource uncertainty, is related to the internal
environment and deals with the question of how to allocatethe appropriate financial, technical, and human resourcesto reduce uncertainty about customers, technologies, andLievens, Moenaert / NEW SERVICE TEAMS 49

---PAGE---

competitors during the innovation task (Moenaert and
Souder 1990a).
Proposition 5a: The level of innovative uncertainty re -
duction (i.e., about customers, competitors, technol -
ogies, and resources) relates positively to the
exchange of intraproject and extraproject communi -
cation.
The need for integration and intraorganizational coor -
dination increases in cases where the innovation process
involves reciprocal task interdependencies between depart -
ments (Galbraith 1973; Thompson 1967; Tushman
1979a). Internal communication is a prime mechanism forstimulating cross-functional cooperation and for gettingteam members actively involved. Indeed, previous researchhas pointed to the positive relationship of the integration offunctionally specialized activities and innovation success(e.g., Cooper 1979; Griffin and Hauser 1994; Maidiqueand Zirger 1984; Moenaert et al. 1995; Pinto and Pinto1990; Van de Ven and Delbecq 1974). Thus, taking into ac -
count the importance of integration and its impact on inno -
vation performance, we expect that the effectiveness of
project communication in reducing innovative uncertain-ty will be contingent upon the level of cross-functionalcooperation.
Moreover, we examine the boundary-spanning activi-
ties of project members who are concerned with mediatingcommunication between their work unit and other workunits within the organization. These individuals have alsobeen called integrators (Daft and Lengel 1986; Galbraith1974; Lawrence and Lorsch 1967) because they facilitatecommunication across organizational boundaries.
As a result, it is likely that the greater the level of
cross-functional cooperation that has been achieved, themore effective intraproject and extraproject communica -
tion will be in reducing the level of innovative uncertainty.
We can deduce the following proposition:
Proposition 5b: The level of cross-functional coopera -
tion positively moderates the relationship between
the level of innovative uncertainty reduction and theexchange of extraproject and intraproject communi -
cation.
Performance of the Financial
Service Innovation Project
Innovation-related research not focusing on the R&D
organization has also adopted a contingency perspectivewhen examining the relationship between uncertainty, co -
ordination means, and organizational effectiveness
(Argote 1982; Blau and McKinley 1979; Gupta, Dirsmith,and Fogarty 1994). Based on the information-processing
view that we adopted on organizational innovation, welink the level of innovative uncertainty reduction to inno -
vation success (e.g., Allen 1985; Clark and Fujimoto
1991; Souder and Moenaert 1992). In line with this contin -
gency-based research (e.g., Craig and Hart 1992; Griffin
and Page 1993; Montoya-Weiss and Calantone 1994), wecan define success as a multidimensional construct that in -
volves financial and technological success and the
achievement of learning effects. Project teams gain knowl -
edge, or learn (e.g., Levitt and March 1988), as they ex -
change information. Therefore, we can define project
communication effectiveness as a change in knowledge.Stated otherwise, the intended change in project members’cognitive behavior can be conceived as a reduction in thelevel of innovative uncertainty. We can then formulate thefollowing proposition:
Proposition 6: Performance of the financial service inno -
vation project relates positively to the degree of un -
certainty reduction about (a) customers, (b)
competitors, (c) technologies, (d) and resources.
To simplify and summarize the propositions, Figure 1
describes the organizational antecedents and effects ofproject communication during the new financial serviceinnovation process.
RESEARCH DESIGN
Operationalization of the Variables
The constructs of our research (see Figure 1) were
operationalized according to approaches recommended byChurchill (1979), Peter (1979, 1981), and Peter and Chur -
chill (1986). Through an intensive literature analysis and
the development of a propositional framework, we speci -
fied the domain of the constructs and generated a sample
of items that could be used for measurement purposes(Churchill 1979, p. 66). To create multiple-item scales foreach construct, we relied on three sources of information:(a) existing operationalizations in the literature, (b) de -
scriptions resulting from in-depth interviews designed for
exploratory purposes (Lievens, Moenaert, and S’Jegers1999), and (c) scales of our own design in cases where con -
structs lacked valid operationalizations in the two former
sources. Two types of measurement scales were used: (a)5-point Likert-type scales ranging from 1 = strongly dis -
agree to 5 = strongly agree and (b) 5-point rating scales
that use specific response labels (e.g., 1 = very poor insight
to 5 = very good insight ).50 JOURNAL OF SERVICE RESEARCH / August 2000

---PAGE---

Appendix A provides an overview of the constructs to-
gether with the items comprising each construct and the re-sults of the reliability analysis. For each construct, we alsobriefly refer to the source or sources used for theoperationalizations. All constructs show acceptable tohigh reliability coefficients, using an alpha level of .5 asthe cutoff value for exploratory research (Cronbach andMeehl 1967; Nunnally 1967). For the centralization, com -
plexity, and learning effects constructs, we improved and
further purified the scales by deleting items that showedlow interitem correlations.
Project success, that is, the performance of the financial
service innovation, was assessed using several measures.This is in line with the generally held view that success is amultidimensional construct (Craig and Hart 1992; Griffinand Page 1993; Montoya-Weiss and Calantone 1994).Both financial and nonfinancial indicators were used; spe -
cifically, three performance measures have been included:
financial performance, technological performance, andthe achievement of learning effects (Clark and Fujimoto1991). Financial success was included because it predomi -
nates in the new product (Craig and Hart 1992) and new
service literature (e.g., de Brentani 1995a; Storey andEasingwood 1993). Because there is as yet relatively littleinformation about the technological nature of new finan -cial service innovations and its impact on success, we were
particularly interested in technological performance in afinancial service innovation context. In addition, previouscase studies (Lievens, Moenaert, and S’Jegers 1999) hadindicated that some innovation projects may be viewed asunsuccessful from a commercial point of view but may beseen as generating important learning effects for future in -
novation projects. Therefore, we decided to include this
performance measure as well.
An Ex Post Facto Design:
Survey Research
A survey was organized to analyze the antecedents and
the impact of effective project communication on projectsuccess. Our unit of analysis is the new financial serviceinnovation project.
THEQUESTIONNAIRE
Prior to data collection, a pretest of the survey instru -
ment was organized in two leading Belgian banks (involv -
ing a total of 20 financial service innovation projects). The
purpose of this pretest was (a) to assess construct validityand further purify the scales if necessary and (b) to evalu -Lievens, Moenaert / NEW SERVICE TEAMS 51
FIGURE 1
Propositional Framework on the Antecedents and Effects of Project Communication
During the New Financial Services Innovation Process

---PAGE---

ate and improve the quality of the questionnaire prior to
full implementation of the survey. We developed a struc -
tured survey instrument involving closed-end questions.
Two key contact persons in each bank encouraged re -
spondents to provide additional remarks and comments on
the questionnaire, concerning (a) time needed to fill outthe questionnaire, (b) issues related to questions and scal -
ing, (c) difficulty and flow of the questions, and (d) word -
ing. We also organized two in-depth interviews with two
pretest respondents to assess the following concerns aboutinternal validity:
1. We evaluated potential demand characteristics
during the pretest, that is, respondents’ efforts totry to anticipate research objectives (Campbelland Stanley 1963; Judd, Smith, and Kidder1991).
2. With regard to the scale, we checked (a) potential
halo bias (Cooper and de Brentani 1984; Judd,Smith, and Kidder 1991; Nunnally and Bernstein1994, p. 373), which refers to the rater’s tendencyto systematically perceive an individual as beinghigh (or low) in one area and thus being high (orlow) in other areas as well, and (b) social desir-ability (Nunnally and Bernstein 1994), or therater’s tendency to provide ratings that reflect so-cially desirable behaviors.
SAMPLING STRATEGY
The sampling frame of our study was based on the Bel-
gian Banking Association directory of 124 banks and sav-ings institutions operating in Belgium. To reach keyinformants, we usually addressed the letter requesting par -
ticipation to the commercial director of the bank or to the
marketing manager. This initial sampling frame was re -
vised following a first round of telephone calls through
which we eliminated those banks not engaged in new ser -
vice development activities. The revised sampling frame
consisted of 77 banks and saving institutions.
We asked respondents in the participating financial in -
stitutions to select two completed service innovation pro -
jects. In the questionnaire, the term project was used to
define the task or process of transforming a service ideainto a new service launched in the market. To maximize theresearch validity, we asked respondents to choose projectsbased on the following criteria: (a) one project is a com -
mercially successful service innovation, the other project
is a commercially unsuccessful service innovation; (b) thetwo projects had been completed recently, that is, marketlaunch occurred a maximum of 2 years before; and (c) theprojects are largely internally developed projects (not fullyoutsourced) and involved personnel from different depart -
ments within the organization. Typically, respondentswere project managers and marketing and segment
managers, as well as product managers involved in the de -
velopment of the new financial service innovations.
Out of a total of 154 questionnaires (two projects for all
77 banks in our revised sample frame), we achieved a re -
sponse rate of 42%. Of these 65 valid questionnaires, re -
turned by 36 banks, 37 were commercially successful
projects and 28 were commercial failures. This bias onthe success side has been shown to be the norm in cross-sectional surveys dealing with new financial service devel -
opment (e.g., Cooper and de Brentani 1991; de Brentani
1989, 1991, 1993a, 1993b, 1995a, 1995b; Easingwoodand Storey 1993, 1994; Edgett and Parkinson 1994). Sev -
eral strategies and follow-up efforts were undertaken to
bring the response to the level achieved. The mailing con -
sisted of an introductory letter, a faxed document to iden -
tify the respondents and the corresponding project, and
two questionnaires with accompanying letters for these re -
spondents. Anonymity and confidentiality were ensured.
Participants were told in an accompanying letter that theywould benefit from involvement in the study. The partici -
pating banks received two structured questionnaires with
mainly closed questions. A total of four follow-up roundsby telephone were organized, allowing a time span of 2weeks between the follow-up sessions. A final reminderletter with questionnaires was sent to the potential respon-dents exactly 1 month after the last follow-up telephoneround. Finally, the participating banks received a summaryreport and were invited to a presentation and feedback ses-sion held by the researchers.
DATA ANALYSIS
Data Screening
Because all of our hypotheses are directional, the sig -
nificance tests used were one-tailed. Given the limited size
of our sample, we decided to set the alpha level of signifi -
cance at .1 (Type I error) to minimize Type II errors (Cook
and Campbell 1979; Hays 1986; Henkel 1976). Prior to thedata analysis, all variables were carefully screened tocheck assumptions of normality, linearity, independence,and homogeneity of variance (Tabachnick and Fidell1989).
Through the inspection of the standardized scores
(measures with a zscore in excess of ±3.16) and the nor -
mal probability plots, univariate outliers were identified
among the continuous variables. Multivariate outlierswere identified through computation of Mahalanobis’sdistance. To minimize the impact on the small sample size,we decided not to delete these cases but to reduce their in -52 JOURNAL OF SERVICE RESEARCH / August 2000

---PAGE---

fluence by assigning them a value that was one unit larger
(or one unit smaller) than the next extreme score in the dis -
tribution that was not an outlier (Tabachnick and Fidell
1989, p. 70).
A test of homogeneity of variance, using both
Cochran’s Cand Bartlett’s Ftests (see Hays 1986) to
check the comparability of the failed and successful pro-jects, was performed. Results of these two tests indicatedthat there was no difference between the group of success-ful and failed projects, suggesting the appropriateness oftesting for differences in mean values.
Research Findings
Testing our propositional framework enables us to shed
more light on project communication as a mediator (Baronand Kenny 1986) in our causal framework concerning thenature of the link with its antecedents and its impact onproject performance through the level of innovative uncer -
tainty reduction. Project communication was labeled a
mediator variable (Baron and Kenny 1986) because its rolechanges from a dependent variable (in its relationship tothe antecedent organizational variables) to an independentvariable (in terms of its contribution to uncertainty reduc -
tion). The results of the analyses are presented below. Ap -
pendix B comprises the entire correlation matrix involving
all constructs under study.
ORGANIZATIONAL ANTECEDENTS OF
PROJECT COMMUNICATION
Table 1 presents the bivariate correlation coefficients
(Pearson zero-order correlation coefficients), the means,and the standard deviations for the constructs under con -
sideration. Proposition 1 is supported by the findings. The
level of complexity relates positively both to intraprojectteam communication ( r= .59, p< .001) and to extraprojectcommunication (i.e., project members’ boundary-span -
ning activities) ( r= .66, p< .001). Proposition 3 is also
supported. As hypothesized, intraproject communication(r= –.51, p< .001) and the project members’ bound -
ary-spanning activities ( r= –.37, p< .05) show a negative
relation with the degree of centralization.
Using the level of complexity and centralization as
regressors, two standard multiple regressions were runwith intraproject and extraproject as the dependent vari -
ables, respectively. The statistically significant regres -
sions of intraproject communication ( R
2= .43) and
extraproject communication ( R2= .45) on complexity and
centralization are significant and are reported in Table 2.Both complexity ( β= .47, p< .001) and centralization ( β=
–.36, p< .05) are significant predictors of intraproject
communication. Higher complexity stimulates communi -
cation within the project team, as opposed to higher levels
of centralization, which hinders the communication flowswithin the project team. Moreover, complexity ( β= .61, p<
.01) was shown to significantly contribute, whereas cen -Lievens, Moenaert / NEW SERVICE TEAMS 53
TABLE 1
Correlation Matrix Between Organizational Antecedent Variables
and Project Communication Variables
Project Intraproject Extraproject
Variable Mean SD Complexity Formalization Centralization Climate Communication Communication
Complexity 3.94 .71
Formalization 3.50 .84 .42****Centralization 2.31 .88 –.33** –.28*Project climate 3.79 .93 .30** .19* –.39**
Intraproject communication 3.72 .61 .59**** .69**** –.51**** .51****
Extraproject communication 3.46 .74 .66**** .40**** –.37** .27** .56****
NOTE: Table entries represent Pearson product moment correlations. Using pairwise deletion, the sample sizes vary between 64 and 65. Hypothesized
correlations are in bold print.*p< .1. ** p< .05. **** p< .001 (all one-tailed).
TABLE 2
The Antecedent Role of Complexity and
Centralization on Project Communication:
Multiple Regression Analyses
Intraproject Extraproject
Communication Communication
Complexity .465*** .606***
Centralization –.356** –.170*R2adjusted .434 .446
F 25.11 26.40
Significance < .0001 < .0001
NOTE: Intraproject and extraproject communication are dependent vari-
ables and represent column entries. Complexity and centralization are in-dependent variables and represent row entries. Table entries representstandardized beta coefficients. N= 65. Listwise deletion of missing data.
*p< .1. ** p< .05. *** p< .01 (all one-tailed).

---PAGE---

tralization ( /c98= –.17, p< .1) significantly impeded the ex -
change of intraorganizational information by project
members.
To test the curvilinear relationships (formulated in
Propositions 2 and 4, which relate the level of formaliza-tion and project climate to intraproject and extraprojectcommunication, respectively), second-degree polynomial(i.e., the independent variable is raised to a certain power)regression equations were used. This entailed adding tothe four bivariate regression equations (the two communi-cation variables as the regressands with the two organiza-tional variables as regressors) the quadratic term of theindependent variables in question (i.e., formalization andproject climate) (see Table 3). Through hierarchical re -
gression analysis, the proportion of variance of the de -
pendent variable, incremented by the quadratic vector, was
tested for statistical significance (Pedhazur 1982). Propo -
sition 2 is partly supported by the data. The level of formal -
ization is curvilinearly related (inverted U) to the transfer
of extraproject information by project members. Thesefindings indicate that moderately formalized project envi -
ronments are the most favorable antecedent condition for
organizational liaisons to transfer extraproject informa -
tion. Further analysis of Table 1 indicates that formaliza -
tion may be linearly related to intraproject communication
(r= .69, p< .001), considering the significant correlation
coefficient. Partial support is also found for Proposition 4.In line with our expectations, a curvilinear relationship ap -
pears to exists between the quality of the project climate
and intraproject communication. Both relativelylow-quality and high-quality project climates seem to cre -
ate barriers for information transfer within the project
team. In other words, a moderate project climate again isshown to be the best condition for intraproject communi -
cation. No support was found for a curvilinear relationshipbetween project climate and the boundary-spanning activ -
ities of project members. Based on Table 1, the latter may
be linearly related ( r= .27, p< .05) to project climate.
PROJECT COMMUNICATION EFFECTIVENESS
According to the correlation coefficients presented in
Table 4, Proposition 5 is largely supported ( ).Intraproject communication was found to have a positiveimpact on the level of uncertainty reduction about custom-ers (r= .48, p< .001), technologies ( r= .32, p< .05), re-
sources ( r= .40, p< .001), and competitors ( r= .21, p< .1).
Similarly, the results indicate that extraproject communi-cation contributes to uncertainty reduction about competi -
tors ( r= .35, p< .05), customers ( r= .35, p< .05), and
technologies ( r= .24, p < .05).
Using the level of intraproject communication and
extraproject communication as independent variables inmultiple regressions relating to the four types of innova -
tive uncertainty reduction (i.e., dependent variables) (see
Table 5), the R
2s were found to be statistically significant
in all cases: (a) customer uncertainty ( R2= .20), (b) com -
petitive uncertainty ( R2= .10), (c) resource uncertainty
(R2= .14), and (d) technological uncertainty ( R2= .08),
specifically. Extraproject communication by projectmembers contributed significantly only to uncertainty re -
duction about competitors ( /c98= .38, p< .05), whereas
intraproject communication contributed to the reductionsin customer uncertainty ( /c98= .38, p< .01), technological
uncertainty ( /c98= .28, p< .1), and resource uncertainty ( /c98=
.46,p< .01). However, in contrast to what was hypothe -
sized in Proposition 5a and indicated by the correlation
analyses, the two types of communication were not bothalways significantly indicated for each form of uncertaintyreduction. This can partly be explained by the relatively54 JOURNAL OF SERVICE RESEARCH / August 2000
TABLE 3
The Antecedent Role of Formalization and Project Climate on Project Communication:
Hierarchical Curvilinear Regression Analyses
Intraproject Extraproject Intraproject Extraproject
Communication Communication Communication Communication
Formalization .724 .523 Project climate .671 .344
Formalization2.088 –.297** Project climate2–.292** .141
R2adjusted .465 .149 R2adjusted .249 .056
R2change .006 .074 R2change .060 .014
F 55.82 11.99 F 22.265 4.724
Significance < .0001 < .001 Significance < .0001 < .05Fchange .759 5.886 Fchange 5.471 .924
Significance ns < .05 Significance < .05 ns
NOTE: Four bivariate regression equations involving two regressors (formalization and project climate) linked to two regressands (intraproject c ommuni -
cation and extraproject communication). Quadratic terms of the independent variables (regressors) were entered after the variables from which the y were
calculated (original variable) were entered into the regression equation. Table entries represent standardized beta coefficients. N= 65. Listwise deletion of
missing data. One-tailed probabilities of the beta coefficients: * p< .1, ** p< .05, *** p< .01.

---PAGE---

high intercorrelation ( r= .56) of the two independent
variables.
THEMODERATING ROLE OF
CROSS -FUNCTIONAL COOPERATION
Proposition 5b is supported. We performed hierarchical
regression analysis to examine the moderating impact ofthe level of cross-functional cooperation on project com-munication effectiveness. The significant interactions arepresented in Table 6. Thus, our findings support the contin-gency hypothesis that we formulated: Project communica-tion effectiveness depends on the level of cross-functionalcooperation achieved. The strong interdependencies thatexist due to the specific nature of services require interac-tion and integration (e.g., Mahajan et al. 1994; Thompson1967). Cross-functional cooperation seems essential forenhancing this integration. Remarkable is its moderatingrole in reducing resource uncertainty, regardless of thetype of communication concerned. Although our data didnot provide support for the relationship between boundaryspanners and the reduction of resource uncertainty,cross-functional cooperation seems to be a crucial moder -
ator in enhancing this relationship. Moreover, the interac -
tion terms of cross-functional cooperation with intra-
project communication significantly enhances uncertaintyreduction about competitors and technologies. The inter -
action of boundary-spanning communication and
cross-functional cooperation also contributes to uncer -
tainty reduction about customers.
Two additional analyses provide further validation of
the pivotal but moderating role of cross-functional cooper -
ation on project communication effectiveness. One ap -
proach involved eliminating cross-functional cooperation
as a potential moderator in the relationship between inno -
vative uncertainty reduction and project performance. Hi -
erarchical regression analyses of the performance measureswere performed (i.e., financial success, technological suc -
cess, and learning effects) on the innovative uncertainty
domains and the level of cross-functional cooperation.
The cross-functional cooperation variable was entered
only after the innovative uncertainty domains had been in -
cluded. In this way, we could test whether the increment in
the proportion of variance in the performance measures,accounted for by the innovative uncertainty variables, wasstatistically significant. In line with our expectations, wefound that cross-functional cooperation did not signifi -
cantly increase R
2; that is, it does not appear to contribute
to new financial services success. Considering that the or -
der in which predictors are entered in the hierarchical re -
gression strongly influences results, we performed a
standard multiple regression of the performance measureson the innovative uncertainty domains and the level ofcross-functional cooperation. Again, cross-functional co -
operation did not emerge as a significant predictor.Lievens, Moenaert / NEW SERVICE TEAMS 55
TABLE 4
Correlation Matrix Between the Project Communication Variables
and Innovative Uncertainty Variables
Intraproject Extraproject Customer Competitive Technological Resource
Variable Mean SD Communication Communication Uncertainty Uncertainty Uncertainty Uncertainty
Intraproject communication 3.72 .61
Extraproject communication 3.46 .74 .56****
Customer uncertainty 3.47 .72 .48**** .35**
Competitive uncertainty 3.03 1.18 .21* .35** .24**
Technological uncertainty 3.34 .93 .32** .24** .25** .42****
Resource uncertainty 3.51 .88 .40**** .15 .19* .37** .64****
NOTE: Table entries represent Pearson product moment correlations. Using pairwise deletion, the sample sizes vary between 62 and 65. Hypothesized a nd
significant correlations are in bold print.*p< .10. ** p< .05. **** p< .001 (all one-tailed).
TABLE 5
Effective Project Communication:
Multiple Regression Analyses
Customer Competitive Technological Resource
Uncertainty Uncertainty Uncertainty Uncertainty
Intraproject
communication .381*** –.036 .279* .460***
Extraproject
communication .142 .375** .082 –.109
R2adjusted .200 .098 .080 .139
F 8.899 4.429 3.650 6.122
Significance < .0001 < .05 < .05 < .05
SOURCE: Dependent variables represent column entries (customer un-
certainty, competitive uncertainty, resource uncertainty, and technologi-cal uncertainty). Independent variables represent the row entries(intraproject communication and extraproject communication). Tableentries represent standardized beta coefficients. N= 65. Listwise deletion
of missing data.*p< .1. ** p< .05. *** p< .01 (all one-tailed).

---PAGE---

Our data also demonstrate the mediating role of the
level of innovative uncertainty reduction betweencross-functional cooperation and project performance. Inother words, they provide support for the proposition thatthe effect of cross-functional cooperation on project per -
formance is not a direct one but one that is mediated by the
level of innovative uncertainty reduction (Baron andKenny 1986). As Table 7 illustrates, significant positivecorrelations exist between cross-functional cooperationand the degree of resource uncertainty reduction ( r= .38,
p< .05), technological uncertainty reduction ( r= .33, p<
.05), and customer uncertainty reduction ( r= .30, p< .05).
Similarly, there are significant positive correlations be-tween cross-functional cooperation and financial perfor-mance ( r= .25, p< .05), technological performance ( r=
.36,p< .05), and learning effects ( r= .26, p< .05). We pos-
tulate that these significant correlations result mainly fromthe mediating role of innovative uncertainty reduction. In -
deed, this assertion was supported after calculating the
partial correlation between cross-functional cooperationand the performance measures, controlling for the level ofinnovative uncertainty reduced. In two of three cases (i.e.,financial and technological success), correlations betweencross-functional cooperation and project performancewere no longer significant. Remarkable and interesting,the correlation with learning effects remained significant(r= .23, p< .05) after partialing the effect of innovative un -
certainty reduction.
PROJECT SUCCESS
Proposition 6 is partly supported. Table 7 gives the
Pearson correlation coefficients, the mean, and the stan -
dard deviation for the involved constructs. The extent of
customer uncertainty reduced ( r= .34, p< .05) and the
amount of resource uncertainty reduced ( r= .21, p< .1)
positively and significantly correlate with financial suc -
cess. Technological success relates positively to the reduc -
tion of customer uncertainty ( r= .31, p< .05), resourceuncertainty ( r= .46, p< .001), and technological
uncertainty ( r= .42, p< .001). The reduction of competi -
tive uncertainty does not show a significant relationship
with any of the performance measures. The feedbackgroup discussions suggested that one plausible explana -
tion may reside in the transparency of the market structure
within the Belgian banking industry. At that time, infor-mation about competitors was widely available. This mayexplain why competitive uncertainty reduction seems lesslikely to be a priority during the innovation task. However,this situation may of course be different for that of othercountries in which market structure is less stable. As a re-sult, these data have to be interpreted with caution.
Our findings also do not show any significant correla-
tions between the reduction of innovative uncertainty andlearning effects. However, the findings suggest that thelevel of cross-functional cooperation between depart-ments is an important contributor to the creation of learn -
ing effects.
MANAGEMENT IMPLICATIONS
AND FUTURE RESEARCH
Innovation management within the financial industries
has to realize that financial processes are complex andknowledge intensive and require much use of informationtechnologies. Moreover, strong interdependencies existbetween marketing, operations, and other departments,due to the organization-client interface. Therefore, coop -
eration and integration between these departments is an
important antecedent of new financial service success. Asde Brentani (1989) stated, “Service firms also have diffi -
culties getting their technical and systems people (e.g.,
computer experts, process specialists) and their marketingpersonnel (e.g., frontline or services concept specialists) toeffectively combine their respective points of view andproficiencies” (p. 250). Future research questions may re -
late to the type of departments involved in service innova -56 JOURNAL OF SERVICE RESEARCH / August 2000
TABLE 6
Statistically Significant Hierarchical Regression of the
Moderating Effects of Cross-Functional Cooperation
Interaction Terms Sign
(cross-functional Interaction Dependent Significancecooperation with . . . ) Term Variable R2Adjusted R2Change FChange FChange
Intraproject communication Positive Competitive uncertainty .012 .06 3.776 p<. 1
Intraproject communication Positive Technological uncertainty .096 .053 3.796 p<. 1
Intraproject communication Positive Resource uncertainty .155 .095 7.999 p< .01
Extraproject communication Positive Competitive uncertainty .099 .047 3.423 p<. 1
Extraproject communication Positive Resource uncertainty .138 .104 8.223 p< .01
NOTE: Interaction terms (with cross-functional cooperation) were entered after the variables from which they were calculated were entered into the re-
gression equation. N= 65. Listwise deletion of missing data. One-tailed probabilities.

---PAGE---

57TABLE 7
Correlation Matrix Between Innovative Uncertainty Domains,
Performance Measures, and Cross-Functional Cooperation
Financial Technological Learning Customer Competitive Technological Resource Cross-Functional
Variable Mean SD Performance Performance Effects Uncertainty Uncertainty Uncertainty Uncertainty Cooperation
Financial performance 2.82 1.30
Technological performance 3.32 1.24 .65****Learning effects 3.55 .83 .53**** .31**Customer uncertainty 3.47 .72 .34** .31** .16
Competitive uncertainty 3.03 1.18 –.13 .12 –.08 .24**Technological uncertainty 3.34 .93 –.01 .42**** –.03 .25** .42****
Resource uncertainty 3.51 .88 .21* .46**** .12 .19* .37** .64****
Cross-functional cooperation 3.84 .80 .25** .36** .26** .30** .12 .33** .38**
NOTE: Table entries represent Pearson product moment correlations. Using pairwise deletion, the sample sizes vary between 61 and 65. Hypothesized a nd significant correlations are in bold print.
*p< .1. ** p< .05. **** p< .001 (all one-tailed).

---PAGE---

tion as well as the marketing/R&D counterpart within a
services setting, and financial services setting in particular.
In fact, project managers have to deal with sometimes
complex marketing interfaces during new service develop -
ment. These interfaces primarily involve the management
of horizontal processes within the organization. Projectmanagers have to keep careful track of these processes,knowing the activities, flows, and interactions between thedepartments involved; noticing delays; and taking actionwhenever necessary. However, the latter involves the coor -
dination of a complex process in which the boundaries of
the involved functional departments must be crossed andconnections between them have to be made in order forservice innovation to be successful. As a result, the staffingof cross-functional teams is crucial for project success ingeneral and, as our findings indicate, for learning, in par -
ticular, to take place.
In fact, the contribution to organizational learning as
such should be a continuous aim of the innovation effort. Itis exactly through the specialist knowledge and expertiseof the professional staff that financial service organiza -
tions can build a competitive advantage. The enhanced
learning through cross-functional cooperation is a type ofcore competence that is much harder to copy, thereby re-ducing the threat of competition. Therefore, innovationmanagement should consider the importance of learn-ing-project teams. These teams should not only benefitfrom previous experience, but they should also learn fromother teams previously or currently engaged in similartasks. Consequently, future research should examinecross-functional teams’ contributions to learning duringnew service development.
Therefore, managers responsible for new service devel -
opment need to recognize the critical communication roles
that project members fulfill, because these individuals’intraproject communication flows foster uncertainty re -
duction during the innovation process and ultimately af -
fect the level of project success. Moreover, boundary
spanners link the project team to the external sources of in -
formation that are crucial for successfully fulfilling the in -
novation task.
A question that has not been addressed in this research
is, indeed, Who are these boundary spanners? and Do theyhave any unique characteristics? We could assume thatthese integrators are eager to learn, are strong communica -
tors, and are able to link and integrate different viewpoints
between the involved departments. Depending on the spe -
cific information needs, different project team members
could perform boundary-spanning activities. Frontlineemployees may channel important customer informationto the project team. Process engineers or computer expertstogether with highly skilled knowledge workers could actas boundary spanners regarding essential competitive andtechnological information. Moreover, team structure may
be adapted during the project life cycle to allow for partici -
pation by representatives of other organizations (e.g., affil -
iated companies, universities, etc.). Being reliable,
discrete, cooperative, flexible, and independent may besome of the characteristics to investigate in the futurewhen researching the optimal profile of boundary span -
ners. Again, the latter may be contingent upon the type of
information required during the project life cycle.
Thus, a balanced approach is needed when managing
intraproject and extraproject communication in order topreserve diversity and heterogeneity within the organiza -
tion because this has been shown to enhance innovative
uncertainty reduction and, ultimately, project perfor -
mance. The strong correlation between intraproject and
extraproject communication suggests the necessity of thisbalanced approach. Future research, however, could probemore deeply into the possible trade-off between bound -
ary-spanning communication and intraproject communi -
cation during the project life cycle. As Stork (1991) stated,
“Individuals’ communication patterns will become in -
creasingly constrained by the groups of which they are
members” (p. 180). Due to individual information-pro-cessing limits, individuals try to deal with the problem ofinformation overload by considering a limited set of inter-action partners within the organization. Thus, individualstend to establish strong intragroup communication,whereas boundary-spanning and intergroup communica-tion tend to decrease (Granovetter 1973; Stork 1991).
This trade-off may be steered by innovation manage-
ment’s designing organizational characteristics for effec-tive innovation. As our findings suggest, managers shouldcreate a flexible, facilitative, participative, harmoniousculture in which project team members work. The climateshould be supportive and encouraging to project teammembers. Innovative behavior—the willingness to experi -
ment, learn, and take risks—should be rewarded and ap -
preciated. New service teams may be reinforced in
nonmonetary ways as well. Project team members may bepraised for their work on the generation and implementa -
tion of innovation ideas. Also bonuses for executives may
be linked to the number of new service introductions(Drew 1994).
However, managers also have to be aware of the
“too-good friends” syndrome (Katz and Allen 1982).Therefore, team-based mechanisms in which the composi -
tion of the team and the nature of cooperation with others
are regularly changed, supported by boundary-spanningcommunication, may prevent too much integration. There -
fore, project management must fine-tune organizational
design in order to successfully guide the information-pro -
cessing activities of the project team during the innovation
process. Decentralizing project structures may boil down58 JOURNAL OF SERVICE RESEARCH / August 2000

---PAGE---

to the stimulation and empowerment of project team mem -
bers to deal with development problems themselves rather
than to rely on top management. Decentralizing innova -
tion management through the participation of operational
staff (i.e., frontline personnel) may strongly influence in -
volvement and employee satisfaction. As such, decentral -
izing innovation policies may eventually enhance market
share and customer satisfaction through improved servicedelivery. A flexible project-team environment that en -
hances creativity and the flow of relevant information me -
diated by boundary spanners requires a moderately
formalized organizational setting. Our findings suggestthat project managers should consider a mix of formal andinformal communication during service development. Al -
though our research is quite clear on the existence of a
curvilinear relationship, corroboration in future researchwill have to deal with the following questions: Is there abenchmark for project teams or organizations? What is theoptimum in terms of organizational design? What is thethreshold against which project communication becomesineffective? Moreover, future research should address thetype of project structures that may create and enhance fa-vorable design contingencies for organizing new financialservice development.
CONCLUSION
In this study, we assessed the antecedents and the ef-
fects of project communication and their impact on theperformance of the financial service project. Communica-tion was examined from an information-processing per -
spective, that is, in terms of uncertainty reduction. Support
was found for the contribution of uncertainty reduction tothe financial and technological success of new financialservices. Our study also provides additional empirical evi -
dence that the appropriate organizational design is an im -
portant prerequisite for effective project communication.
The level of complexity and formalization increasesintraproject communication, whereas the level of central -
ization appears to be a barrier for communication within
the project team. A curvilinear relationship between thequality of the project climate and intraproject communica -
tion indicates that a moderate project climate is the best
condition for intraproject communication. The better thequality of the project climate and the more complex theproject environment, the more extraproject informationwill be transferred by project members. However, moder -
ately formalized project environments seem to provide the
most favorable conditions for boundary-spanning commu -
nication to occur in new service development.
All four types of innovative uncertainty were found to
be significantly reduced through intraproject communica -tion. Moreover, except for resource uncertainty, bound -
ary-spanning communication was also an important con -
tributor to the development of a knowledge base. Our
findings reflected the crucial role of cross-functional co -
operation as a contingency variable in ensuring project
communication effectiveness. The greater the degree ofcross-functional cooperation, the more effectiveintraproject and extraproject communication are in reduc -
ing the level of innovative uncertainty. When examining
the information-processing impact of communication, thereduction of customer uncertainty and resource uncer -
tainty were found to be significant predictors of both fi -
nancial and technological success, whereas technological
uncertainty reduction was found to contribute signifi -
cantly to the perceived level of technological success.
APPENDIX A
Individual Items Used to Measure the Constructs(with reliability estimates)
Project Success: The Performance
of the New Financial Service
New financial service performance has been assessed by sev-
eral measures. This is in line with the generally held view thatsuccess is a multidimensional construct (Craig and Hart 1992;Griffin and Page 1993; Montoya-Weiss and Calantone 1994). Fi-nancial and nonfinancial indicators were used to measure suc-cess. These measures were selected on the basis of (a) internalconsistency (i.e., if the item pools were generated on the basis ofexisting measures) and (b) case study research. The followingscale instruction was provided on the questionnaire:
Shown below are a number of statements and questions.
Along with each statement, you will find a scale. Pleaseindicate how strongly you agree with each of the follow -
ing statements, relative to the presently discussed project.
Circle the scale value that best reflects your opinion. (1 =strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree )
Financial performance (Cronbach’s α= .96). We developed a
multiple-item scale for financial performance that reflects themarket share, sales growth, and overall profitability of the new fi -
nancial service. The scale is based on de Brentani’s (1989, 1991)
research on financial service innovation.
1. This project achieved the initial commercial objectives
and expectations.
2. This new service exceeded market share objectives.3. This new service exceeded sales growth objectives.4. Overall profitability of this new service was high.
Learning effects (Cronbach’s α= .87). Following the case
study research findings, we designed our own scale for learningeffects. Project teams are seen primarily as information-process -
ing systems. In line with our definition of communication andLievens, Moenaert / NEW SERVICE TEAMS 59

---PAGE---

communication effectiveness, we consider the effect of commu -
nication to be cognitive, equivalent to the creation of a knowl edge
base (i.e., uncertainty reduction). As a result, project teams gainknowledge and consequently learn (e.g., Kim 1993; Leonard-Barton1995; Levitt and March, 1988) as they exchange information.
1. Our experience and learning in this project proved to be
essential for the successful creation and completion ofsubsequent projects.
2. The knowledge acquired during the innovation process of
this project served as an essential input for other new ser -
vice developments.
3. The development of this new financial service created a
general development expertise that eased the develop -
ment and introduction of subsequent new services.
4. The experience of developing and launching this new fi -
nancial service lead to enhanced know-how for future in -
novation projects.
5. Through the development and launch of this new service,
project members learned a lot on new financial serviceinnovation.
Technological Success
We decided to assess technological success by a single item:
“How would you describe the technological success of this pro-ject?” This was rated on a 5-point scale (1 = very unsuccessful to
5=very successful ). This selection was based on in-depth discus-
sions with pretest respondents. They considered this item tobetter represent the construct of technological success. Althoughthis might contradict the view within measurement theory thatmultiple-item scales are more reliable (Churchill 1979), Peterand Churchill (1986, p. 4) stated that measure characteristics af-fect construct validity not only through reliability but also viacontent validity.
Innovative Uncertainty Domains
The measures concerning the innovative uncertainty domains
were based on the operationalization of Moenaert and Souder(1990a) and were partly adapted for financial service innovationprojects (Lievens, Moenaert, and S’Jegers 1999). The followingscale instruction was provided on the questionnaire:
Shown below are some items concerning the type of infor -
mation available during development and launch of this
project. Indicate for each item how well you and other pro -
ject members were informed during the innovation pro -
cess of this new service. The choice runs from 1 ( no
knowledge existed for that subject )t o5( we knew every -
thing we had to know ). Values between 1 and 5 reflect dif -
ferent levels of knowledge in the respective areas. Please
circle the number that best reflects your choice.
Competitive uncertainty (Cronbach’s α= .85).
1. The technological strategy of the competition.2. The marketing strategy of the competition.
Customer uncertainty (Cronbach’s α= .74).
1. The customer’s needs (user requirements).2. The potential market.
3. The buyer behavior of the potential customer.
Technological uncertainty (Cronbach’s α= .91).
1. The quality of the applied technologies (e.g., information
technologies).
2. The user-friendliness of the technologies.3. The cost-efficiency of the technologies.
Resource uncertainty (Cronbach’s α= .80).
1. The required R&D strategy for this project.2. The required technological support for this project.3. The required personnel for this project.
Project Communication
To specify the nature of the information that is transferred
during the financial service innovation process, we used the com -
munication typology proposed by Hauptman (1986): coor-
dinative and innovative information. Hauptman examined thiscommunication typology as a mediator between task type andperformance in the case of software development. The dualitybetween the coordination and innovation requirements of thetask was proposed as a predictor of optimal communication pat -
terns and was linked to the structure, stability, and newness of the
technology involved in the task. Both types of information give aclear picture of the kind of information that is exchanged duringthe innovation process. Innovative communication comprisescreativity in problem solving and new idea processing and adap-tation to change. Coordinative communication relates to the as-signment of instructions to project members so that they canexecute their jobs (Souder and Moenaert 1992) and includes con-trols, orders, direction, and feedback between subordinates andsuperiors in task-related activities (Greenbaum 1974). Bound-ary-spanning communication by project members was based ona scale of our own design, partly derived from the literature (e.g.,Tushman 1977).
Intraproject communication (Cronbach’s α= .70). The fol -
lowing scale instruction was provided on the questionnaire:
Shown below are a number of statements concerning com -
munication during the innovation process. Under each
statement, you will find a numbered scale and an explana -
tion of the appropriate meaning of the numbers. Please
rate each statement according to the degree the statementdescribes your opinion of this project. Draw a circlearound the number that best reflects your choice.
1. During the development and launch preparation of this
project, how good was project team members’ insightof what everybody else involved with this project wasactually doing? (1 = very poor insight t o5= very good
insight )
2. To what extent do you agree with the following statement:
“Information concerning the technological requirementswas widely available during new service development.”(1 = strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree )
3. During the innovation process of this project, how well
were project members informed and updated concern -60 JOURNAL OF SERVICE RESEARCH / August 2000

---PAGE---

ing commercial information (customer, competition)?
(1 = very poorly to 5 = excellent )
4. Less structured information is also exchanged during new
service development in order to induce the innovativenessof the project in which new information is generated orproblems are solved in a creative way. How frequently wasinformation transferred that was helpful in solving work-related problems? (1 = basically never t o5= once a day )
Extraproject communication (Cronbach’s α.83). The follow -
ing scale instruction was provided on the questionnaire:
Shown below are a number of statements and questions.
Along with each statement, you will find a scale. Pleaseindicate how strongly you agree with each of the followingstatements, relative to the presently discussed project. Cir -
cle the scale value that best reflects your opinion. (1 =
strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree )
1. The development of this project was characterized by in -
terdepartmental communication stimulated by project
members who had regular contacts with their colleaguesfrom other departments.
2. The project team members involved with this new service
were particularly active in communicating with personneloutside their departments.
3. Some team members of this project acted as liaisons be-
tween different departments by transferring informationand thereby fostering cooperation between them.
4. Through the efforts of some project members, this inno-
vation process was characterized by a steady exchange ofinformation between the departments.
Organizational Variables
The following scale instruction was provided on the
questionnaire:
Shown below are a number of statements concerning the
organizational structure in which the new service was de -
veloped. Along with each statement, you will find a scale.
Please indicate how strongly you agree with each of thefollowing statements, relative to the presently discussedproject. Circle the scale value that best reflects your opin -
ion. (1 = strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree )
Cross functional cooperation (Cronbach’s α= .90).
Cross-functional cooperation was adapted from Mahajan et al.(1994) and Pinto, Pinto, and Prescott (1993).
1. This project showed active involvement of all parties
involved.
2. Cooperation between project members was characterized
by a steady and fluent exchange of resources (money, per -
sonnel, equipment, office space).
3. Work flow (materials, objects, and customers) was easily
transferred between the project members involved.
4. An excellent interaction was present between the mem -
bers involved for the transfer of information.Complexity (Cronbach’s α= .80). Complexity was partly
based on the operationalization of Gupta and Wilemon (1986).
1. This project involved cooperation from different func -
tional specialists.
2. The development of this new service was characterized
by the involvement of a wide range of specialist skills in -
cluding marketing, operations, and technical personnel.
3. The project required skills and professional inputs from a
diversity of functional departments.
4. The project members involved during development of
this project were selected because of their specialist skillswithin their respective fields.
Formalization (Cronbach’s α= .82). We assessed formaliza -
tion through existing measures (Dewar, Whetten, and Boje 1980;
Gupta, Raj, and Wilemon 1986; Ruekert and Walker 1987;Walton 1981).
1. The development and launch preparation was totally un -
structured: everybody was allowed to do almost as he or
she pleased. (R)
2. There were precise time schedules for the activities to be
undertaken for this project.
3. Project team members were given very specific job
instructions.
4. This project proceeded by means of a well-documented
action plan.
Centralization (Cronbach’s α= .55). Centralization was as-
sessed through existing measures (Dewar, Whetten, and Boje1980; Gupta, Raj, and Wilemon 1986; Robert and O’Reilly1974; Walton 1981).
1. Top management delegated responsibilities for the tasks
involving this project. (R)
2. Top management encouraged project personnel to make
suggestions. (R)
Project climate (Cronbach’s α= .92). The operationalization
of project climate was based on previous operationalizations(Mohr and Nevin 1990; Souder and Moenaert 1992) as well as onprevious case study findings (Lievens, Moenaert and S’Jegers1999). For example, in developing a measure for project climate,we used the cited formulations given by project managers duringthe in-depth interviews: “a positive attitude, a supportive climate,a high level of enthusiasm, a strong commitment of personneland management.”
1. The whole new service development project took place in
a harmonious climate.
2. The relationship among the project members during ser -
vice development and launch preparations was very good.
3. The project members involved in this project trusted one
another.
4. The relationship between the project members was
excellent.
NOTE: (R) = items were reverse coded.Lievens, Moenaert / NEW SERVICE TEAMS 61

---PAGE---

APPENDIX B
Entire Correlation Matrix of the Constructs Under Study
Intraproject Extraproject
Formali- Centrali- Project Communi- Communi- Customer Competitive Technological Resource Financial Technological Learning
Variable Complexity zation zation Climate cation cation Uncertainty Uncertainty Uncertainty Uncertainty Performance Performance Effects
Complexity
Formalization .42****Centralization –.33** –.28*Project climate .30** .19* –.39**Intraproject
communication .59**** .69**** –.51**** .51****
Extraproject
communication .66**** .40**** –.37**** .27** .56***
Customer
uncertainty .32** .34** .13 .09 .48**** .35**
Competitive
uncertainty .37** .08 .15 .02 .21* .35** .24**
Technological
uncertainty .40** .26* .24* .35** .32** .24** .25** .42****
Resource
uncertainty .28* .29** .36** .35** .40**** .15 .19* .37** .64****
Financial
performance .26* .27* .17 .14 .37** .25* .34** –.13 –.01 .21*
Technological
performance .33** .25* .31** .31** .49** .26* .31** .12 .42**** .46**** .65****
Learning effects .32** .21* .34** .20 .38** .23* .16 –.08 –.03 .12 .53**** .31**Cross-functional
cooperation .45** .39** .56** .75** .69** .37** .30** .12 .33**** .38** .25** .36** .26**
NOTE: Table entries represent Pearson product moment correlations. Using pairwise deletion, the sample sizes vary between 61 an d 65.
*p< .1. ** p< .05. **** p< .001 (all one-tailed).
62

---PAGE---

REFERENCES
Allen, T. J. (1985), Managing the Flow of Technology: Technology Trans -
fer and the Dissemination of Technological Information within the
R&D Organization . Cambridge, UK: MIT Press.
 and S. I. Cohen (1969), “Information Flow in Research and De -
velopment Laboratories,” Administrative Science Quarterly , 14 (1),
12-19.
Argote, L. (1982), “Input Uncertainty and Organizational Coordination
in Hospital Emergency Units,” Administrative Science Quarterly ,2 7
(September), 420-34.
Baron, R. M. and D. A. Kenny (1986), “The Moderator-Mediator Vari -
able Distinction in Social Psychological Research: Conceptual, Stra -
tegic, and Statistical Considerations,” Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology , 51 (6), 1173-82.
Bentley, K. (1990), “A Discussion of the Link between One Organiza -
tion’s Style and Structure and Its Connection with Its Market,” Jour-
nal of Product Innovation Management , 7, 19-34.
Blau, J. R. and W. McKinley (1979), “Ideas, Complexity, and Innova -
tion,” Administrative Science Quarterly , 24 (June), 200-18.
Bowen, D. E. and B. Schneider (1988), “Services Marketing and Man -
agement: Implications for Organizational Behavior,” Research in Or -
ganizational Behavior , 10, 43-80.
Brown, J. W. and J. M. Utterback (1985), “Uncertainty and Technical
Communication Patterns,” Management Science , 31 (3), 301-11.
Campbell, D. T. and J. C. Stanley (1963), Experimental and Quasi-exper -
imental Designs for Research . Dallas: Houghton Mifflin.
Chase, R. B. (1981), “The Customer Contact Approach to Services: The -
oretical Bases and Practical Extensions,” Operations Research , 29,
698-706.
 and D. A. Tansik (1983), “The Customer Contact Model for Or-
ganization Design,” Management Science , 29 (9), 1037-50.
Churchill, G. A. Jr. (1979), “A Paradigm for Developing Better Measures
of Marketing Constructs,” Journal of Marketing Research , 16 (Feb-
ruary), 64-73.
Clark, K. B. and T. Fujimoto (1991), Product Development Performance:
Strategy, Organization and Management in the World Auto Industry .
Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Cook, T. D. and D. T. Campbell (1979), Quasi-Experimentantation: De -
sign and Analysis Issues for Foeld Settings . Boston: Houghton
Mifflin.
Cooper, R. G. (1979), “The Dimensions of Industrial New Product Suc -
cess and Failure,” Journal of Marketing , 43 (Summer), 93-103.
 and U. de Brentani (1984), “Criteria for Screening New Indus -
trial Products,” Industrial Marketing Management , 13, 149-56.
 and (1991), “New Industrial Financial Services: What
Distinguishes the Winners,” Journal of Product Innovation Manage -
ment , 8, 75-90.
 , C. J. Easingwood, S. Edgett, E. J. Kleinschmidt, and C. Storey
(1994), “What Distinguishes the Top Performing New Products in Fi -
nancial Services,” Journal of Product Innovation Management , 11,
281-99.
Craig, A. and S. Hart (1992), “Where to Now in New Product Develop -
ment Research?” European Journal of Marketing , 26 (11), 3-36.
Cronbach, L. J. and P. E. Meehl (1967), “Construct Validity in Psycho -
logical Tests,” in Problems in Human Assessment , D. N. Jackson and
S. Messic, eds. New York: McGraw-Hill, 57-77.
Daft, R. L. and R. H. Lengel (1986), “Organizational Information Re -
quirements, Media Richness and Structural Design,” Management
Science , 32 (5), 554-71.
 and K. E. Weick (1984), “Towards a Model of Organizations as
Interpretation Systems,” Academy of Management Review , 9 (2),
284-95.
de Brentani, U. (1989), “Success and Failure in New Industrial Services,”
Journal of Product Innovation Management , 6, 239-58.
 (1991), “Success Factors in Developing New Business Ser -
vices,” European Journal of Marketing , 24 (2), 33-59. (1993a), “The Effect of Customization and Customer Contact on
the Factors Determining Success and Failure of New Industrial Ser -
vices,” in Perspectives on Marketing Management , V ol. 3, M. J.
Baker, ed. New York: John Wiley, 275-98.
 (1993b), “The New Product Process in Financial Services: Strat -
egy for Success,” International Journal of Bank Marketing , 11 (3),
15-22.
 (1995a), “Firm Size: Implications for Achieving Success in New
Industrial Services,” Journal of Marketing Management , 11, 207-25.
 (1995b), “New Industrial Service Development: Scenarios for
Success and Failure,” Journal of Business Research , 32, 93-103.
 and R. G. Cooper (1991), “New Industrial Financial Services:
What Distinguishes the Winners?” Journal of Product Innovation
Management , 8, 75-90.
 and (1992), “Developing Successful New Financial Ser -
vices for Businesses,” Industrial Marketing Management , 21,
231-41.
De Meyer, A.C.L. (1985), “The Flow of Technological Innovation in an
R&D Department,” Research Policy , 14, 315-28.
Dewar, R. D., D. A. Whetten, and D. Boje (1980), “An Examination of
the Reliability and Validity of the Aiken and Hage Scales of Central -
ization, Formalization, and Task Routineness,” Administrative Sci -
ence Quarterly , 25 (March), 120-28.
Drew, S. (1994), Business Re-Engineering in Financial Services . Lon -
don: Pitman.
Easingwood, C. J. (1986), “New Product Development For Service Com -
panies,” Journal of Product Innovation Management , 4, 264-75.
 and J. Percival (1990), “Evaluation of New Financial Services.
International,” Journal of Bank Marketing , 8 (6), 3-8.
 and C. Storey (1991), “Success Factors for New Consumer Fi-
nancial Services,” International Journal of Bank Marketing , 1, 3-10.
 and C. Storey (1993), “Marketplace Success Factors for New Fi-
nancial Services,” Journal of Services Marketing , 7 (1), 41-54.
 and C. Storey (1994), “The Value of Multi-Channel Distribution
Strategy,” in Marketing: Its Dynamics and Challenges , 23rd EMAC
Conference, J. Bloemer, J. Lemmink, and H. Kasper, eds. Maastricht,the Netherlands: University of Limburg, 203-12.
Ebadi, Y . M. and J. M. Utterback (1984), “The Effects of Communication
on Technological Innovation,” Management Science , 30 (5), 572-85.
Edgett, S. and S. Parkinson (1994), “The Development of New Financial
Services: Identifying Determinants of Success and Failure,” Interna -
tional Journal of Service Industry Management , 5 (4), 24-38.
Fidler, L. A. and J. D. Johnson (1984), “Communication and Innovation
Implementation,” Academy of Management Review , 9 (4), 704-11.
Galbraith, J. R. (1973), Designing Complex Organizations . Reading,
MA: Addison-Wesley.
 (1974), “Organization Design: An Information Processing
View,” in Organizational Psychology , 2nd ed., D. A. Kolb, I. M. Rubin,
and J. M. McIntyre, eds. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall,313-22.
Granovetter, M. S. (1973), “The Strength of Weak Ties,” American Jour -
nal of Sociology , 78 (6), 1361-80.
Greenbaum, H. H. (1974), “The Audit of Organizational Communica -
tion,” Academy of Management Journal , 17 (4), 739-54.
Griffin, A. and J. R. Hauser (1994), “Integrating Mechanisms for Mar -
keting and R&D,” ISBM report, Pennsylvania State University.
 and A. L. Page (1993), “An Interim Report on Measuring Prod -
uct Development Success and Failure,” Journal of Product Innova -
tion Management , 10, 291-308.
Grönroos, C. (1990), Service Management and Marketing: Managing
the Moments of Truth in Service Competition . Lexington, MA:
Lexington Books.
Gupta, A. K., S. P. Raj, and D. Wilemon (1986), “A Model for Studying
R&D-Marketing Interface in the Product Innovation Process,” Jour-
nal of Marketing , 50 (April), 7-17.
Gupta, P. P., M. W. Dirsmith, and T. J. Fogarty (1994), “Coordination and
Control in a Government Agency: Contingency and InstitutionalLievens, Moenaert / NEW SERVICE TEAMS 63

---PAGE---

Theory Perspectives on GAO Audits,” Administrative Science Quar -
terly, 39, 264-84.
Hage, J., M. Aiken and C. B. Marett (1971), “Organization Structure and
Communications,” American Sociological Review , 36 (October),
860-71.
Hauptman, O. (1986), “Influence of Task Type on the Relationship be -
tween Communication and Performance: The Case of Software De -
velopment,” R&D Management , 16 (2), 127-39.
Hays, W. L. (1986), Statistics , 4th ed. New York: Holt, Rinehart and
Winston.
Henkel, R. E. (1976), Tests of Significance . Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Janis, I. L. (1973), Victims of Groupthink: A Psychological Study of For -
eign Policy Decisions and Fiascoes . Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Johne, F. A. and P. Harborne (1985), “How Large Commercial Banks
Manage Product Innovation,” International Journal of Bank Mar -
keting , 3 (1), 54-70.
Judd, C. M., E. R. Smith, and L. H. Kidder (1991), Research Methods in
Social Relations , 6th ed. Forth Worth, TX: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich.
Katz, D. and R. L. Kahn (1966), The Social Psychology of Organizations .
New York: John Wiley.
Katz, R. (1982), “The Effects of Group Longevity on Project Communi -
cation and Performance,” Administrative Science Quarterly , 27 (1),
81-104.
 and T. J. Allen (1982), “Investigating the Not Invented Here Syn -
drome: A Look at the Performance, Tenure, and Communication Pat -
terns of 50 R&D Project Groups,” R&D Management , 12 (1), 7-19.
Keller, R. T. and W. E. Holland (1975), “Boundary-Spanning Activity
and Research and Development Management: A ComparativeStudy,” IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management , EM-22(4)
(November), 130-33.
Kim, D. H. (1993), “The Link between Individual and Organizational
Learning,” Sloan Management Review , Fall, 37-50.
Langeard, E., J.E.G. Bateson, C. H. Lovelock, and P. Eiglier (1981), “In-
tegrating Different Functional Perspectives in Service Businesses,”inServices Marketing: New Insights from Consumers and Managers ,
E. Langeard, J.E.G. Bateson, C. H. Lovelock, and P. Eiglier, eds.Cambridge, MA: Marketing Science Institute, 81-95.
Lawrence, P. and J. Lorsch (1967), Organizations and Environment .
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Leonard-Barton, D. (1995), Wellsprings of Knowledge: Building and
Sustaining the Sources of Innovation . Boston: Harvard Business
School Press.
Levitt, B. and J. G. March (1988), “Organizational Learning,” Annual
Review of Sociology , 14, 319-40.
Lievens, A., K. de Ruyter, and J. Lemmink (1999), “Learning During
New Banking Service Development: A Communication NetworkApproach to Marketing Departments,” Journal of Service Research ,
2 (2), 145-63.
 , R. K. Moenaert, and R. S’Jegers (1999), “Linking Communica -
tion to Innovation Success in the Financial Services Industry: A Case
Study Analysis,” International Journal of Service Industry Manage -
ment , 10 (1), 23-47.
Lovelock, C. H., E. Langeard, J.E.G. Bateson, and P. Eiglier (1988),
“Some Organizational Problems Facing Marketing in the ServiceSector,” in Managing Services: Marketing, Operations and Human
Resources , C. H. Lovelock, ed. London: Prentice-Hall, 359-66.
Macdonald, S. (1998), Information for Innovation: Managing Change
from an Information Perspective . Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press.
Mahajan, J., A. J. Vakharia, P. Paul, and R. B. Chase (1994), “An Explor -
atory Investigation of the Interdependence between Marketing and
Operations Functions in Service Firms,” International Journal of Re -
search in Marketing , 11, 1-15.
Maidique, M. A. and B. J. Zirger (1984), “A Study of Success and Failure
in Product Innovation: The Case of the U.S. Electronics Industry,”IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management , EM31(4) (Novem -
ber), 192-203.March, J. G. and H. A. Simon (1958), Organizations . New York: John
Wiley.
Moenaert, R. K. and W. E. Souder (1990a), “An Analysis of the Use of
Extrafunctional Information by R&D and Marketing: Review andModel,” Journal of Product Innovation Management , 7, 213-39.
——— and ——— (1990b), “An Information Transfer Model for Inte -
grating Marketing and R&D Personnel in New Product Development
Projects,” Journal of Product Innovation Management , 7, 91-107.
 , A. De Meyer, W. E. Souder, and D. Deschoolmeester (1995),
“R&R/Marketing Communication during the Fuzzy Front-End,”IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management , 42 (3), 243-58.
Mohr, J. and J. R. Nevin (1990), “Communication Strategies in Mar -
keting Channels: A Theoretical Perspective,” Journal of Marketing ,
(October), 36-51.
Montoya-Weiss, M. M. and R. Calantone (1994), “Determinants of New
Product Performance: A Review and Meta-Analysis,” Journal of
Product Innovation Management , 11, 397-417.
Nunnally, J. C. (1967), Psychometric Theory , New York: McGraw-Hill.
 and I. H. Bernstein (1994), Psychometric Theory , 3rd ed. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Pedhazur, E. J. (1982), Multiple Regression in Behavioral Research . Fort
Worth, TX: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Peter, J. P. (1979), “Reliability: A Review of Psychometric Basics and
Recent Marketing Practices,” Journal of Marketing Research ,1 6
(February), 6-17.
 (1981), “Construct Validity: A Review of Basic Issues and Mar -
keting Practices,” Journal of Marketing Research , 18 (May), 133-45.
 and G. A. Churchill Jr. (1986), “Relationships among Research
Design Choices and Psychometric Properties of Rating Scales: AMeta-Analysis,” Journal of Marketing Research , 23 (February),
1-10.
Pinto, M. B. and J. K. Pinto (1990), “Project Team Communication and
Cross-Functional Cooperation in New Program Development,”Journal of Product Innovation Management , 7, 200-212.
 , , and J. E. Prescott (1993), “Antecedents and Conse-
quences of Project Team Cross-functional Cooperation,” Manage-
ment Science , 39 (10), 1281-97.
Porter, L. W. and K. H. Roberts (1983), “Communication in Organiza-
tions,” in Handbook of Industrial and Organizational Psychology ,
M. D. Dunnette, ed. New York: John Wiley, 1553-89.
Reidenbach, R. E. and D. L. Moak (1986), “Exploring Retail Bank Per -
formance and New Product Development: A Profile of Industry Prac -
tice,” Journal of Product Innovation Management , 3, 187-94.
Robert, K. H. and C. A. O’Reilly (1974), “Measuring Organizational
Communication,” Journal of Applied Psychology , 59 (3), 321-26.
Rogers, E. M. and R. Agarwala-Rogers (1976), Communication in Orga -
nizations . New York: Free Press; London: Collier Macmillan.
 and F. F. Shoemaker (1971), Communication of Innovations: A
Cross-Cultural Approach , 2nd ed. New York: Free Press.
Rothwell, R. and A. B. Robertson (1973), “The Role of Communication
in Technological Innovation,” Research Policy , 2, 204-25.
Ruekert, R. W. and O. C. Walker (1987), “Marketing’s Interaction with
Other Functional Units: A Conceptual Framework and Empirical Ev -
idence,” Journal of Marketing , 51 (January), 1-19.
Smith, K. G., K. A. Smith, J. D. Olian Jr., H. P. Sims, D. P. O’Bannon, and
J. A. Scully (1994), “Top Management Team Demography and Pro -
cess: The Role of Social Integration and Communication,” Adminis -
trative Science Quarterly , 39 (September), 412-38.
Souder, W. E. (1987), Managing New Product Innovations . Lexington
MA: Lexington.
 and R. K. Moenaert (1992), “Integrating Marketing and R&D
Project Personnel within Innovation Projects: An Information Uncer -
tainty Model,” Journal of Management Studies , 29 (4), 485-512.
Storey, C. and C. Easingwood (1993), “The Impact of the New Product
Development Project on the Success of Financial Services,” Service
Industries Journal , 13 (3), 40-54.64 JOURNAL OF SERVICE RESEARCH / August 2000

---PAGE---

Stork, D. (1991), “A Longitudinal Study of Communication Networks:
Emergence and Evolution in a New Research Organization,” Journal
of Engineering and Technology Management , 7, 177-96.
Tabachnick, B. G. and L. S. Fidell (1989), Using Multivariate Statistics ,
2nd ed. New York: HarperCollins.
Thompson, J. D. (1967), Organizations in Action . New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Tushman, M. L. (1977), “Special Boundary Roles in the Innovation Pro -
cess,” Administrative Science Quarterly , 22 (December), 587-605.
 (1979a), “Impacts of Perceived Environmental Variability on
Patterns of Work Related Communication,” Academy of Manage -
ment Journal , 22 (3), 482-500.
 (1979b), “Managing Communication Networks in R&D Labora -
tories,” Sloan Management Review , Winter, 37-49.
 (1979c), “Work Characteristics and Subunit Communication
Structure: A Contingency Analysis,” Administrative Science Quar -
terly, 24, 82-97.
 and D. A. Nadler (1980), “Communication and Technical Roles
in R&D Laboratories: An Information Processing Approach,” Man-
agement Sciences , 15, 91-112.
Van de Ven, A. H. and A. L. Delbecq (1974), “A Task Contingent Model
Of Work-Unit Structure,” Administrative Science Quarterly , 19,
183-97.
 and D. L. Ferry (1980), Measuring and Assessing Organizations .
New York: John Wiley.
Walton, E. J. (1981), “The Comparison of Measures of Organization
Structure,” Academy of Management Review , 6 (1), 155-60.Weick, K. E. (1969), The Social Psychology of Organizing . Boston: Ad -
dison-Wesley.
Zaltman, G., R. Duncan, and J. Holbek (1973), Innovations and Organi -
zations . New York: John Wiley.
Annouk Lievens is a senior research fellow and assistant profes -
sor of marketing in the Department of Marketing and Marketing
Research at Maastricht University. Her research interests andpublications focus on financial services marketing, communica -
tion networks within financial services organizations, service in -
novation management, and marketing interfaces during new
service development.
Rudy K. Moenaert is a professor of marketing at the University
of Ghent in Belgium and Nyenrode University in the Nether -
lands. He has published in journals such as the Journal of Prod -
uct Innovation Management ,R&D Management ,Management
Science ,IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management , and
theJournal of Management Studies . His current research inter -
ests focus on the international management of product innova -
tion, the management of innovation programs, the marketing of
product innovations, and Internet marketing.Lievens, Moenaert / NEW SERVICE TEAMS 65