The effect of trust on customer contact personnel strategic behavior and sales
performance in a service environment
James M. Pappas ⁎, Karen E. Flaherty
Spears School of Business, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 74078, United States
Received 13 February 2006; accepted 17 September 2007
Abstract
The involvement of customer contact personnel in the strategy process is a largely unexplored area in both marketing and strategic
management. Based on social exchange theory, and in particular, the notion of trust within this context, we examine the nature and extent of
strategy participation exhibited by customer contact personnel. Exploring dyadic relationships we found that the extent to which contact personnel
trust their supervisors positively influence their willingness to participate in strategic activities. Furthermore, we found that communication and
information sharing moderate the relationship between trust and strategic activities. Thus, the more contact personnel are involved in the strategic
process, the more likely supervisors are to rate the contact person's selling performance as high.
© 2007 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Trust; Communication; Management control systems; Strategic behaviors
The influence customer contact personnel have on the strategy
process within the firm remains neither well documented nor well
understood. While marketing researchers acknowledge the im-
portance of customer contact employees (e.g., customer service
personnel, salespeople), a predominance of the research has fo-
cused on a top–down, rather than a bottom–up, approach toward
understanding the contributions of these employees. Put
differently, research has focused on the dissemination of strategy
from top managers to customer contact personnel (Hartline et al.,
2000). In this paper, we consider the customer contact person as a
strategic entity. Given their link between internal and external
constituents, contact personnel act as service experts. They also
transfer information between the two parties, potentially in-
fluencing strategy making.
As boundary spanners, customer contact personnel provide an
important link between the organization and its customers and
provide a potentially valuable source of strategic information to
managers. These employees have access to information regarding
evolving customer needs and possible product or service
improvements (Bettencourt and Brown, 2003). Furthermore,
frontline sales, operations, and service personnel often have the
best vantage point to make quicker and better strategic decisions
(Day, 1994). They represent the organization externally, and may
influence the organization internally through their communica-
tions (Bettencourt and Brown, 2003). Understanding the nature
and extent to which customer contact employees are actually
involved in the strategy process, as well as the mechanisms
allowing for this process, are becoming imperative.
To explore how customer contact personnel participate in the
strategy process, we used social exchange theory to examine
dyadic relationships between the supervisor and the salesperson.
Social exchange theory has been a central within the organization
sciences literature as a framework toward predicting loyalty to an
employee's superior, compliance to supervisory demands, and
reduced conflict between levels (Marcus and House, 1973).
According to Blau (1964), social exchange theory is based on the
concept of negotiated exchanges between two parties in which
people form subjective cost–benefit analyses and the comparison
of alternatives. Said differently, if one partner helps, or in any way
benefits, the other there is likely to be an expectation that the party
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Journal of Business Research 61 (2008) 894–902
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail address: james.pappas@okstate.edu (J.M. Pappas).
0148-2963/$ - see front matter © 2007 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jbusres.2007.09.017

that benefited will reciprocate. However, the exact nature and
timing of the reciprocation is not always clear (Gouldner, 1960).
Past research indicates that employees tend to view social
exchanges with a long-term view and do not evaluate exchanges
individually (Blau, 1964). Over a period of time the pattern of
reciprocity will achieve balance between parties (Rousseau,
1998).
Customer contact personnel who trust their supervisors are
more likely to have an influence in the organization because they
will engage in more fruitful dyadic interactions with supervisors
(Sparrowe and Liden, 2005). Social interactions are integral to
the process of knowledge generation and strategic development
(Floyd and Lane, 2000). A trusting relationship is of utmost
importance to a wide variety of exchange relationships (Morgan
and Hunt, 1994; Rich, 1997). Salespeople receive perceived
benefits from a trusting relationship and, based on social
exchange theory, they will feel obligated to repay the
organization by offering benefits (such as participation in
strategic activity) to the organization. When salespeople
participate in strategic activities that benefit the organization, it
is likely that over time supervisor-ratings of the salesperson's
performance will increase (Floyd and Wooldridge, 1992; Dutton
et al., 2001). In essence, research has suggests that more
involved employees end up with an improved sense of customer
needs and as a result are more successful. Thus, to the extent that
salespeople participate in the strategy process, we expect that
supervisors' reports of their selling performance will increase.
Research generally suggests that communication is critical to
effective strategy implementation (Jaworski, 1988). In fact,
trust, communication, and open information sharing between
two parties all have the potential to create relational value
(Moorman et al., 1992). Behaviors that are perceived to be risky,
such as delegating or information sharing, are said to influence
the nature of reciprocal trust existing between the leader and the
follower (Lester and Brower, 2003). Thus, in our study, we also
explore the extent to which communication variables (i.e.,
communication frequency and information sharing) moderate
the relationship between trust and the strategic activities.
The purpose of this study was to (1) examine the strategic
activities of the employees as a potential mediator of the
relationship between supervisee trust and increases in supervi-
sor-ratings of individual sales performance, (2) consider how
and when customer contact employees will participate in
strategic activity, and (3) determine if salesperson strategic
activity mediates the relationship between a salesperson's trust
in the supervisor and the salesperson's selling performance.
Further, we identify two communication-related constructs
(frequency of communication between the salesperson and the
supervisor and the extent of open information sharing between
the salesperson and the supervisor) as key moderators of the
relationship between supervisee trust and salesperson partici-
pation in strategic activity.
In summary, by exploring the interplay between trust,
communication, strategic activities, and individual-level sales
performance (Fig. 1), the paper complements the existing work
concerning strategic roles and activities that to date has focused
on upper and middle-level managers (Floyd and Wooldridge,
1992) by considering how and when employees that do not
occupy formal positions of authority but do serve as important
boundary spanners participate in these activities. Further, the
study extends existing research on trust (Rich, 1997; Atuahene-
Gima and Li, 2002) by considering strategic activity as a
potential mediator of the trust–performance relationship.
1. Strategic roles at the functional-level
The management literature on strategic process provides a
long list of specific roles played by each management level and
Fig. 1. An exchange model of autonomous strategic behavior at the functional-level.
895
J.M. Pappas, K.E. Flaherty / Journal of Business Research 61 (2008) 894–902

have integrated these roles into various models (Floyd and
Lane, 2000). Floyd and Wooldridge (2000) suggest that
strategic activity includes behaviors such as championing new
ideas and initiatives, synthesizing strategic information, facil-
itating strategic initiatives, and integrating strategic informa-
tion. In accordance with a customer-focused approach, research
has shown that the management of workplace conditions
requires a focus on customer linkage (Paulin et al., 2006). As
boundary spanning employees, salespeople often are required to
negotiate, interpret, and explain customer information to
company representatives and company information to custo-
mers. In essence, they link the organization to its customers in
ways similar to middle managers who perform boundary
spanning roles involving management, suppliers, and customers
(Floyd and Wooldridge, 1992).
In a middle-management context, exposure to the demands of
external constituents, including customers, has been shown to
promote recognition of the potential value of divergent strategic
initiatives (Floyd and Wooldridge, 1992). Salespeople often
have access to divergent information coming from important
customer groups, and as boundary spanners they too are likely to
perceive its value to the firm. With access to such information,
salespeople—as “mid-level professionals” (Floyd and Wool-
dridge, 2000)—have the ability to impact strategic thought
throughout the firm. Because they are exposed to diverse
information, we assert that salespeople are in a good position to
champion new initiatives, and synthesize new and ambiguous
knowledge keeping a customer's perspective in mind. They
provide a likely source of new ideas coming from the outside,
and as a result, nurture and experiment with these ideas as well.
2. Influence of strategic activity on sales performance
We define sales performance as the salesperson's achieve-
ment of quantity and quality sales objectives. This definition is
consistent with past research evaluating performance in a sales
domain (Sujan et al., 1994) and generally reflects the traditional
outcome performance construct as discussed by Anderson and
Oliver (1987). In this paper, we were most concerned with
collecting supervisors' subjective assessments of the sales-
person's performance.
Theoretically, participation in strategic activity is likely to
lead to enhanced sales performance. Based on exchange theory
(Blau, 1964), perceptions of salesperson performance may be
conceptualized as returns provided to subordinates from the
supervisor as well as an investment made by subordinates to the
supervisors (e.g., the salesperson makes an investment by
working at a high level, and the supervisor provides the return
of positive perceptions of the salesperson's performance). The
investments and returns of supervisors and subordinates must
balance out over time (Dansereau et al., 1984). Participation in
autonomous strategic behaviors is a specific investment made
by the salesperson. The salesperson is engaged in activities that
benefit the supervisor and the organization. According to
exchange theory and in particular the norm or reciprocity, we
expect that the supervisor will return the favor with positive
perceptions of the salesperson's behavior.
Furthermore, the salesperson's involvement in strategic
activity has been shown to lead to enhanced individual
outcomes. When the salesperson participates in the “strategic
conversation” of the firm such as suggesting new ideas or
encouraging peers to implement a new strategic initiative, they
will benefit from strategic consensus, improved implementation
of strategy, and ultimately improved performance (Floyd and
Wooldridge, 1992). Top managers have also begun to point out
the performance-related benefits of employee participation in
strategy. Dutton et al. (2001) report that when employees are
inspired to make decisions they often become star performers.
More involved employees end up with an improved sense of
customer needs and as a result are more successful. Thus, to the
extent that salespeople participate in the strategy process, we
expect that supervisors' reports of their selling performance will
increase.
H1. Salesperson participation in strategic activities is positively
associated with individual-level sales performance as perceived
by the supervisor.
3. Influence of trust on strategic activity
The concept of trust has received considerable attention
within management and marketing fields. It has been defined in
multiple ways (e.g., Atuahene-Gima and Li, 2002; Mayeret al.,
1995; Doney and Cannon, 1997). However, we define trust as
the extent to which the salesperson believes the supervisor to be
honest and benevolent (Doney and Cannon, 1997). Because
recent studies have reported conflicting findings on the
connection between trust and performance (Atuahene-Gima
and Li, 2002; Dirks, 1999; Rich, 1997), researchers have called
for more comprehensive studies of the link between trust and
performance (Moorman et al., 1992). In this paper, we build on
Floyd and Wooldridge's (2000) argument that trust is a critical
element within the strategic renewal domain and greatly impacts
managers' strategic activity as they pertain to performance.
Trust is a necessary condition for successful interactions
between salespeople and supervisors (Rich, 1997), and has been
shown to be a vital construct within a social exchange theory
framework (Graen and Uhl-Bien, 1995). The social exchange
process is governed based on social obligations (Blau, 1964), in
that trust creates obligations between two parties (Lambe et al.,
2001). Put differently, salespeople receive perceived benefits
from a trusting relationship with the supervisor and will repay
the supervisor in some manner. When employees perceive that
their organization provides positive (i.e., trust-based) supervi-
sion, they then feel obligated to devote time and energy to
beneficial organizational activities (Schneider and Bowen,
1995). Further still, individuals engaged in an environment of
high mutual trust are not concerned about balancing social
exchange transactions as much as individuals in a low trust
environment who often seek reciprocity or equivalence
(Sparrowe and Liden, 2005).
Furthermore, social exchange theory suggests that trust
creates an environment wherein the salesperson is at ease
raising issues with the supervisor. Trust in others leads to an
896
J.M. Pappas, K.E. Flaherty / Journal of Business Research 61 (2008) 894–902

atmosphere where the individual is more willing to express
ideas, thoughts, and concerns about what is being done
(Sonnenberg, 1994). Salespeople are more likely to explore
and participate in risky behavior when they feel safe and
supported by the authority figure (Nelson and Quick, 1991).
This implies that in a trusting atmosphere salespeople will be
more tolerant of the risk associated with championing,
synthesizing, facilitating, and implementing behaviors associ-
ated with the strategy process that goes beyond the sales-
person's traditional role. For instance, a salesperson might
recognize the potential of a new initiative and subsequently
approach the supervisor and act as a champion for the new idea.
Despite the salesperson's belief that the initiative has potential,
some level of risk is still involved. The initiative may not be
accepted; it may ultimately result in failure. For a salesperson to
take on additional and unnecessary risk, the comfortable and
supporting atmosphere dictated by a trusting relationship is
critical. Thus, we contend that supervisee trust is positively
related to strategic activity.
H2. Supervisee trust is positively associated with salespeople's
participation in strategic activities.
4. Mediating role of strategic activity
We propose that strategic activities mediate the relationship
between trust and sales performance. The impact of trust on
individual performance has been shown in many empirical
studies, though trust's effect on group-level performance has
received only partial support (Dirks, 1999). In the past, trust has
been shown to influence organizational outcomes through
certain behaviors such as the delegation of authority (Mayer
et al., 1995). In this vein, we posit that the strategic behaviors
will have a similar effect on individual outcomes. Research
suggests that when employees are encouraged to suggest new
ideas or initiatives, projects have a higher likelihood of
implementation (Floyd and Wooldridge, 1992). More involved
employees become more engaged with the customer and, as a
result, are more successful. (Dutton et al., 2001). In sum, we
argue that through greater participation in strategic activities
that trust influences sales performance. To the extent that
supervisee trust results in the salesperson accepting greater risk
and showing more initiative, said trust is likely to have a
positive impact on the salesperson's performance. We expect
that trust is associated with performance through the behaviors
and activities that it promotes. Therefore,
H3. When controlling for strategic activities, the direct effect of
supervisee trust on individual-level sales performance will be
diminished.
5. Moderating effect of communication
Communication is critical to producing effective coordina-
tion between two parties (Mohr et al., 1996). In the supervisor–
employee dyad, communication is considered one of the most
powerful supervisory behaviors, commonly cited as the primary
means of information transfer within the firm and as an
important tool used to influence behaviors of others (Johlke and
Duhan, 2001). We examine the influence of two components of
communication on the relationship between trust and strategic
activities. In particular, we consider communication frequency
and open information sharing. Communication frequency has
been found to be critically important in a number of exchange
relationships (Mohr et al., 1996).
Communication frequency refers to the extent and duration
of contact between two parties. Past research suggests that in
and of itself communication frequency is positively related to a
host of job outcomes (Behrman and Perreault, 1984). For one,
frequent communication with supervisors has been shown to
reduce uncertainty of salespeople (Johlke and Duhan, 2001).
This reduction in uncertainty is critical in determining the
outcomes of supervisee trust (Becerra and Gupta, 2003).
Furthermore, free-flowing internal communications along with
a supportive managerial culture have been found to enhance the
creation of new business products and opportunities within an
organization (Eesley and Longenecker, 2006).
According to principles of social exchange theory, indivi-
duals will form exchange relationships and maintain exchange
relationships in order to reap either economic and/or social
rewards (Blau, 1964). To the extent that the exchange
relationship results in rewards over time, both trust and social
obligations to the exchange partner develop. Relational
exchange norms (either explicit or tacit) provide the guidelines
or rules for the expected behaviors of each party (Blau 1964).
We argue that consistent, frequent communication will serve to
strengthen the effect of supervisee trust on the salesperson's
desire to reciprocate by participating in strategic activities that
are helpful to the supervisor and the organization. With frequent
communications, it is more likely that the supervisee trust will
play a role in determining extent of participation in strategic
activities as well. Thus,
H4. The frequency of communication between the supervisee
and the salesperson, the stronger the relationship between
supervisee trust and salesperson strategic activity will be.
Open information sharing has also been shown to be
valuable to strong exchange relationships (Cannon and
Homburg, 2001). Given that supervisors are a source of
feedback for employees it follows that if dialogue between
the supervisor and the employee is restricted, open sharing of
information cannot exist. The positive result of a high trust
relationship on salesperson participation in strategic activity
may not be realized to its fullest extent (Kacmar et al., 2003).
We suggest that when the supervisor openly shares information,
the salesperson acquires the strategic knowledge that is
necessary for future participation in strategic efforts. Without
this basic strategic knowledge, the salesperson will be unable to
recognize opportunities, never mind act as an effective
champion of strategic initiatives. We expect that the extent to
which a supervisor openly shares information about the future
(i.e., discusses strategic issues and shares sensitive information)
with the salesperson moderates the relationship between
trust and strategic activity. Open sharing of information is
897
J.M. Pappas, K.E. Flaherty / Journal of Business Research 61 (2008) 894–902

likely to strengthen the relationship between trust and strategic
activity. Thus,
H5. The higher the open information sharing between the
supervisee and the salesperson, the stronger the relationship
between supervisee trust and salesperson strategic activity will
be.
6. Research methods
6.1. Sample
Given our focus on the interpersonal relationships existing
between customer contact employees and their immediate
supervisors, it was necessary to capture certain elements of the
exchange from the perspective of the supervisor as well as the
customer contact employee. Taking a dyadic approach enables
us to make a contribution above and beyond that of prior
research that has studied interpersonal relationships between
employees and their supervisors using single informant data.
We obtained data from sales organizations operating in the
healthcare sector. Salespeople operating within this sector tend
to be educated professionals, and as a result present a likely
category to study potential strategic participation.
6.2. Data collection
Contact information for the organizations was obtained from a
national (US) list purchased from a list broker. A random
sample of the firms was contacted via initial telephone calls
(Dillman, 1978). In the phone conversations, we introduced the
study to the sales managers, determined whether or not par-
ticipation was feasible (i.e., to eliminate some instances of firms
that did not employ salespeople), and generated support from the
sales managers. Subsequently, sales managers of interested
firms were mailed a packet with the following materials:
(1) Cover letter. The cover letter included detailed instruc-
tions regarding the completion of the questionnaire.
Supervisors were asked to distribute salesperson ques-
tionnaires to the three selected salespeople. Supervisors
were encouraged to choose a top performer, moderate
performer, and lower performer to ensure that not only the
best sales representatives were included. Also, super-
visors were asked to complete the supervisor question-
naire. All questionnaires were to be returned separately.
(2) Supervisor questionnaire. The supervisor questionnaire
included measures of the firm's market turbulence,
product complexity, firm performance, and management
style (empowerment). In addition, supervisors evaluated
the strategic activities for each salesperson. These
rankings were matched with the responses from the
corresponding salesperson.
(3) Three salesperson questionnaires. The salesperson ques-
tionnaire included measures of supervisee trust, informa-
tion sharing, frequency of communication, as well as a
host of demographic and background information.
Of 450 firms initially expressing interest and pre-qualifying
for participation via phone calls, 132 dyads were received from
the first wave of data collection and 25 were received from the
second wave resulting in a total of 157 matched dyads
representing 67 distinct firms (or managers). In many instances,
two or three ‘salesperson’ questionnaires were returned per each
‘manager’ questionnaire. To ensure that the nestedness of our
data is not resulting in a greater probability of committing a type
1 error (Hox, 2002), we calculated the design effect according to
the procedure recommended by Hox (2002). This resulted in a
design effect of 0.7. Design effects less than 2 do not influence
tests of significance Hox (2002); therefore, suggesting that we
are able to analyze our data accordingly. Given the possibility of
a total of 1350 possible dyads that we may have received, we
calculate a response rate of approximately 12%. While the 12%
response rate is generally lower than other published studies, it
is to be expected given our focus on collecting dyadic data. Our
sample was comprised of a majority of males (58%) who
typically held bachelor's degrees (75%). The average age within
our sample was 37 and the average total income was $93,000
USD.
We tested for nonresponse bias in a manner consistent with
procedures outlined by Armstrong and Overton (1977). We
compared responses from the first wave against those from the
second wave. No significant differences were determined for
the variables in the study. Additionally, comparisons across
respondents and nonrespondents on dimensions of firm size
indicated no significant differences.
6.3. Measures
Preexisting measures were used for all constructs. Where
necessary the measures were adapted slightly in wording to fit
the context of the current study. Of the measures completed by
the salespeople, most were 7-point Likert-type multi-item
scales. Trust was measured using Doney and Cannon's (1997)
eight-item measure of trust (α=0.87, average variance
extracted=0.69). Measures for amount of information sharing
(α=0.89, average variance extracted=0.58) and frequency of
communication (α=0.78, average variance extracted=0.52)
were adapted from Cannon and Homburg (2001).
Supervisors completed multi-item measures of market
turbulence and firm performance (α=0.90, average variance
extracted=0.65) adapted from Slater and Olson (2000) and
Babakus et al. (1996). Supervisors also reported on salesperson
performance using the Sujan et al. (1994) six-item measure and
salesperson participation in strategic activities using the Floyd
and Wooldridge (1992) twenty-item measure. We adopt Floyd
and Wooldridge's (1992, 2000) conceptualization that middle
managers engage in four primary activities: championing new
ideas, synthesizing information, facilitating adaptability, and
implementing. We conceptualize strategic activity as a higher
order construct including the four first order constructs
described by Floyd and Wooldridge (2000). Strategic activities
were assessed using five-point Likert-type scales (synthesizing
α=0.89, average variance extracted=0.52; implementing α=
0.89, average variance extracted=0.60; championing α=0.88,
898
J.M. Pappas, K.E. Flaherty / Journal of Business Research 61 (2008) 894–902

average variance extracted=0.51; facilitating α=0.77, average
variance extracted=0.52). All measures have been used in
previous studies and have been found to be reliable and valid.
To further verify the psychometric properties of the measures,
we used confirmatory factor analysis (CFA). Given the large
number of measures, we estimated two submodels. This approach
is consistent with past research (Doney and Cannon 1997). The
first model included individual performance as well as the four
strategic activities (Model Fit Indices — χ2=171.13, GFI=0.89,
RMSEA=0.06, CFI=0.91). The second model included trust,
communication frequency, and the amount of information sharing
(Model Fit Indices — χ2=182.63, GFI=0.89, RMSEA=0.05,
CFI=0.90). Fit indices indicate adequate fit for all models. Also,
Cronbach's alpha and average variance extracted for each
construct also meet or exceed minimally acceptable standards.
6.4. Control variables
Throughout our analyses we introduced several variables for
control purposes such as product complexity, market turbu-
lence, sales experience, and length of relationship between the
supervisor and subordinate. We also controlled for the super-
visor's self-reported management, or empowerment, style.
Empowerment, defined as a set of practices implemented by
key managers involving the delegation of responsibilities to
their employees in such a manner designed to enhance the
increased decision-making authority of the salespeople (Leach
et al., 2003). Thus, salespeople that are “empowered” via a
particular set of practices will be given greater opportunity for
self-management, increased participation, and more authority
regarding decisions that involve job tasks (Leach et al., 2003).
As a result, it is critical to control for this effect to isolate the
relationship between the constructs of interest. We used the
Hartline and Ferrel (1996) eight-item measure of empowerment
to assess individual management style. Finally, we collected
data on age, sex, education, sales experience, income, length of
time working with current supervisor, and self-efficacy.
7. Analyses and results
Summary statistics and intercorrelations for the variables are
provided in Table 1. The tests of the remaining hypotheses shed
some light on the role trust plays in determining the extent of the
activity, as well as the result of such activity in terms of
supervisor reports of sales performance.
In H1, we used regression analysis to determine if sales-
person participation in strategic activities is positively associ-
ated with individual-level sales performance (Table 2). Results
support the expected positive association between strategic ac-
tivity and supervisor-rated performance (β=0.67, pb0.01). The
adjusted R2 for this equation was 0.45. We also used regression
Table 1
Variable means, standard deviations, and intercorrelations
Variables
ST
CF
IS
SA
IP
LR
EXP
EMP
MT
PC
Supervisee trust (ST)
–
Communication freq. (CF)
0.44⁎⁎
–
Information sharing (IS)
0.61⁎⁎
0.45⁎⁎
–
Strategic activities (SA)
0.42⁎⁎
0.49⁎⁎
0.42⁎⁎
–
Individual performance (IP)
0.39⁎⁎
0.56⁎⁎
0.53⁎⁎
0.67⁎⁎
–
Length of relationship (LR)
0.19⁎
0.23⁎⁎
0.19⁎
0.13
0.14
–
Sales experience (EXP)
0.23⁎⁎
0.07
0.26⁎⁎
0.11
0.10
0.33⁎⁎
–
Empowerment (EMP)
0.18⁎
−0.06
0.07
0.09
0.06
−0.01
0.23⁎⁎
–
Market turbulence (MT)
0.17
0.02
−0.04
0.06
0.21⁎⁎
0.11
0.07
−0.02
–
Product complexity (PC)
0.09
0.01
0.05
0.18⁎
0.13
−0.09
0.19⁎
0.35⁎⁎
0.01
–
Mean
5.23
5.38
4.54
3.15
3.52
46.95
2.79
5.36
4.65
4.36
Standard deviation
0.93
1.20
1.51
0.88
0.87
41.04
1.54
0.83
1.36
1.04
⁎⁎Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).
⁎Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed).
Table 2
Moderated regression analysis: the effect of trust on strategic activities
Strategic activities
Model 1
Model 2
β
t-value
β
t-value
Independent variables
Supervisee trust
0.42
3.88⁎
0.38
2.88⁎
Communication freq.
0.39
4.19⁎
0.37
3.99⁎
Information sharing
0.00
0.03
0.11
1.53
Interactions
Supervisee trust
×Comm. freq.
0.47
5.10⁎
×Info sharing
0.31
3.04⁎
Control variables
Length of relationship
0.12
1.42
0.09
0.97
Sales experience
−0.04
−0.45
0.06
−0.01
Empowerment
−0.04
−0.43
−0.04
−0.44
Market turbulence
0.09
1.25
0.08
0.99
Product complexity
0.19
2.14^
0.16
1.73^
R2
0.41
0.48
Adjusted R2
0.35
0.42
F-value
7.2⁎
8.8⁎
Incremental R2 F-value
4.1⁎
⁎pb0.01 (two-tailed).
^pb0.05 (two-tailed).
899
J.M. Pappas, K.E. Flaherty / Journal of Business Research 61 (2008) 894–902

analysis to test H2 to determine if supervisee trust is positively
associated with salespeople's participation in strategic activi-
ties. Results also support the expected positive association be-
tween supervisee trust and strategic activity (β=0.42, pb0.01).
Thus, H1 and H2 were both supported.
7.1. Mediating effect of strategic activities
In H3 we tested if strategic activities mediate the relationship
between supervisee trust and individual-level sales perfor-
mance. Here we followed procedures outlined by Baron and
Kenny (1986). To rule out the possibility of spurious relation-
ships resulting from multicollinearity, we ran a regression of the
dependent variable on the mediating variable alone. If the coef-
ficient for the mediating variable is significant, then the pos-
sibility of significance due to a spurious relationship in the third
regression is unlikely (Noble et al., 2002). In the first equations,
again, we find trust to be significantly related to strategic
activity (β=0.42, pb0.01). Further, in equation 2, trust is sig-
nificantly related to individual sales performance (β=0.39,
pb0.01). In equation 3 we hypothesized that the effect of su-
pervisee trust on performance would be insignificant in the
presence of the strategic activities. Results show that the beta
coefficient for supervisee trust decreased to a marginal-level of
significance (β=0.08, pb0.10). Thus, we support H3.
7.2. Moderating effects of communication mechanisms
In H4 and H5, we tested for the moderating effect of
communication mechanisms on the relationship between
supervisee trust and salesperson strategic activity (see Fig. 1).
To do this, we used hierarchical moderated regression analysis
(Aiken and West, 1991). We estimated an initial regression
equation including supervisee trust along with communication
frequency, information sharing, as well as the control variables.
In the second model, the hypothesized interactions were added.
Prior to doing so, the constituent variables were mean-centered
to eliminate multicollinearity (Aiken and West, 1991). Variance
inflation factors were below the cutoff of 10, ranging from 1.9
to 3.7, thus suggesting that multicollinearity was not a problem.
We found support for the interaction effect of communica-
tion frequency and open sharing of information on the trust–
strategic activity relationship (see Figs. 2 and 3 for simple slope
analysis). We hypothesized that these elements of good
communication would in fact enhance the relationship between
trust and the strategic activities. The trust×communication
frequency interaction is positive and statistically significant
(β=0.47, pb0.01). In addition the interaction between trust and
information sharing is positive and significant (β=0.31,
pb0.01). Thus, we support H4 and H5.
8. Discussion
This study integrated insights from the strategy process,
social exchange, and marketing literatures, to provide a deeper
understanding of the influence of salespeople in the strategy
process. In doing so, we identify strategy behavior of the
salesperson as a vital intervening mechanism through which
trust in the supervisor ultimately influences contact person's
sales performance. Further, we demonstrate the moderating
effects of two communication variables (i.e., communication
frequency and open information sharing) on the relationship
between supervisee trust and customer contact person strategic
behavior. A more in-depth discussion of the contributions of
this paper is developed below.
8.1. Theoretical implications
Our study adds to the social exchange theory literature by
demonstrating that trust can effectively shape the strategy
process in service organizations where management and
marketing are interrelated. While research has demonstrated
how trust can lead to enhanced strategic participation among
sales representatives (Sonnenberg, 1994), we recognize that
proper communication mechanisms must first be in place. We
argue that a high degree of communication (both in terms of
frequency and the open nature of the communication) enables
important exchange norms to develop. These norms provide a
guide for proper exchange behaviors (Lambe et al., 2001).
Through repeated, open communications the salesperson is
likely to become more comfortable participating in these
activities. Recently, researchers have begun to question the
value of trust suggesting that prior assumptions of the positive
consequences of trust are not consistently supported in empirical
research. Further, engagement in strategic activities leads to
beneficial outcomes for the salespeople if trust is nurtured and
Fig. 2. Simple slope of trust×open information sharing.
Fig. 3. Simple slope of trust×communicating frequency.
900
J.M. Pappas, K.E. Flaherty / Journal of Business Research 61 (2008) 894–902

valued, especially when communication and exchange becomes
part of the norms that govern the exchange relationship.
This study essentially transforms the view of top down
management to a bottom–up approach where information from
customer contact personnel can modify the business performance.
We demonstrate that trust in the supervisor leads salespeople to
participate in four strategic activities that in the literature have
previously been reserved for upper and middle managers. It
should be noted that information sharing did not have an effect on
strategic activity as a main effect; however, the interaction effect
of information sharing and trust was statistically significant. Said
differently, organizations require a positive exchange relationship
to realize the effects of open communication.
Knowledge that members of the organization, whom do not
occupy formal positions of authority, also engage in strategic
behaviors points to new avenues for the study of strategic
renewal. This result bolsters and extends prior customer linkage
research (e.g., Bettencourt and Brown, 2003) suggesting that
organizations not only send strategic signals to salespeople, but
salespeople may participate in setting the strategic agenda by
sending strategic signals to their managers as well. We
demonstrate that salespeople participate in strategic activities
that include both an upward influence on top management
decisions and downward influence on peers.
8.2. Managerial implications
The study showed that strategic activity leads to beneficial
outcomes for the individual. Despite the general acknowledge-
ment that salespeople (as boundary spanners) are in a position to
influence strategic decisions (Day, 1994; Bettencourt and
Brown 2003), ours empirically demonstrates the beneficial
effect of strategic activity among salespeople on individual sales
performance. Sales personnel are service experts. They have a
vested interest in ensuring that relevant customer information is
not only received by managers, but also utilized to fuel
decision-making that is customer-focused. It is not surprising
that these service experts perform better when they engage in
strategic activities.
Furthermore, the results of this study suggest that salespeo-
ple should be selected on criteria that not only best reflect the
qualities and characteristics leading to successful sales relation-
ships, but also according to qualities and characteristics deemed
important for participating effectively in the strategic activities.
To this end, strategic activities hold positive consequences for
both the salesperson as an individual and the organization as a
whole. Our findings align the employee's and the organization's
interests and thereby make a case for the importance and
viability of the salesperson's participation in strategy. This
result provides an argument for why a salesperson (or any
contact employee) would engage in risky behavior (e.g., risk top
management criticism). Given the link we found between
activity and performance, it might prove beneficial to certain
sales-driven organizations to take steps to encourage strategic
behavior. This could lead to a host of implications and changes
revolving around the motivation, compensation, leadership, and
ultimate evaluation of salespeople. More often than not, they are
evaluated and compensated based on sales output. However, our
findings suggest that activity-based quotas promoting strategic
activity or other incentive structures may be recommended.
8.3. Study limitations and directions for further research
We recommend that future studies not examine supervisee
trust in a snapshot. Instead, the continuous process of fostering
trust is what will determine whether or not supervisee trust
results in participation in strategic activities or individual
performance. Past research has long called for longitudinal
exchange relations and network structures to better guide future
research (Emerson, 1976). In this way, researchers might be
able to better capture the dynamic nature of dyadic exchange
(Bauer and Green, 1996). Investigating newly formed dyadic
exchanges or examining a multitude of exchange relationships
over time might provide new evidence of why salespeople
engage in strategic behavior.
Further, the possibility for the reversal of hypothesized
relationships cannot be ruled out given the cross-sectional nature
of the data. For instance, one could argue that participation in
strategic activities leads to enhanced trust rather than the reverse
(c.f. Floyd and Wooldridge, 2000). Second, the study's focus is
limited to the effect of supervisee trust elicited from one type of
customer contact employee, the salesperson, on supervisor-rated
selling performance. While this is a good first step to establish-
ing the mediating influence of strategic activity in this
relationship, future research considering other elements of
performance (e.g., service behaviors) and other groups of
customer contact employees is warranted. We also note that our
sample of salespeople was limited to those operating within a
healthcare sector. Our findings may not generalize to other
customer contact groups that do not possess the same education
or skill level. While considerable variance exists within this
group, we cannot completely rule out the possibility that results
may differ across other groups. Also, with a 12% response rate
caution must be taken when generalizing findings.
Our results suggest several other interesting avenues for
future research. This study opens the door to a host of important
research questions involving the ‘middle-management role’ of
the salesperson. Research examining additional antecedent
factors leading to participation in strategy (e.g., organizational
structure, organizational values, personal characteristics) will
certainly help to advance knowledge of this topic. Research
examining additional consequences of salesperson participation
in strategic activity is also appealing. Finally, a greater
understanding of the benefits, and possible negatives, associ-
ated with an expanded role for the salesperson is necessary.
References
Aiken Leona S, West Stephen G. Multiple regression: testing and interpreting
interactions. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications; 1991.
Anderson Erin, Oliver Richard. Perspectives on behavior-based versus outcome-
based salesforce control systems. J Mark 1987;51:76–88 [October].
Armstrong James C, Overton Terry S. Estimating nonresponse bias in mail
surveys. J Mark Res 1977;14:396–400 [August].
901
J.M. Pappas, K.E. Flaherty / Journal of Business Research 61 (2008) 894–902

Atuahene-Gima Kwaku, Li Haiyang. When does trust matter? Antecedents and
contingent effects of supervisee trust on performance in selling new products
in China and the United States. J Mark 2002;66:61–81 [July].
Babakus E, Cravens DW, Grant K, Ingram TN, La Forge R. Investigating the
relationships between sales management controls, sales territory design,
salesperson performance, and sales organization effectiveness. Int J Res
Mark 1996;13:345–63.
Baron Rueben M, Kenny David A. The moderator–mediator distinction in
social psychological research: conceptual, strategic, and statistical con-
siderations. J Pers Soc Psychol 1986;51:1173–82.
Bauer Tayla N, Green Stephen G. Development of leader–member exchange: a
longitudinal test. Acad Manage J 1996;39(6):1538–67.
Becerra Manuel, Gupta Anil K. Perceived trustworthiness with the organization:
the moderating impact of communication frequency on trustor and trustee
effects. Organ Sci 2003;14(1):32–45.
Behrman Douglas N, Perreault William D. A role stress model of the
performance and satisfaction of industrial salespersons. J Mark
1984;48:9–21 [Fall].
Bettencourt Lance A, Brown Stephen W. Role stressors and customer-oriented
boundary-spanning behaviors in service organizations. J Acad Mark Sci
2003;31(4):394–408.
Blau PL. Exchange and power in social life. New York: John Wiley & Sons;
1964.
Cannon Joseph P, Homburg Christian. Buyer–supplier relationships and
customer firm costs. J Mark 2001;65:29–43 [January].
Dansereau Fred, Graen George, Haga William. Avertical dyad linkage approach
to leadership within formal organizations. Org Beh Hum Relat
1984;13:46–78.
Day George S. The capabilities of market-driven organizations. J Mark
1994;58:37–52 [October].
Dirks Kurt T. The effects of interpersonal trust on work group performance.
J Appl Psychol 1999;84(3):445–55.
Dillman A. Mail and telephone surveys: the total design method. New York:
John Wiley & Sons; 1978.
Doney Patricia M, Cannon Joseph P. An examination of the nature of trust in
buyer–seller relationships. J Mark 1997;61:35–51 [April].
Dutton JE, O'Neill RM, Lawrence KA. Moves that matter: issue selling and
organizational change. Acad Manage J 2001;44:716–36.
Eesley Dale T, Longenecker Clinton O. Gateways to intrapreneurship. Ind
Manage 2006;48(1):18–24.
Emerson Richard M. Social exchange theory. Annu Rev Sociology 1976;2:
335–62.
Floyd Steven W, Wooldridge Bill. Middle management involvement in strategy
and its association with strategic type. Strateg Manag J 1992;13:153–67.
Floyd Steven W, Wooldridge Bill. Building strategy from the middle:
reconceptualizing strategy process. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; 2000.
Floyd Steven W, Lane Peter J. Strategizing throughout the organization:
managing role conflict in strategic renewal. Acad Manage Rev 2000;25(1):
154–77.
Gouldner Alvin W. The norm of reciprocity. Am Sociol Rev 1960;25(2):
161–78.
Graen G, Uhl-Bien Mary. Development of the leader–member exchange theory
of leadership over 25 years: applying a multi-level multi-domain
perspective. Leadershp Q 1995;6(2):219–47.
Hartline Michael D, Ferrell OC. The management of customer-contact service
employees: an empirical investigation. J Mark 1996;60(4):52–71.
Hartline Michael D, Maxham JG, McKee DO. Corridors of influence in the
dissemination of customer-oriented strategy to customer contact employees.
Journal of Marketing 2000;64:35–50.
Hox Joop J. Multilevel analysis: techniques and applications. Mahwah, New
Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates; 2002.
Jaworski Bernard J. Toward a theory of marketing control: environmental
context, control types, and consequences. J Mark 1988;52:23–39.
Johlke Mark C, Duhan Dale F. Testing competing models of sales force
communication. J Pers Sell Sales Manage 2001;21(4):265–77.
Kacmar KM, Witt LA, Zivnuska S, Gully SM. The interactive effect of leader–
member exchange and communication frequency in performance ratings.
J Appl Psychol 2003;88(4):764–72.
Lambe C Jay, Wittman Michael, Spekman Robert E. Social exchange theory and
research on business-to-business relational exchange. J Bus-to-Bus Mark
2001;8(3):1–36.
Leach DJ, Wall TD, Jackson PR. The effect of empowerment on job knowledge:
an empirical test involving operators of complex technology. J Occup Organ
Psychol 2003;76(1):27–52.
Lester Scott W, Brower Holly H. In the eyes of the beholder: the relationship
between subordinates' felt trustworthiness and their work attitudes and
behaviors. J Leadershp Organ Stud 2003;10(2):17–34.
Marcus Philip M, House James S. Exchange between superiors and subordinates
in large organizations. Adm Sci Q 1973;18(2):209–22.
Mayer Roger C, Davis James, Schoorman FD. An integrative model of
organizational trust. Acad Manage Rev 1995;20(3):709–34.
Mohr Jakki, Fisher Robert J, Nevin John R. Collaborative communication in
interfirm relationships: moderating effects of integration and control. J Mark
1996;60:103–15 [July].
Moorman Christine, Zaltman G, Deshpande Rohit. Relationships between
providers and users of market research: the dynamics of trust within and
between organizations. J Mark Res 1992;29:314–28 [August].
Morgan Robert M, Hunt Shelby D. The commitment–trust theory of
relationship marketing. J Mark 1994;58:20–39 [July].
Nelson Debra L, Quick James C. Social support and newcomer adjustment in
organizations: attachment theory at work? J Organ Behav 1991;12:543–54.
Noble Charles H, Sinha Rajiv K, Kumar Ajith. Market orientation and
alternative strategic orientations: a longitudinal assessment of performance
implications. J Mark 2002;66:25–39 [October].
Paulin Michele, Ferguson Ronald J, Bergeron Jasmin Bergeron. Service climate
and organizational commitment: the importance of customer linkages. J Bus
Res 2006;59(8):906–15.
Rich Gregory A. The sales manager as a role model: effects on trust, job
satisfaction, and performance of salespeople. J Acad Mark Sci 1997;25
(4):319–28.
Rousseau Denise M. The ‘problem’ of psychological contract considered.
J Organ Behav 1998;19:665–71.
Schneider B, Bowen DE. Winning the service game. Boston, MA: Harvard
Business School Press; 1995.
Slater Stanley F, Olson Eric M. Strategy type and performance: the influence of
sales force management. Strateg Manage J 2000;21:813–29 [August].
Sonnenberg FK. Managing with a conscience: how to improve performance
through integrity, trust, and commitment. New York: McGraw-Hill; 1994.
Sparrowe Robert T, Liden Robert C. Two routes to influence: integrating leader–
member exchange and social network perspectives. Adm Sci Q 2005;50
(4):505–35.
Sujan Harish, Weitz Barton A, Kumar Nirmalya. Learning orientation, working
smart, and effective selling. J Mark 1994;58(July):39–52.
902
J.M. Pappas, K.E. Flaherty / Journal of Business Research 61 (2008) 894–902
