https://doi.org/10.1177/01492063211003951Journal of Management
 
DOI: 10.1177/01492063211003951
© The Author(s) 2021
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions 
Can Supportive Coaching Behaviors Facilitate 
Boundary Spanning and Raise Job Satisfaction? 
An Indirect-Effects Model
Jennifer A. Marrone
Seattle University
Narda R. Quigley
Villanova School of Business
Gregory E. Prussia
John Dienhart
Seattle University
As organizations encounter unpredictable external environments, expectations are changing for 
managers and team leaders toward providing more facilitative, less directive coaching in order to 
stimulate more flexibility and adaptability. Prior research has underscored the role of team leader 
supportive coaching behaviors in reinforcing and growing team member capabilities to work 
independently from the leader. What is not yet understood, however, is if and how supportive 
coaching behaviors relate to team member engagement in boundary-spanning behaviors, which 
are team member efforts to establish and maintain relationships with key parties external to their 
team. This study examines how team leaders’ supportive coaching of boundary spanning—defined 
as a set of behaviors that (a) encourages team members to engage in frequent and open collabora -
tions with key parties external to the team and (b) grants team members the latitude to engage 
external parties in ways the team members deem necessary—relates to team member boundary-
spanning behavior and job satisfaction through a motivational pathway. We test a hypothesized 
indirect-effects model within a field sample of 256 engineering employees working in teams. 
Results indicate that leaders’ supportive coaching of boundary spanning is positively related to 
team member boundary-spanning self-efficacy, which in turn is positively related to team member 
engagement in boundary-spanning behavior for their teams. Also, team members who reported 
more boundary-spanning behavior experienced greater job satisfaction. The findings have impor -
tant implications for organizations, team leaders, and team members.
Keywords:  supportive coaching; boundary-spanning behavior; job satisfaction; mediation
Corresponding author: Jennifer A. Marrone, Albers School of Business and Economics, Seattle University, 901 
12th Avenue, P.O. Box 222000, Seattle, WA 98122-1090, USA. 
E-mail: marronej@seattleu.edu1003951 JOM XXX10.1177/01492063211003951Journal of Management Marrone et al. / Boundary-Spanning Behavior
research-article 2021
Vol. 48No.5, May 2022 1131– 1159
1131

Rapid, constant, and disruptive change is now the norm [in organizations]. . . . Twenty-first 
century managers simply don’t (and can’t!) have all the right answers. . . . The role of the 
manager, in short, is becoming that of a coach. (Ibarra & Scoular, 2019: 112)
Ibarra and Scoular’s (2019) research captures a shift in organizations: Leaders are expected 
to provide more facilitative, less directive coaching to employees, who are engaged in 
increasingly dynamic and complex work environments. Reflective of this trend, some team 
leaders engage in “supportive coaching” behaviors that encourage and empower team mem -
bers to work independently from the leader and to grow their capacity to self-manage the 
team processes that drive team and organizational performance (see Carson, Tesluk, & 
Marrone, 2007; Morgeson, 2005; Wageman, 2001). One team member activity that is critical 
for modern organizations is boundary spanning . Boundary-spanning behaviors are team 
member efforts to establish and maintain relationships with key entities external to their 
working unit for the purposes of achieving work-unit tasks and objectives (Ancona & 
Caldwell, 1992). When a team member solicits resources from upper-level management, he 
or she is engaged in boundary-spanning behavior. Other examples of boundary-spanning 
behavior include negotiating deliverable deadlines directly with another working unit and 
acquiring needed technical expertise from external subject-matter experts. These efforts can 
yield markedly higher client satisfaction (Marrone, Tesluk, & Carson, 2007), facilitate team 
learning (Edmondson, 2003), enhance organizational innovation (Hargadon, 1998), and 
increase sales margins (Gladstein, 1984).
Given the importance of boundary spanning, it is surprising that we do not yet understand 
how team leaders can support and motivate their members to engage in these behaviors. We 
do not know how (or if) a team leader’s choice to “act as coach”—to be more facilitative and 
less directive—relates positively to team member boundary spanning. Addressing this gap is 
significant because enacting team boundary spanning has shifted away from team leaders 
and toward the team itself. Team members are increasingly expected to represent team goals 
and progress directly to stakeholders, incorporate diverse expertise from other functional 
areas, and coordinate their interdependencies with other work groups (see Ancona & 
Bresman, 2007; Cross et al., 2000; Marrone, 2010; Yan & Louis, 1999). Understanding the 
leader’s efforts to support team member engagement in these activities is thus ever more 
important (Tesluk & Mathieu, 1999). Also, boundary spanning is notably challenging for 
team members to execute and may require specific leadership support. For example, mem -
bers who boundary span report role overload and burnout due to conflicting expectations and 
demands placed on them by diverse external parties, which may relate to poor work experi -
ences and lower job attitudes (Marrone et  al., 2007; Singh, Goolsby, & Rhoads, 1994). 
Leaders might be able to help team members overcome various deterrents to their engage -
ment in this behavior, however, by emphasizing cross-boundary engagement and encourag -
ing boundary-spanning behavior.
In the current study, we therefore examine the relationship of team leader coaching behav -
iors on team member engagement in boundary spanning and team member job satisfaction. 
We focus specifically on team leaders’ supportive coaching of boundary spanning, which we 
conceptualize as a set of behaviors that (a) encourages team members to engage in frequent 
and open collaborations with key parties external to the team and (b) grants team members 1132 Journal of Management / May 2022
the latitude to engage external parties in ways that the team members deem are necessary. We 
use social cognitive theory (e.g., Bandura, 1986, 1997, 2012) and Hackman and Wageman’s 
(2005) theory of team coaching as the foundation of our arguments, and we examine whether 
boundary-spanning self-efficacy (Marrone et  al., 2007) serves as an important motivational 
mechanism through which supportive-coaching behaviors relate to team member boundary 
spanning. We hypothesize that team leader supportive-coaching behaviors relate to higher 
member beliefs in their boundary-spanning capabilities, these beliefs relate to members’ 
engagement in boundary-spanning behaviors, and these behaviors relate to higher levels of 
job satisfaction.
This study makes several important contributions. First, we clarify the relationship 
between supportive-coaching behavior and team member boundary-spanning behavior, 
which is nearly absent in the work teams coaching literature in the organizational behavior 
domain. Extant studies have focused on the impacts of team leader supportive-coaching 
behaviors on internal team dynamics, yet increasing demands are placed on team members 
to establish and maintain relationships across  team boundaries. Second, our findings offer an 
important theoretical extension regarding the effective leadership of externally dependent 
work units by extending foundational work in the boundary-spanning literature that previ -
ously highlighted directive team leader behaviors. We explore the role of supportive-coach -
ing behaviors because boundary spanning is notably challenging for team members to 
execute and members may seek out and benefit from specific leadership support in this 
domain. Third, this study advances understanding of how supportive-coaching behavior pos -
itively relates to team members’ boundary-spanning behavior. Specifying and testing this 
underlying motivational mechanism answers recent calls for greater theoretical understand -
ing of the antecedents to team member boundary-spanning behavior (Joshi, Pandey, & Han, 
2009). Fourth, we examine the relationship between boundary-spanning behavior and job 
satisfaction in an attempt to elucidate prior boundary-spanning research, where classic argu -
ments for a positive association between boundary-spanning behavior and job satisfaction 
(e.g., Aldrich & Herker, 1977; Hallenbeck, Hautaluoma, & Bates, 1999; Keller, 1978) have 
been called into question by some more recent empirical findings (e.g., Marrone et  al., 2007; 
Ramarajan, Bezrukova, Jehn, & Euwema, 2011). Last, this study advances understanding of 
the ongoing supportive-coaching behaviors exhibited by organizational managers and team 
leaders. In so doing, we contribute to calls for deeper exploration of managerial coaching 
dimensions, mechanisms, and effects (e.g., Dahling, Taylor, Chau, & Dwight, 2016).
Theoretical Background
Team Member Boundary-Spanning Behavior
As noted already, boundary-spanning behaviors are defined as the efforts made by employ -
ees to establish and maintain relationships with key entities external to one’s own working 
unit for the purposes of achieving work unit tasks and objectives (Ancona & Caldwell, 1992; 
Marrone et  al., 2007). The overarching function of these behaviors is to manage the work 
unit’s relationships with its external environment (Ancona, 1990; Leifer & Delbecq, 1978). 
In considering work teams as subsystems embedded in their larger organizational system, the 
necessity for work teams to engage externally becomes readily apparent. Work teams depend 
upon their organizational environment for “human, technological, and financial information, 1133 Marrone et al. / Boundary-Spanning Behavior
for information and power, and eventually for [their] very existence” (Friedlander, 1987: 
303). In turn, the operations and output of the team further constitutes the system (Friedlander, 
1987). Beyond the organizational environment, work teams and their members also contrib -
ute to, and extract resources from, clients, suppliers, and other organizations residing across 
organizational boundaries (Rosenkopf & Nerkar, 2001; Takeishi, 2001). The active manage -
ment of a working unit’s relationships to key parties in its environment enables the team to 
secure resources, exert power, obtain information (Aldrich & Herker, 1977), and experiment 
and collaborate with other work units (Ancona, 1990). As such, member boundary spanning 
underlies the survival and success of the team and its organization.
Foundational empirical research in the work teams domain by Ancona and Caldwell 
(1988, 1992) identified three primary types of boundary-spanning behaviors that are exe -
cuted by work-unit members on the team’s behalf. These behaviors aim to (a) represent one’s 
work unit in a positive way to external entities in order to gain further resources and/or pro -
tect the unit from undue and adverse pressures (referred to as ambassadorial  behaviors), (b) 
scan actively for resources and expertise embedded in external entities (referred to as scan-
ning activities), and (c) manage interdependencies across work teams, such as informing 
others of the work unit’s task progress (referred to as task coordination  activities). Later 
research supports that engaging in these behaviors significantly affects the performance of 
the focal working unit, the organization, and other interdependent entities (for related discus -
sions of boundary-spanning behaviors and outcomes, see Cross et  al., 2000; Faraj & 
Yan, 2009; Marrone, 2010; Marrone et al., 2018; Somech & Khalaili, 2014). For exam -
ple, ambassadorial behaviors can elevate the unit’s ability to secure needed resources to 
achieve organizational objectives (Ancona & Caldwell, 1992; Benoliel & Somech, 2015; 
Druskat & Wheeler, 2004), and scanning behaviors can result in greater organizational learn -
ing and innovation (Lorenzoni & Lipparini, 1999; Mors, 2010).
The benefits of boundary-spanning behavior notwithstanding, significant variance exists 
in the extent to which team members will engage in these activities. Early in-depth qualita -
tive studies conducted by Ancona (1990) and Ancona and Caldwell (1992) demonstrated that 
within some teams, members exhibit high levels of boundary-spanning activity, whereas in 
other teams, members exhibit notably low levels and remain comparatively more isolated 
from external parties relevant to the team’s task work. Research has not yet determined which 
antecedent variables are most predictive of this variance, though these qualitative depictions 
illuminated leadership as an important factor to consider (see also Marrone, 2010). Team 
leaders who explicitly communicated strategies to their teams that emphasized early external 
team activity were uniquely successful in influencing team members to engage in important 
boundary-spanning behaviors that resulted in the team’s higher effectiveness. These team 
leaders understood the need for boundary spanning, placed priority on this activity, and 
directed members’ behaviors accordingly.
In contrast, when team leaders did not prioritize and direct the boundary-spanning func -
tion, team members demonstrated either passive reactivity to the team’s external environ -
ment or unilaterally imposed their team’s ideas on external parties without an active 
consideration of the roles, contributions, or objectives of the team’s existing and potential 
contextual relationships (Ancona, 1990). These teams were significantly less effective over -
all. Empirical research conducted by Hackman (2002) and colleagues likewise concluded 
that without team leader explicit direction to interact externally, team members tended to 1134 Journal of Management / May 2022
exhibit passive reactivity to their environment. It may be that without team leader direction 
and encouragement, the demands associated with interacting beyond the team’s boundary 
will reduce the willingness of the team’s members to engage in boundary-spanning behav -
iors. Indeed, boundary spanners have reported high levels of role overload as a result of 
continued exposure to diverse parties’ perspectives and objectives (Marrone et  al., 2007) and 
negative job experiences (Ramarajan et  al., 2011).
Supportive Coaching of Boundary Spanning
An alternative approach for team leaders who wish to encourage—rather than direct or 
ignore—boundary spanning may be the use of supportive-coaching behaviors. Supportive-
coaching behaviors are team leader efforts to reinforce the team’s competencies and capabili -
ties independently from the leader (Morgeson, 2005). It is important to note that we follow 
the teams literature within organizational behavior (e.g., Carson et  al., 2007; Morgeson, 
2005; Wageman, 2001) in examining the behaviors of “team leads,” or first-line team manag -
ers. These managers are internal to the organization and have supervisory authority and lead -
ership responsibility with respect to the teams. This approach is aligned with broader 
managerial coaching studies, which increasingly emphasize the ongoing roles managers play 
in supporting the development and growth of employees (e.g., Dahling et  al., 2016; Ellinger, 
2013; Hui & Sue-Chan, 2018). A primary aspect of supportive-coaching behaviors is the 
leader’s empowerment of the team’s members (Arnold, Arad, Rhoades, & Drasgow, 2000; 
Burke, Stagl, Klein, Goodwin, Salas, & Halpin, 2006; Weer, DiRenzo, & Shipper, 2016). For 
example, Carson et  al. (2007) found that leaders who supported their teams with coaching 
behaviors established internal team conditions that enhanced team members’ voice, empow -
erment, and shared leadership. Similarly, Farh and Chen (2018) found that coaching pro -
moted employee voice in a field study of surgical teams. Supportive coaching empowers 
team members through encouraging team self-management and providing team members 
with latitude and authority so that they may act independently and free from leader interfer -
ence (Farh & Chen, 2018; Morgeson, 2005; Wageman, 2001). As Morgeson (2005: 502) 
noted, “Practically, this would involve providing reinforcement to the team but not actually 
becoming involved in the task performance itself.”
Supportive coaching of boundary spanning thus reinforces the team’s capabilities to carry 
out boundary-spanning behaviors without direct intervention from their leader. We concep -
tualize supportive coaching of boundary spanning as a set of behaviors that (a) encourages 
team members to engage in frequent and open collaborations with key parties external to the 
team and (b) grants team members the latitude to engage external parties in ways that the 
team members deem are necessary. The combination of encouragement and responsibility is 
vital to the supportive-coaching approach as it both guides team members toward engage -
ment in productive boundary-spanning tasks and empowers team members with the authority 
and control to carry out these actions independently from their leader. Empowered team 
members, in turn, realize increased self-efficacy (Arnold et  al., 2000), satisfaction (Ellinger, 
Ellinger, & Keller, 2003; Morgeson, 2005), and learning (Burke et  al., 2006; Edmondson, 
2003) that, in turn, stimulate greater team performance. Indeed, numerous empirical findings 
suggest that team effectiveness is positively associated with supportive coaching behaviors 
(see Buljac-Samardzic & van Woerkom, 2015; Burke et  al., 2006; Liu, Pirola-Merlo, Yang, 1135 Marrone et al. / Boundary-Spanning Behavior
& Huang, 2009; Rousseau, Aube’, & Tremblay, 2013; Weer et  al., 2016), and preliminary 
evidence suggests that supportive-coaching behaviors may positively influence teams to 
actively coordinate with other work groups (Edmondson, 2003; Tesluk & Mathieu, 1999).
Supportive-coaching behaviors influence work-unit effectiveness through motivational 
means (see Burke et  al., 2006) that enhance the effort that team members will exert toward 
work tasks. Hackman and Wageman’s (2005) theory of team coaching specifies the motiva -
tional role that team leader coaching behaviors plays in supporting team effectiveness. The 
authors suggest that when coaching efforts reinforce team capabilities and encourage self-
management, as is the intentional aim of supportive coaching, team leaders communicate 
optimism regarding the team’s capabilities that motivates team members to contribute greater 
efforts toward their collective team-related tasks. In support of this theory, Liu et  al.’s (2009) 
study of 137 research and development teams in Taiwan demonstrated that increases in team 
member efforts significantly mediated the positive influence of team coaching on team effec -
tiveness. Additionally, Weer et  al. (2016) studied 714 managers and their teams over 54 
months and found a positive and significant link between supportive coaching and the 
strength of team members’ effort toward team tasks (labeled as team commitment). Rousseau 
et al. (2013) also found that supportive coaching motivated greater team commitment, which 
in turn enhanced team innovation, for teams in a public safety organization.
Hypothesis Development
In the sections that follow, we contend that the motivating influence of supportive coach -
ing is most likely to occur through a salient mediating mechanism—boundary-spanning self-
efficacy (i.e., team members’ views about their ability to perform boundary-spanning tasks 
effectively; Marrone et  al., 2007)—that enhances team members’ views about their bound -
ary-spanning capabilities. We hypothesize that supportive coaching of boundary spanning 
indirectly relates to team member job satisfaction through higher boundary-spanning self-
efficacy and greater engagement in boundary-spanning behaviors.
Supportive Coaching of Boundary Spanning and Team Member Boundary-
Spanning Self-Efficacy
A team leader’s supportive-coaching behaviors likely facilitate greater engagement in 
member boundary-spanning behavior through enhancing team member perceptions of their 
boundary-spanning self-efficacy. Classic work in social cognitive theory (e.g., Bandura, 
1986, 1997) emphasizes the critical role of self-efficacy (defined as the belief in one’s capa -
bility to organize and execute the course of action required to succeed; Bandura, 1997; Hardy, 
Day, & Steele, 2019) as a factor in the self-regulation of motivation and behavior. Numerous 
studies over the past several decades find that self-efficacy has positive effects on work per -
formance (e.g., Stajkovic & Luthans, 1998). Importantly, self-efficacy perceptions likely 
“vary across activity domains and situational conditions rather than manifest uniformly . . . 
in the likeness of a general trait” (Bandura, 2012:13). In keeping with prior research that 
considers boundary-spanning behavior as an activity domain (e.g., Lanaj & Hollenbeck, 
2015; Marrone et  al., 2007), we examine the role of supportive-coaching behaviors in build -
ing boundary-spanning self-efficacy, which we in turn expect will result in higher levels of 1136 Journal of Management / May 2022
boundary-spanning behavior. As noted earlier, we define boundary-spanning self-efficacy as 
a team member’s belief in his or her ability to “successfully establish and manage relation -
ships with important parties external to his or her team” (Marrone et  al., 2007: 1426).
Following Bandura’s (1997, 2012) identification of verbal persuasion as one primary 
source of self-efficacy, team members will likely internalize the verbal support and responsi -
bility regarding boundary spanning given to them by authority figures, thereby making it 
easier to hold and sustain affirming self-beliefs about this action. Indeed, Boyer, Zollo, 
Thompson, Vancouver, Shewring, and Sims (2000) found in a meta-analysis that verbal per -
suasion is an especially impactful antecedent of self-efficacy, as it can raise (or lower) self-
efficacy beliefs independent of performance. Individuals’ expectations of themselves are 
highly influenced by the expectations of their leaders (Mitchell & Daniels, 2003) and particu -
larly so because these expectations are a salient aspect of the individual’s immediate social 
environment from which sensemaking occurs (Weick, 1995). Furthermore, team members 
are additionally motivated to internalize the positive expectations signaled by their leader’s 
supportive coaching to maintain consistent views about themselves that are positive and 
coherent with signals from their external environment (Salancik & Pfeffer, 1978).
Though studies of team leader coaching behaviors have not yet addressed boundary-span -
ning self-efficacy, scholars have theorized that self-efficacy in other task domains is a pri -
mary mechanism through which supportive coaches exert motivational influence (e.g., 
Dahling et  al., 2016; Manz & Sims, 1987). As one example, Pousa and Mathieu (2015) found 
that managerial coaching significantly enhanced employee self-efficacy, which then fully 
mediated coaching’s effect on changes in employee behavioral performance (i.e., actions 
employees took to achieve desirable performance results) in a sample of 122 financial advi -
sors. We hypothesize the following:
Hypothesis 1 : Supportive coaching of boundary spanning is positively related to team member 
boundary-spanning self-efficacy.
Team Member Boundary-Spanning Self-Efficacy and Boundary-Spanning 
Behavior
Team members with higher levels of efficacy regarding their ability to boundary span may 
be more likely to undertake subsequent boundary-spanning efforts and may persist longer in 
their efforts despite any difficulties that may arise. This occurs through a number of self-
regulatory pathways associated with more positive self-efficacy beliefs (Bouffard-Bouchard, 
1990). Bandura (2012: 13) noted that self-efficacy beliefs contribute to choice processes as 
individuals decide on their course of action because perceptions of self-efficacy “affect the 
slate of options people consider and the choices they make at important decision points.” 
Self-enabling beliefs allow team members to take greater risks in engaging in boundary-
spanning activity because efficacious team members view challenges as opportunities to 
learn and excel rather than as threats or insurmountable obstacles (Bandura, 1997, 2012). 
Furthermore, those with high levels of self-efficacy interpret their bodily reactions to stress -
ful work tasks adaptively (Bandura, 1997, 2012); team members with higher boundary-span -
ning self-efficacy may experience less anxiety associated with boundary-spanning behavior 
than those with lower levels of boundary-spanning self-efficacy (Bandura, 1997). These 1137 Marrone et al. / Boundary-Spanning Behavior
gains in stress resistance should allow for greater persistence in boundary-spanning activity 
over time (Hobfoll, 1989). As team members are encouraged by their leaders and persuaded 
verbally of their boundary-spanning capabilities, they are likely to exert greater effort toward 
boundary-spanning activities and sustain those efforts over time, thereby affirming their 
beliefs that such behaviors are valued, supported, and likely to be effective.
In the boundary-spanning domain, one existing empirical study supports the link between 
efficacy and behavior. Boundary-spanning self-efficacy emerged as a strong motivational 
driver of team member boundary-spanning behavior in a study of MBA consulting teams 
(Marrone et  al., 2007). The authors surmised that boundary-spanning self-efficacy led to 
higher goal setting and more realistic task performance strategies, which promoted both 
boundary-spanning activity and success. Importantly, Marrone et  al. (2007) is the only pub -
lished study providing evidence of a positive relationship between boundary-spanning self-
efficacy and boundary-spanning behavior. Moreover, their work examined this relationship 
in one team-based context (i.e., consulting team members) using a sample of MBA students. 
Also, Marrone et  al. (2007) did not consider the role of leadership or supportive-coaching 
behaviors in helping to increase boundary-spanning activity through positively influencing 
boundary-spanning self-efficacy beliefs; one contribution of the current research is to exam -
ine this indirect effect. Based on the aforementioned theoretical arguments, and rooted in 
Bandura’s (1986, 1997, 2012) work and the existing empirical evidence, we hypothesize the 
following:
Hypothesis 2 : Team member boundary-spanning self-efficacy will be positively related to team 
member boundary-spanning behavior.
Supportive Coaching, Team Member Boundary-Spanning Behavior, and Team 
Member Job Satisfaction
Prior research is somewhat ambiguous regarding the effects of boundary-spanning 
behaviors at the individual level. Although boundary-spanning behaviors can potentially 
contribute to role overload and burnout (e.g., Marrone et  al., 2007; Singh et  al., 1994), 
engagement in team member boundary-spanning behavior may also elevate team member 
job satisfaction. Job satisfaction is “a pleasurable or positive emotional state” that is “a 
function of the perceived relationship between what one wants from a job and what one 
perceives it is offering” (Locke, 1976: 1300). To the extent that individuals perceive that 
their job expectations are fulfilled, they will experience positive job satisfaction (Bacharach, 
Bamberger, & Conley, 1991). Boundary-spanning behaviors may elevate job satisfaction 
because engaging in boundary-spanning directly enables team members to achieve produc -
tive work-related tasks, such as acquiring needed resources for their team and successfully 
implementing team ideas (see Ancona, 1990; Ancona & Caldwell, 1992; Friedlander, 1987). 
Because goal achievement meets individuals’ basic needs for autonomy and competence 
(Deci & Ryan, 2000) and satisfies team needs for performance and survival (Morgeson, 
DeRue, & Karam, 2010), boundary-spanning behaviors that facilitate goal attainment or 
other desirable outcomes can enable greater job satisfaction. For instance, Aldrich and 
Herker (1977) theorized that because boundary-spanning actions enable individuals to gain 
power and exercise control over their environment in ways that “improve their bargaining 1138 Journal of Management / May 2022
position,” their job satisfaction should increase. Several empirical studies have supported 
these ideas, demonstrating that contrary to prior theories, boundary-spanning activity was 
unrelated to role stressors and positively related to job satisfaction (e.g., Keller, 1978; Keller 
& Holland, 1975). Our arguments are consistent with those of Locke (1970) and others who 
viewed job satisfaction as a function of performance leading to valued outcomes that are 
satisfying to individuals (see a review of studies by Judge, Thoresen, Bono, & Patton, 2001). 
We thus hypothesize a direct effect of team member boundary-spanning behavior on team 
member job satisfaction:
Hypothesis 3 : Team member boundary-spanning behavior will be positively related to team member 
job satisfaction.
Moreover, leader encouragement of boundary-spanning behaviors may make salient their 
importance for team members, even if these behaviors do not directly assist team members 
in goal attainment. More specifically, when leaders explicitly encourage and emphasize 
engagement in boundary-spanning behaviors, and team members respond with higher levels 
of these behaviors, leaders may validate team members’ perceived and actual capabilities to 
meet their job expectations. Ultimately, this process could result in higher team member job 
satisfaction.
In sum, supportive coaching of boundary spanning signals leader confidence in team 
members’ capabilities regarding boundary-spanning behaviors that are proximally relevant 
to desired job outcomes, such as relationship building and coordination of mutually benefi -
cial deadlines across interdependent teams. As such, the resulting improvements in job atti -
tudes (i.e., higher job satisfaction) from this type of supportive leadership are likely to be 
realized through team members’ higher engagement specifically in those boundary-spanning 
behaviors. It is important to note, therefore, that supportive-coaching behaviors are not likely 
to directly or immediately result in a rise in job satisfaction. Rather, we suspect that as effica -
cious team members explore boundary-spanning tasks independently from their leader, they 
experience opportunities to observe the consequences of their efforts, are empowered to 
adapt their boundary-spanning behaviors as appropriate based on what they observe, and 
learn to respond to unique circumstances with external parties as those issues arise, resulting 
in an enacted mastery of boundary spanning that is satisfying and productive (for related 
arguments, see Hui & Sue-Chan, 2018). We thus hypothesize an overall indirect effect of 
supportive coaching of boundary spanning on job satisfaction through team member bound-
ary-spanning self-efficacy and boundary-spanning behavior:
Hypothesis 4 : Supportive coaching of boundary spanning will have an indirect relationship with job 
satisfaction via team member boundary-spanning self-efficacy and team member boundary-
spanning behavior serially.
Method
To test our hypotheses, we collected field data via surveys and used a variety of analytical 
tools, including Mplus (1998-2017), which allows for an assessment of direct and indirect 
effects while including multilevel model specifications. The analysis of field data for this 
study is important in that it allowed us to observe and understand the role that 1139 Marrone et al. / Boundary-Spanning Behavior
  
supportive-coaching behaviors may play on a daily basis within intact working teams in a 
real organization in encouraging boundary-spanning behavior and, as a result, positively 
relating to higher job satisfaction in team members. We describe further details of the sample, 
analytical techniques, and results of preliminary analyses for assessing nonindependence of 
observations, missing data assumptions, and overall measurement model fit next.
Sample and Procedure
A large division of a manufacturing and engineering firm located in the United States served 
as the host for the research. Six hundred and eighty-six employees (nonmanagement team 
members) were contacted via email and asked to participate in a voluntary study involving two 
waves of data collection separated by a 3-month gap.1 This time interval ensured minimal dis -
ruption for the employees (based on discussions with management) and allowed the research 
team to manage concerns about survey length and common-method bias. Two hundred and 
sixty-two team members responded to the first survey (which included measures of supportive 
coaching and boundary-spanning self-efficacy) for a first-wave response rate of 38.2%. One 
hundred and seventy-nine of these individuals also responded to the second survey (which 
included measures of boundary-spanning behavior and job satisfaction) for a response rate to 
both surveys of 26.1%. Of the 179 who also responded to the Wave 2 survey, 170 included 
mostly complete data. The average age of this matched sample was 41.92 years ( SD = 11.11), 
approximately 90.0% of the respondents were male, 54.3% identified the United States as their 
country of origin (geographical areas included India/Asia [14.7%], North America [58.2%], 
Russia [11.2%], and western Europe [12.9%]), and on average, participants had worked at the 
organization for 9.04 ( SD = 8.75) years. Approximately 64.7% of the respondents identified as 
White. Other ethnicities included African American/Black (1.8%), Asian (22.4%), Hispanic/
Latino (5.9%), Native American (1.2%), Pacific Islander (1.2%), and Other (5.3%, including 
Russian and multiethnic). Though we used the matched sample to assess our measures and 
measurement models, we used all available data to assess structural model relationships.
Following survey data collection, two analyses were conducted to determine possible dif -
ferences between Wave 1 and Wave 2 survey respondents. First, t tests were conducted on 
demographic characteristics to determine if sampling bias contributed to differences across 
the two waves of data acquisition. Results indicated no significant differences in age, gender, 
or education. Second, Goodman and Blum’s (1996) approach was followed to determine if 
sampling characteristics contributed to nonrandom bias. Specifically, we used logistic regres -
sion to assess attrition bias because assessing bias on the basis of demographic differences 
alone is insufficient, and it is critical to examine whether respondents also differ on substan -
tive model variables (Goodman & Blum, 1996). We first created a dependent variable distin -
guishing those who completed both surveys from those who completed only the first survey. 
The substantive variables collected in the Wave 1 survey were then regressed onto this 
dependent measure. Results indicated no nonrandom sampling bias; we thus concluded that 
subject attrition would not bias subsequent measurement data analyses.
Measures
The particular items and rating scales associated with each measure are in the appendix.1140 Journal of Management / May 2022
Supportive coaching of boundary spanning (herein labeled as “supportive coaching”).  We 
relied on previous studies assessing supportive-coaching behaviors of encouragement and 
empowerment (e.g., Morgeson, 2005), as well as our discussions and interviews of orga -
nizational personnel, to develop a four-item scale for the purposes of this study that asked 
respondents to rate the extent to which they agreed that their lead encouraged and empowered 
employee engagement in boundary spanning. We also followed prior research supporting the 
use of employee ratings of leader coaching behavior. For instance, Ellinger et  al. (2003) found 
that self-reported ratings of supervisor coaching behaviors were significantly different (higher 
and inflated) than employee ratings of their supervisor’s supportive-coaching behavior. Leader 
self-reported assessments of coaching did not relate to employee attitudes, whereas employee 
ratings were associated with higher job satisfaction and commitment (Thornhill & Saunders, 
1998). Furthermore, though not measuring leader coaching, Karasek’s (1979) landmark study 
of job demands “suggests that self-assessments are a reasonably accurate measure of job deci -
sion latitude.” Because we were interested in employee perceptions of supportive coaching, 
aggregation to the unit level of analysis was not appropriate.
Boundary-spanning self-efficacy.  A previously established six-item scale from Marrone 
et al. (2007) was used to assess the extent to which team members agreed with statements 
regarding their confidence in their ability to effectively carry out and manage boundary-
spanning behaviors. We chose to use this measure for two specific reasons. First, the measure 
we used has been validated in previous boundary-spanning research that found its reliability 
to be .92; also, the measure was predictive of boundary-spanning behavior (Marrone et  al., 
2007). Second, previous research has found that Likert-type and traditional measures of self-
efficacy have similar reliability, predictive validity, factor structures, and discriminability 
and therefore has recommended using Likert-type measures over traditional strength/magni -
tude measures given their superior practicality (Maurer & Pierce, 1998).
Boundary-spanning behavior.  We closely followed Ancona and Caldwell’s (1992) devel -
opment of boundary-spanning items and selected 13 items from their research to assess the 
extent to which team members engaged in various boundary-spanning behaviors aimed at 
establishing and maintaining relationships with key external parties. The wording of some 
items was adjusted to reflect the particular organization in which we collected data. We 
further used their factor-analytic results in order to aggregate items into three a priori indica -
tor variables based on their boundary-spanning character: ambassadorial, scouting, and task 
coordination. The ambassadorial group included five items that reflected both buffering and 
representational activities. The four items composing the scouting group involved scanning 
outside the team for ideas about the competition, market, or relevant technology. Finally, the 
task coordination group included four items that involved coordinating technical or design 
issues with outside groups. Items were averaged to form the three indicator variables.
Job satisfaction.  Survey items for this measure were from the five-item Job Satisfaction 
Relative to Expectations instrument (Bacharach et  al., 1991). The measure assesses the extent 
of agreement between broad satisfaction elements of a job relative to employee expectation. 
Previous results showed negative correlations between scores derived from this measure and 
those from role conflict, role overload, and work–home conflicts (Bacharach et  al., 1991). 1141 Marrone et al. / Boundary-Spanning Behavior
  
A measure comprising a subset of the items also showed strong negative correlations with 
role ambiguity and intent to leave but positive correlations with organizational commitment 
(Conley & You, 2009).
Demographic variables.  We included gender, age, and ethnicity/race as variables in all 
substantive equations. It is possible that females and non-White team members within a 
relatively male- and White-dominated organization and/or younger employees in the orga -
nization would have comparatively less access to resources that support boundary spanning 
than do male, White, or more senior employees. There is strong theory and extant evidence to 
suggest that members of subordinated social identity groups (e.g., women and non-Whites) 
have less access to resources at work and experience greater challenges and lower job satis -
faction, whereas dominant groups (and their members) possess a “disproportionately large 
share of positive social value” (Amis, Mair, & Munir, 2020), such as power and status. Age 
can also afford members with greater power and rewards, and a positive correlation between 
age and job satisfaction has been found in numerous studies in the organizational behavior 
literature (see Lee & Wilbur, 1985; Rhodes, 1983). We measured age in years; we coded 
gender using male = 1 and female = 2. Finally, we asked respondents, “What is your ethnic -
ity/race?” and included seven response options: African American/Black, Asian, Caucasian/
White, Hispanic/Latino, Native American, Pacific Islander, and Other. Given the preponder -
ance of Caucasian/White respondents, we ultimately coded the measure using Caucasian/
White = 1 and all others = 2.
Preliminary Analyses
Table 1 includes means, standard deviations, variable correlations, and reliabilities based 
on the matched sample of usable data (see Table 1).
We evaluated the quality of our measures by first specifying and assessing a latent vari -
able baseline measurement model using maximum-likelihood estimation methods in 
Bentler’s (2007) EQS 6.1 program. Construct items and factor groupings were used as indi -
cators for the latent variables (see Figure 1). Overall model fit was evaluated using χ2/df 
ratio, the comparative fit index (CFI), and the non-normed fit index (NNFI). In addition, the 
standardized root mean square residual (SRMR) as well as the root mean square error of 
approximation (RMSEA) was used to assess model lack of fit. Good model fit can be inferred 
when the χ2/df ratio falls below 3.00, CFI and NNFI values exceed .90, and SRMR and 
RMSEA values are under .10 (Kline, 2005). Measurement parameter estimates were evalu -
ated for significance, and nested-model comparisons were examined using the sequential 
chi-square difference test (we used an alpha of .05 throughout).
Measurement analyses required complete data at the item level, resulting in a sample size 
of 164. The measurement model provided good fit to the data, χ2(129, N = 164) = 210.97, 
p < .001, χ2/df = 1.63, CFI = .97, NNFI = .96, SRMR = .04, RMSEA = .06, and all stan -
dardized factor loadings were significant and ranged from .71 to .96 ( M = .80). To examine 
the construct independence of our measures, we compared the baseline measurement model 
with a series of alternative nested models that constrained theoretically independent con -
structs to be equivalent (see Table 2). First, a single-factor measurement model specifying 
perfect correlation among all model latent variables was specified to assess overall 1142 Journal of Management / May 2022
discriminability. Next, separate tests were conducted to evaluate the conceptual distinction 
between each of the model constructs. These tests consisted of comparing the baseline model 
with models that constrained particular constructs to be equal. The single-factor model used 
to assess overall discriminability (Model 2 in Table 2) poorly accounted for the sample data. 
These results support the multidimensionality of the model being tested. Subsequent sequen -
tial chi-square difference tests showed that constraining combinations of latent variables to 
be equivalent (see Models 3 to 8 in Table 2) produced significantly worse-fitting models 
when compared with the baseline measurement model. Moreover, decreases in model CFI 
indicated a material reduction in model fit for each of the constrained models. These findings 
provide initial support for the quality of our measures.
Additional evidence pertaining to the convergent and discriminant validity of our con -
structs is provided in Table 3. All constructs exceed the .70 recommended composite con -
struct reliability threshold as well as the .50 recommended average variance extracted (A VE) 
threshold (Fornell & Larcker, 1981; Hair, Black, Babin, & Anderson, 2010), further support -
ing the convergent validity of our measures. Moreover, A VE values exceed the maximum 
shared variance and average shared squared variance in all of our model constructs, thereby 
demonstrating their discriminant validity (Hair et  al., 2010). Together, these results attest to 
the psychometric quality of our measures.
We were also concerned about potential method variance effects in our data. We engaged 
in both pre– and post–data collection actions in order to address possible common-method 
bias. Following recommendations by Podsakoff and his colleagues (Podsakoff, MacKenzie, 
Lee, & Podsakoff, 2003; Podsakoff, MacKenzie, & Podsakoff, 2012), we first sought to limit 
potential method bias by following three specific pre–data collection strategies. First, we 
made certain to “eliminate common scale properties” (Podsakoff et  al., 2012: 550) and cre -
ated measures with distinct scale endpoints. Two of our constructs, supportive coaching and 
boundary-spanning self-efficacy, used traditional Likert scales (1 = strongly disagree  to 5 = 
strongly agree ), whereas our other two constructs utilized alternative anchor points (bound -
ary spanning behavior, 1 = a very small extent  to 5 = a very great extent ; job satisfaction, 1 
= very dissatisfied  to 5 = very satisfied ). Next, we worked to ensure the “temporal, proxi -
mal, or psychological separation between predictor and criterion” measures (Podsakoff et  al., Table 1
Variable Means, Standard Deviations, Correlations, and Reliabilities
Variable M SD 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1. Age 41.92 11.11 —  
2. Gender 1.10 0.30 −.12 —  
3. Ethnicity 1.35 0.48 −.12 .00 —  
4. Supportive coaching 3.72 0.69 −.08 −.01 .05 (.88)  
5. Boundary-spanning self-efficacy 3.63 0.82 .12 −.02 −.03 .32**  (.95)  
6. Boundary-spanning behavior 2.62 0.83 −.03 −.13 .18* .19* .35**  (.94)  
7. Job satisfaction 3.27 1.08 .01 −.05 .09 .24** .29** .29** (.88)
Note: N  = 170. Scale reliabilities are along the diagonal in parentheses. Listwise deletion following variable creation.
*p < .05
**p < .011143 Marrone et al. / Boundary-Spanning Behavior
2012: 549). As such, we arranged for proximal separation of our measures by including them 
in distinct surveys and separating them as much as possible within each survey. Finally, we 
made sure to collect our ultimate criterion measure separately from other measures. This Figure 1
Measurement Model Results
 1144 Journal of Management / May 2022
measure, job satisfaction, was included in the second survey, which was administered 
approximately 3 months and 1 week after the first survey that contained two of the model 
predictor measures.
Following data collection, we examined results from three separate analyses in order to 
assess potential method effects. First, we used exploratory factor analysis to determine if 
Harman’s single-factor test would indicate a common-method factor. Results indicated that a 
single factor explained only 38% of the variance, much less than the 50% threshold estab -
lished for the test to indicate a method factor (Podsakoff et  al., 2003). Next, we compared the 
baseline measurement model with a model in which the correlations between model factors 
were specified as equal to unity (i.e., a method factor). As can be seen in Table 2, results from 
this constrained method factor model, χ2(135, N = 164) = 1406.19, p < .001, CFI = .47, 
NNFI = .40, SRMR = .21, RMSEA = .24, along with a subsequent sequential chi-square 
difference test suggested the method factor model was a significantly worse fit relative to the 
original model, Δχ2 (6, N = 164) = 1195.22, p < .001.
Finally, we also assessed potential method effects by specifying an additional method fac -
tor model that included an unmeasured latent-methods factor within our baseline measure -
ment model. We compared our baseline multifactor trait model to the method factor model 
(multifactor trait plus method-effects model). This specification is recommended to assess 
the existence and extent of methods effects (e.g., Podsakoff et al., 2003; Williams, Cote, & 
Buckley, 1989). Importantly, none of the trait measures became insignificant following inclu -
sion of method factor effects. Moreover, the amount of variance accounted for by method Table 2
Indices for Nested Sequence of Measurement Models
Model χ2 df CFI NNFI SRMR RMSEA ∆χ2
1. Baseline 210.97 129 .97 .96 .04 .06 —
2. Single-factor model 1406.19 135 .47 .40 .21 .24 —
3. Equate supportive coaching with efficacy 495.20 132 .84 .82 .11 .13 —
 Difference between Models 1 and 3 — — — — — — 284.23*
4.  Equate supportive coaching with boundary-
spanning behavior468.12 132 .86 .83 .12 .12 —
 Difference between Models 1 and 4 — — — — — — 257.15*
5.  Equate supportive coaching with satisfaction 527.06 132 .83 .81 .13 .14 —
 Difference between Models 1 and 5 — — — — — — 316.09*
6.  Equate efficacy with boundary-spanning 
behavior426.29 132 .87 .85 .10 .12 —
 Difference between Models 1 and 6 — — — — — — 215.32*
7. Equate efficacy with satisfaction 913.3 132 .67 .62 .17 .19 —
 Difference between Models 1 and 7 — — — — — — 702.33*
8.  Equate boundary-spanning behavior with 
satisfaction448.2 132 .86 .84 .11 .12 —
 Difference between Models 1 and 8 — — — — — — 237.23*
Note: N  = 164. CFI = comparative fit index; NNFI = non-normed fit index; SRMR = standardized root mean 
square residual; RMSEA = root mean square error of approximation.
*p < .0011145 Marrone et al. / Boundary-Spanning Behavior
effects was very small—it averaged only 7%. This variance accounted for is less than half the 
amount of method variance in typical behavioral research (Williams et  al., 1989) and com -
pares favorably with method factor variance (11%) found in organizational research (Carlson 
& Kacmar, 2000). Overall, we believe method variance was not a material problem in this 
study based on results from these post–data collection analyses.
Results
To examine substantive relationships, we considered our data using multilevel latent vari -
able structural equation modeling procedures included in Mplus (Muthen & Muthen, 1998-
2017). Two-hundred and fifty-six usable observations were included in these analyses. We 
used the TYPE=COMPLEX analysis in order to take into account the nonindependence of 
observations due to cluster sampling. Because respondents were organized into work groups, 
which may have contributed to systematic bias in our results, we added the effect of the 
group-level work unit into our model.2 The model was assessed based on maximum likeli -
hood estimation using 5,000 bootstrap draws and bias-corrected 95% confidence intervals 
(CIs). Indirect effects were assessed by examining each CI; any interval that ranges from 
negative on the low side to positive on the high side indicates an insignificant indirect effect.
Omnibus model results yielded a good fit to the data, χ2(180, N = 256) = 285.47, p < 
.001, χ2/df = 1.58, CFI = .96, SRMR = .05, RMSEA = .04. Furthermore, individual 
model path estimates depicted in Table 4 and Figure 2 indicate strong support for model 
hypotheses. Specifically, results support Hypothesis 1, in that supportive coaching was 
positively related to boundary-spanning efficacy ( β = .41, SE = .07, p = .000). Results 
further demonstrate support for Hypothesis 2 and the direct effect of boundary-spanning 
self-efficacy on boundary-spanning behavior ( β = .34, SE = .08, p = .000). Results also 
indicate that boundary-spanning behavior was positively related to job satisfaction ( β = 
.21, SE = .10, p = .039) providing support for Hypothesis 3. Importantly, the direct effect 
of supportive coaching on job satisfaction was insignificant ( β = .10, SE = .10, p = .351). 
Overall, the proposed model predictors explained 15% of the variance in job satisfaction 
(R2 = .15, SE = .07, p = .019).Table 3
Latent Variable Psychometric Quality and Correlations
VariableIntraconstruct Reliability Correlations
CR CR AVE MSV 1 2 3 4
1. Supportive coaching .87 .87 .63 .12 — — — —
2. Boundary-spanning self-efficacy .95 .95 .78 .14 .36* — — —
3. Job satisfaction .94 .94 .76 .12 .24* .32* — —
4. Boundary-spanning behavior .87 .87 .70 .14 .24* .39* .35* —
Note: N  = 164. CR = construct reliability; AVE = average variance explained; MSV = maximum shared squared 
variance; ASV = average squared variance.
*p < .051146 Journal of Management / May 2022
Table 4 also includes results related to indirect model pathways and Hypothesis 4. Hypothesis 
4 stated that supportive coaching would indirectly effect job satisfaction through boundary-
spanning self-efficacy and boundary-spanning behavior. As shown in Table 4, supportive 
coaching was positively associated with boundary-spanning self-efficacy, which was related to 
boundary-spanning behavior, which was subsequently related to job satisfaction. The indirect 
effect of supportive coaching on job satisfaction through boundary-spanning self-efficacy and Table 4
Path Coefficients and Indirect Effects
VariablePath Coefficients Indirect Effects
To JS To BSEFF To BSB EstimateBias-Corrected 
Bootstrap 95% 
Confidence Interval
From
 SC .10 (.10) .41 (.07) .10 (.09) —  
 BSEFF .20 (.11) - .34 (.08) —  
 BSB .21 (.10) — — —  
Total indirect effect — — — .13 (.05) [.05, .21]
Indirect effects
 SC → BSEFF → JSat — — — .08 (.05) [.01, .16]
 SC → BSB → JSat — — — .02 (.02) [−.01, .06]
 SC → BSEFF → BSB → JSat — — — .03 (.02) [.00, .06]
Direct effect
 SC → JSat — — — .10 (.10) [−.07, .27]
Total effect
 SC → JSat — — —  .23 (.09) [.08, .36]
Note: N  = 256. Standard errors shown in parentheses. SC = supportive coaching; BSEFF = boundary-spanning 
self-efficacy; BSB = boundary-spanning behavior; JSat = job satisfaction.
Figure 2
Mediation Model Results
Note: N  = 256. * p = .039; ** p < .001.1147 Marrone et al. / Boundary-Spanning Behavior
boundary-spanning behavior was significant ( β = .03, 95% CI [.00, .06]), thereby supporting 
serial mediation. Moreover, the insignificant direct effect of supportive coaching on job satis -
faction (β = .10, 95% CI [−.07, .27]) indicates that including the two mediators in the model 
eliminates the direct effect of supportive coaching on job satisfaction. These findings demon -
strate support for Hypothesis 4 and the proposed indirect effects specified in the model.
Though not hypothesized here, results in Table 4 also can be used to examine simple indi -
rect pathways included in the model. In particular, the pathway from supportive coaching to 
job satisfaction via boundary-spanning self-efficacy yielded a significant indirect effect ( β = 
.08, 95% CI [.01, .16]). However, the pathway from supportive coaching to job satisfaction 
via boundary-spanning behavior yielded an insignificant indirect effect ( β = .02, 95% CI 
[−.01, .06]). Together with the results pertaining to model hypotheses, these results attest to 
the strong influence of efficacy perceptions on subsequent outcomes.
Discussion
The outcome of the indirect-effects model tested here indicates that team leader support -
ive coaching of boundary spanning positively relates to boundary-spanning self-efficacy 
among team members. This, in turn, relates to greater team members’ engagement in bound -
ary-spanning behaviors, which positively relates to their job satisfaction. Through their 
boundary-spanning behavior, team members initiate and manage relationships with the 
team’s clients and external suppliers, coordinate efforts with mutually interdependent work 
teams also inside the organization, and seek out feedback and resources from external sub -
ject-matter experts so that work tasks both within and across multiple teams can be accom -
plished effectively and efficiently (Ancona & Caldwell, 1992). While prior research to date 
has examined a range of beneficial outcomes associated with boundary spanning for teams 
and organizations, the calls for greater attention to the drivers of these important behaviors 
(e.g., de Vries, Walter, Van der Vegt, & Essens, 2014; Joshi et  al., 2009; Marrone, 2010) are 
important to answer. Engagement in these behaviors is challenging for individuals, and some 
evidence suggests that individual motivation to carry out boundary spanning for one’s team 
and/or organization varies (see Marrone et  al., 2007) and may be low for at least some team 
members (e.g., Lanaj & Hollenbeck, 2015). Traditionally, boundary spanning was viewed as 
the responsibility and authority of organizational leadership (e.g., Aldrich & Herker, 1977; 
Katz & Kahn, 1978), and scholars have made notable strides toward understanding the 
actions and decisions taken by leaders regarding their own boundary-spanning roles and 
behaviors (e.g., Druskat & Wheeler, 2004; Ernst & Chrobot-Mason, 2011).
Yet this prior research is missing a critical element present in modern organizational 
designs: The responsibility for boundary spanning in many areas of the organization is 
increasingly moving to team members and first-line employees (Ancona & Bresman, 2007; 
Cross et al., 2000). A new and timely theoretical question has thus emerged: How can team 
leaders influence and motivate team members to carry out important boundary-spanning 
tasks for their teams? Our study findings suggest a compelling two-part answer. First, tar -
geted supportive-coaching behaviors by team leaders relate to team members’ boundary-
spanning capabilities independently from the team leader. Second, when more capable (i.e., 
more efficacious) team members engage in greater boundary-spanning behaviors as a result 
of their leaders’ supportive-coaching behaviors and motivational influence, team members 1148 Journal of Management / May 2022
  
also increase their job satisfaction. Our findings have theoretical extensions and implications 
for teams coaching and boundary-spanning research.
Theoretical Implications
First, the teams coaching literature in the organizational behavior domain has largely 
ignored the impact of supportive-coaching behaviors on team member interactions between 
or across work teams. Instead, extant studies of a team leader’s supportive-coaching behav -
iors have overwhelmingly focused on factors internal to the team’s boundary, such as team 
member shared leadership (Carson et  al., 2007), voice within the team (Farh & Chen, 2018), 
team commitment (Weer et  al., 2016), and team innovation (Rousseau et  al., 2013). This 
internally oriented focus is significant and remains despite that team external relationships 
are essential to the effectiveness of today’s complex and highly interdependent organizations 
(see Ancona, Backman, & Isaacs, 2019). This study thus extends the focus to the relationship 
between leader supportive-coaching behaviors and team member efforts to engage effec -
tively across team boundaries.
Second, by clarifying and validating the effect of team leader supportive-coaching behav -
iors on team member boundary-spanning capabilities, we offer much needed theoretical clar -
ity around the effective leadership of externally dependent work teams. The extant 
boundary-spanning research examining a team leader’s influence on team member bound -
ary-spanning behavior was reviewed a decade ago by Marrone (2010). She found evidence 
for the influence of directive leadership approaches on driving team member boundary-span -
ning actions in early foundational work by Ancona (1990) and Ancona and Caldwell (1992) 
and limited, mixed findings relating to supportive team leadership approaches in later work. 
Three studies emerged; two found that supportive-coaching behaviors positively influenced 
teams to actively coordinate or communicate with other work groups (Edmondson, 2003; 
Tesluk & Mathieu, 1999), while the other found insignificant or negative effects of support -
ive-coaching behaviors on cross-boundary actions and building relationships with other 
teams (Druskat & Kayes, 1999). These studies relied on generic assessments of supportive-
coaching behaviors, however, rather than a boundary spanning-specific assessment, as we 
have done here. The specificity of our four-item scale measuring supportive coaching of 
boundary spanning is an important contribution to future research, as more global/general -
ized assessments may not have the ability to detect finer-grained theoretical mechanisms 
underlying the boundary-spanning phenomenon.
Third, our findings that supportive-coaching behaviors relate to team member boundary-
spanning behavior through an essential motivational mechanism—increased team member 
beliefs in their boundary-spanning capabilities (i.e., boundary-spanning self-efficacy; 
Marrone et  al., 2007)—integrates the broader managerial coaching literature and the bound-
ary-spanning literature at a level of detail that has previously been largely neglected in both 
literatures. Specifying and testing the underlying motivational mechanism answers recent 
calls for greater theoretical understanding of both (a) the antecedents to team member bound -
ary-spanning behavior as noted earlier (e.g., Joshi et  al., 2009; Marrone, 2010) and (b) the 
specific psychological mechanisms through which ongoing and managerial coaching behav -
iors lead to valued outcomes (e.g., Dahling et  al., 2016). Our findings support the notion that 
supportive coaching can be a potent source of verbal persuasion regarding team member 1149 Marrone et al. / Boundary-Spanning Behavior
  
capabilities in boundary spanning that motivates them to engage in greater levels of these 
important activities for their teams and perhaps persist longer in challenging boundary-span -
ning tasks. These findings complement other work highlighting the role of self-efficacy for 
explaining the motivational influence of supportive (facilitation-based) coaching in particu -
lar, as opposed to more active (guidance) coaching (see Hui & Sue-Chan, 2018), and may 
help to advance a more unified theory of the mechanisms through which supportive-coaching 
behaviors relate to productive team member behaviors and positive job attitudes.
Additionally, the question of whether boundary spanning creates role stress at the indi -
vidual level for team members has been an issue in prior boundary-spanning literature (e.g., 
Marrone et  al., 2007; Singh et  al., 1994). The results of this study suggest that as team leaders 
send strong signals through supportive-coaching behaviors that boundary spanning is valued 
and worthwhile and give latitude to team members to engage in boundary-spanning tasks as 
they deem fit, team members may also see an increase in positive attitudinal outcomes at the 
individual level (i.e., higher job satisfaction), even as they exhibit higher levels of boundary-
spanning behavior. Notably, we collected data on boundary-spanning behavior and job satis -
faction on the same (i.e., second) survey; while we have good theoretical reason to believe 
that higher levels of boundary-spanning behavior occur when team members have higher 
levels of boundary-spanning self-efficacy, as we hypothesized, we cannot rule out the pos -
sibility that higher job satisfaction may also lead to higher levels of boundary-spanning 
behavior. In line with other models of job satisfaction (e.g., Locke, 1970), however, we view 
the concept of satisfaction as a function of performance leading to valued outcomes that are 
satisfying to individuals, suggesting that boundary-spanning behavior drives job satisfaction. 
Our findings provide an additional window into the potentially compelling influence of sup -
portive team coaching behaviors on skill-based and affective outcomes of team members.
Finally, a growing number of studies have delineated facilitative (supportive) from direc -
tive (active) coaching (in the latter, leaders directly intervene in team members’ taskwork and 
problem solving) and suggest the distinction is essential yet often overlooked in studies of 
coaching (e.g., Carson et  al., 2007; Hui & Sue-Chan, 2018; Ibarra & Scoular, 2019; Morgeson, 
2005; Wageman, 2001). We drew upon this work when conceptualizing and assessing sup -
portive coaching as a set of behaviors that reinforce team members’ capabilities to carry out 
boundary spanning. We further specified that the combination of encouragement and respon -
sibility is vital as it both guides members toward engagement in productive boundary-span -
ning tasks and empowers members with the authority and control to carry out these actions 
independently from their leader. Our attention on supportive-coaching behaviors per se and 
not on active coaching may help to answer calls in the managerial coaching literature to 
clarify varying coaching dimensions or types and achieve greater consensus as to what 
behaviors constitute coaching (see Dahling et  al., 2016; Ellinger, 2013).
Practical Implications
One implication of our findings is that they offer organizational leaders a deeper and 
broader understanding of the benefits of team leader supportive coaching behaviors. In busi -
ness environments increasingly characterized by rapid change and disruption, managers are 
expected to adopt “coachlike” approaches to their employees that encourage innovation, 
build commitment, and signal investment in human resources (e.g., Ibarra & Scoular, 2019). 1150 Journal of Management / May 2022
  
New organizational designs rely on the competencies and self-directed behaviors of the orga -
nization’s actors, as opposed to hierarchical control, to bring about the cross-boundary coor -
dination and communication activity needed for organizational success (Fjeldstad, Snow, 
Miles, & Lettl, 2012). That is, meeting organizational objectives increasingly requires that 
those closest to the work take initiative to promote their team’s progress to upper manage -
ment, secure and exchange needed resources from other units, anticipate environmental 
changes, and coordinate interdependencies with other work groups. This study indicates that 
team leaders can employ supportive-coaching behaviors to respond to these organizational 
needs by reinforcing the capabilities of employees at the lowest levels in the organization to 
self-organize and to accumulate and share resources directly with multiple external parties 
who reside across group and organizational boundaries. Moreover, leaders should recognize 
the primary motivational role of boundary-spanning self-efficacy and apply our findings to 
tailor their leadership approach and its effect on team member motivation.
Our research also implies that organizations should allow team leaders sufficient latitude 
to exhibit supportive-coaching behaviors. Encouraging and empowering team members to 
carry out boundary-spanning tasks independently from the team leader may be challenging 
for team leaders who have been enculturated to believe that more directive leadership 
approaches are most effective (see Ancona et  al., 2019, for a discussion). If organizations do 
not work to create a culture and support structure that value empowerment (Ancona et  al., 
2019; Rapp, Gilson, Mathieu, & Ruddy, 2016), leaders who demonstrate empowerment and 
encouragement of boundary spanning may be seen by other leaders, and potentially by their 
own team members, as lacking leadership qualities or competence. This may be particularly 
true for women team leaders (see Marrone et al., 2018). Our results could help to build orga -
nizational cultures valuing supportive coaching by underscoring the importance of these 
behaviors as a potent dimension of team coaching and clarifying its unique motivational 
influence on the boundary spanning of team members who are facing tasks that likely require 
expertise and resources outside their own personal skill sets. Moreover, that team members 
would exhibit higher levels of boundary-spanning behavior—and feel more satisfied with 
their jobs in the process—is compelling evidence that organizations should take a strategic 
interest in developing supportive-coaching capabilities (Ibarra & Scoular, 2019). Equipped 
with the knowledge of this study’s results, team members themselves may be better able to 
advocate for leaders who exhibit greater supportive-coaching behaviors of boundary span -
ning for their team or other teams, thus also strengthening the organizational culture’s values 
around supportive coaching.
Limitations and Future Research
There are limitations of the present study. First, while our model proposes serial media -
tion, we collected data at just two points in time. As we noted earlier, we did so in order to 
manage the organization’s concerns about survey length and mitigate common-method bias 
(especially important when collecting data examining leader behaviors and outcome vari -
ables, as noted by Podsakoff et  al., 2012). We did not collect data on the four substantive 
variables in our study at multiple points in time (i.e., our research was not longitudinal); thus 
we cannot make causal inferences relative to our results. Moreover, the research design of 
this study was not experimental or quasiexperimental; as a result, the causal nature that is 1151 Marrone et al. / Boundary-Spanning Behavior
suggested in our theoretical model cannot be validated with the existing data set. Future 
research that is longitudinal and experimental and/or quasiexperimental in a lab or field set -
ting with the same concepts collected at multiple points in time so as to track changes after 
establishing supportive coaching for boundary spanning is necessary in order to provide 
further support for the causality of the results described here. In addition, future research, 
such as a panel design, might be able to capture variable relationships (i.e., cross-lagged and 
autoregressive effects) that we are not able to assess in the current study.
Second, our use of same-source data collection, despite the fact that we collected data at 
two points in time, may have led to method bias in our results. Our results across three sepa -
rate tests, however, did not indicate that method bias was a material problem in this study. 
Future research should consider incorporating behavioral measures of boundary spanning 
(e.g., the number of meetings on a given employee’s calendar with outside departments or 
parties) or team member ratings of their peers’ boundary-spanning behaviors as another way 
to avoid common-method bias.
Third, there are current design limitations specifically around the consideration of bound -
ary-spanning self-efficacy. In particular, Lord, Diefendorff, Schmidt, and Hall (2010) called 
for more empirical work on self-efficacy to be conducted at the within-person level. Future 
research might consider how supportive coaching helps to develop within-person boundary-
spanning self-efficacy, behaviors, and job satisfaction in a dynamic way that unfolds over 
time. That is, studies might be designed to collect data on the same concepts at multiple time 
points and use an analytical technique that focuses on the analysis of change over time (e.g., 
longitudinal growth modeling; Ployhart & Vandenberg, 2010). Furthermore, while our mea -
sure of boundary-spanning self-efficacy is consistent with measures utilized in management 
and applied psychology fields, designed for working professionals who may have limited 
time to complete a survey with longer instruments (see Maurer & Pierce, 1998), future 
research should consider additional measurement approaches to further validate our findings. 
In particular, researchers could consider potential benefits of an alternative boundary-span -
ning self-efficacy measure aligned with traditional approaches that use a 100-point, 10-unit 
interval scale and compute composite measures of strength and magnitude (see Bandura, 
2006; Lee & Bobko, 1994).
Last, some prior examinations of boundary-spanning behavior in teams have considered 
the concept at the team level rather than at the individual level (e.g., Marrone et  al., 2007, 
who utilized aggregated team member ratings of boundary spanning). The theoretical empha -
sis of this research, however, is at the individual level, as we examine how supportive coach -
ing might motivate individual team members to exhibit more boundary-spanning behaviors 
and how that might influence their individual job satisfaction. Also, unlike the teams studied 
in Marrone et  al. (2007) and other prior research (e.g., Ancona, 1990; Faraj & Yan, 2009), the 
work units in this study were larger in size and not fully colocated, and some members were 
part of multiple teams concurrently. It was therefore difficult, if not impossible, for cowork -
ers to observe and assess accurately the extent of each other’s boundary spanning or bound -
ary spanning at the team level. Hierarchical linear modeling analysis and our primary Mplus 
analysis results revealed that our data did not appear to be biased due to between-group vari -
ance, suggesting that it was appropriate to test hypotheses at the individual level.3
Moving forward, because our study is among the first to demonstrate the importance of 
supportive coaching by team leaders regarding a specific task—boundary spanning—our 1152 Journal of Management / May 2022
findings suggest that more theoretical development linking the influence of team leader 
coaching behaviors to team processes and outcomes could be an important future avenue for 
research. We see promise in work that explores if certain types of coaching may be more 
relevant for certain developmental stages of a given team’s life span. Additionally, team 
leader supportive coaching behavior may help teams build collective efficacy, or the team’s 
belief that it can effectively handle certain tasks (e.g., Bandura, 2000; Stajkovic, Lee, & 
Nyberg, 2009). Transformational leadership, vision, and shared leadership are all positively 
related to higher levels of collective efficacy (e.g., Fiset & Boies, 2019; Nicolaides et  al., 
2014; Wang & Howell, 2012); future research could examine whether supportive-coaching 
behavior influences collective efficacy and whether this could affect other important team 
processes and outcomes, such as team boundary spanning and performance.
Finally, while it was outside the scope of this article to examine the drivers of respondents’ 
perceptions of team membership boundaries, future studies might explore the role that a sup -
portive team coach of boundary spanning might play in encouraging team members to reflect 
upon their perceptions of team boundaries and to increase awareness that perceptions may 
differ from others inside or outside the team. Wimmer, Backmann, and Hoegl (2019), for 
example, argued members’ perceptions of team boundaries are likely to vary in relation to 
individual-level attention and social categorization processes and that such variation should 
be welcomed (see also Mortensen & Haas, 2018).
Conclusion
The idea that team leader supportive-coaching behaviors as they relate to boundary span -
ning specifically may provide a necessary support to help team members navigate increas -
ingly ambiguous and uncertain work-role requirements is a powerful one for organizations. 
We hope this research has provided additional insight linking supportive-coaching behaviors 
that encourage boundary-spanning activities, boundary-spanning behaviors themselves, and 
job satisfaction within an organization that is experiencing the realities of highly technical, 
complex, cross-functional, and fluid work requirements (e.g., Hackman, 2012; Okhuysen, 
Lepak, Lee Ashcraft, Labianca, Smith, & Steensma, 2015).
Appendix
Survey Items Used in Study
Company and group area identifiers have been replaced with “###.”
Supportive coaching.  Please indicate the extent to which you agree with the following 
statements in reference to your team’s lead. Our lead . . .
 1. . . . encourages us to engage in an open and honest information exchange with important exter -
nal parties (such as customers, design suppliers, upper management, external technical experts, 
and other engineering and/or project teams within and outside of ###).
 2. . . . promotes frequent collaboration with important external parties.
 3. . . . grants my team members the autonomy to initiate contact with important external parties 
when I deem it is necessary to do so.1153 Marrone et al. / Boundary-Spanning Behavior
 4. . . . grants my team members the authority to make decisions about when to accommodate 
external party requests and when to “push back.”
(Responses on this scale ranged from 1 = strongly disagree  to 5 = strongly agree .)
Boundary-spanning self-efficacy.  Based on my past experiences working on various proj -
ect and/or engineering teams thus far at ###, I feel very confident . . .
 1. . . . being an advocate for my team to important external parties outside my team (such as cli -
ents, suppliers, upper management, external technical experts, and other engineering and/or 
project teams within and outside of ###) if necessary.
 2. . . . soliciting feedback for my team from relevant external parties.
 3. . . . representing my team to external parties as we discuss project business.
 4. . . . initiating contact with persons outside of the team to discuss team-related problems.
 5. . . . maintaining external relationships that might be helpful to my team.
 6. . . . establishing connections with those outside the team that can provide the team with guid -
ance/support.
(Responses on this scale ranged from 1 = strongly disagree  to 5 = strongly agree .)
Boundary-spanning behavior.  Please indicate to what extent you personally engage in 
the following behaviors with respect to your team’s project.
Ambassadorial
 1. Preventing outsiders from “overloading” the team with too much information or too many 
requests.
 2. “Talking up”/promoting the team to outsiders.
 3. Persuading others to support the team’s decisions.
 4. Acquiring resources (e.g., access to information, supplies, etc.) for the team.
 5. Proactively seeking the advice and support of your team’s manager.
Scouting
 6. Reaching out to individuals outside your team that can provide technical ideas/expertise.
 7. Scanning the environment inside or outside the organization for technical ideas/expertise.
 8. Scanning the environment inside or outside the organization for process ideas/expertise.
 9. Finding out what other groups are doing on similar projects.
Task coordination
10. Keeping other groups inside or outside of ### informed of your team’s progress.
11. Negotiating with outside groups for delivery deadlines.
12. Resolving design problems with external groups.
13. Coordinating activities with external groups inside or outside ###.
(Responses on this scale ranged from 1 = to a very small extent  to 5 = to a great extent .)1154 Journal of Management / May 2022
Job satisfaction.  At the present time, how satisfied or dissatisfied are you with . . .
 1. . . . the progress you are making towards the goals you set for yourself in your present position 
at ###?
 2. . . . your present job in light of your career expectations?
 3. . . . your present job when you compare it to jobs in other organizations?
 4. . . . the chance your job gives you to do what you are best at?
 5. . . . your present job when you consider the expectations you had when you took the job?
(Responses on this scale ranged from 1 = very dissatisfied  to 5 = very satisfied .)
ORCID iDs
Jennifer A. Marrone  https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1969-8990
Narda R. Quigley  https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1302-3140
Notes
1. Prior to surveying team members, we conducted semistructured interviews with 18 managers and lead 
engineers in order to better understand the nature of their work and organizational structure and to ensure that 
previously established measures of boundary-spanning behavior and self-efficacy were appropriate for this organi -
zational context. We learned team members were organized into functional areas similar to large working units or 
departmental groups (average reported size was 19.1 members). Interview responses also confirmed that boundary-
spanning behavior by team members was desired and valued within the organization yet varied between individuals, 
resulting in organizational management wanting to understand further the sources of such variance. Noted bound -
ary-spanning activities followed earlier boundary-spanning research and included collaborations, negotiations, and 
transfer of knowledge among multiple and distinct groups of engineering employees, manufacturing employees, and 
external supplier organizations striving to work collaboratively in designing and manufacturing the lead organiza -
tion’s products.
2. We thank an anonymous reviewer for this suggestion.
3. We used hierarchical linear modeling (Raudenbush & Bryk, 2001) to additionally assess if nonindepen -
dence was likely to be problematic for interpreting our results. The null model indicated that no significant variance 
in our dependent variable, job satisfaction, existed across work units, that is, χ2(79) = 95.04, p = .106, and one-way 
ANOV A tests of all substantive variables also yielded nonsignificant results.
References
Aldrich, H., & Herker, D. 1977. Boundary spanning roles and organization structure. Academy of Management 
Review , 2: 217-230.
Amis, J. M., Mair, J., & Munir, K. A. 2020. The organizational reproduction of inequality. Academy of Management 
Annals , 14: 195-230.
Ancona, D., Backman, E., & Isaacs, K. 2019. Nimble leadership. Harvard Business Review , July: 74-83.
Ancona, D. G. 1990. Outward bound: Strategies for team survival in an organization. Academy of Management 
Review , 33: 334-365.
Ancona, D. G., & Bresman, H. T. 2007. X-teams: How to build teams that lead, innovate, and succeed . Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard Business Press.
Ancona, D. G., & Caldwell, D. F. 1988. Beyond task and maintenance: Defining external functions in groups. Group 
and Organization Studies , 13: 468-494.
Ancona, D. G., & Caldwell, D. F. 1992. Bridging the boundary: External activity and performance in organizational 
teams. Administrative Science Quarterly , 37: 634-665.1155 Marrone et al. / Boundary-Spanning Behavior
Arnold, J. A., Arad, S., Rhoades, J. A., & Drasgow, F. 2000. The empowering leadership questionnaire: The con -
struction and validation of a new scale for measuring leader behaviors. Journal of Organizational Behavior , 
21: 249-269.
Bacharach, S. B., Bamberger, P., & Conley, S. 1991. Work-home conflict among nurses and engineers: Mediating 
the impact of role stress on burnout and satisfaction at work. Journal of Organizational Behavior , 12: 39-53.
Bandura, A. 1986. Social foundations of thoughts and actions: A social cognitive theory . Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice Hall.
Bandura, A. 1997. Self-efficacy: The exercise of control . New York: W. H. Freeman.
Bandura, A. 2000. Exercise of human agency through collective efficacy. Current Directions in Psychological 
Science , 9: 75-78.
Bandura, A. 2006. Guide for constructing self-efficacy scales. In F. Pajares & T. Urdan (Eds.), Self-efficacy beliefs 
of adolescents : 307-337. Greenwich, CT: Information Age.
Bandura, A. 2012. On the functional properties of perceived self-efficacy revisited. Journal of Management , 38: 
9-44.
Benoliel, P., & Somech, A. 2015. The role of leader boundary activities in enhancing interdisciplinary team effec -
tiveness. Small Group Research , 46: 83-124.
Bentler, P. 2007. EQS 6.1 for Windows . Encino, CA: Multivariate Software.
Bouffard-Bouchard, T. 1990. Influence of self-efficacy on performance in a cognitive task. Journal of Social 
Psychology , 130: 353-363.
Boyer, D. A., Zollo, J. S., Thompson, C. M., Vancouver, J. B., Shewring, K., & Sims, E. 2000. A quantitative review 
of the effects of manipulate self-efficacy on performance . Poster session presented at the annual meeting of the 
American Psychological Society, Miami, FL.
Buljac-Samardzic, M., & van Woerkom, M. 2015. Can managers coach their teams too much? Journal of Managerial 
Psychology , 30: 280-296.
Burke, C. S., Stagl, K. C., Klein, C., Goodwin, G. F., Salas, E., & Halpin, S. M. 2006. What type of leadership 
behaviors are functional in teams? A meta-analysis. Leadership Quarterly , 17: 288-307.
Carlson, D. S., & Kacmar, K. M. 2000. Work-family conflict in the organization: Do life role values make a differ -
ence? Journal of Management , 26: 1031-1054.
Carson, J. B., Tesluk, P. E., & Marrone, J. A. 2007. Shared leadership in teams: An investigation of antecedent 
conditions and performance. Academy of Management Journal , 50: 1217-1234.
Conley, S., & You, S. 2009. Teacher role stress, satisfaction, commitment, and intentions to leave: A structural 
model. Psychological Reports , 105: 771-786.
Cross, R. L., Yan, A., & Louis, M. R. 2000. Boundary activities in “boundaryless” organizations: A case study of a 
transformation to a team-based structure. Human Relations , 53: 841-868.
Dahling, J. J., Taylor, S. R., Chau, S. L., & Dwight, S. A. 2016. Does coaching matter? A multilevel model linking 
managerial coaching skill and frequency to sales goal attainment. Personnel Psychology , 69: 863-894.
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. 2000. The “what” and “why” of goal pursuits: Human needs and the self-determination 
of behavior. Psychological Inquiry , 11: 227-268.
de Vries, T. A., Walter, F., Van der Vegt, G. S., & Essens, P. J. M. D. 2014. Antecedents of individuals’ interteam 
coordination: Broad functional experiences as a mixed blessing. Academy of Management Journal , 57: 1334.
Druskat, V. U., & Kayes, D. C. 1999. The antecedents of team competence: Toward a fine-grained model of self- 
management team effectiveness. Research in Managing Groups and Teams , 3: 201-231.
Druskat, V. U., & Wheeler, J. V. 2004. How to lead a self-managing team. MIT Sloan Management Review , 
Summer: 65-71. 
Edmondson, A. 2003. Speaking up in the operating room: How team leaders promote learning in interdisciplinary 
actions teams. Journal of Management Studies , 40: 1420-1452.
Ellinger, A. D. 2013. Supportive supervisors and managerial coaching: Exploring their intersections. Journal of 
Occupational and Organizational Psychology , 86: 310-316.
Ellinger, A. D., Ellinger, A. E., & Keller, S. B. 2003. Supervisory coaching behavior, employee satisfaction, 
and warehouse employee performance: A dyadic perspective in the distribution industry. Human Resource 
Development Quarterly , 14: 435-458.
Ernst, C., & Chrobot-Mason, D. 2011. Boundary spanning leadership: Six practices for solving problems, driving 
innovation, and transforming organizations . New York: McGraw-Hill.
Faraj, S., & Yan, A. 2009. Boundary work in knowledge teams. Journal of Applied Psychology , 94: 604-617.1156 Journal of Management / May 2022
  
Farh, C. I. C., & Chen, G. 2018. Leadership and member voice in action teams: Test of a dynamic phase model. 
Journal of Applied Psychology , 103: 97-110.
Fiset, J., & Boies, K. 2019. Positively vivid visions: Making followers feel capable and happy. Human Relations , 
72: 1651-1670.
Fjeldstad, Ø. D., Snow, C. C., Miles, R. E., & Lettl, C. 2012. The architecture of collaboration. Strategic Management 
Journal , 33: 734-750.
Fornell, C., & Larcker, D. F. 1981. Evaluating structural equation models with unobservable variables and measure -
ment error. Journal of Marketing Research , 18: 39-50.
Friedlander, F. 1987. The ecology of work groups. In J. Lorsch (Ed.), Handbook of organizational behavior : 301-
314. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Gladstein, D. L. 1984. Groups in context. Administrative Science Quarterly , 29: 499-517.
Goodman, J. S., & Blum, T. C. 1996. Assessing the non-random sampling effects of subject attrition in longitudinal 
research. Journal of Management , 22: 627-652.
Hackman, J. R. 2002. Leading teams: Setting the stage for great performances . Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business 
Press.
Hackman, J. R. 2012. From causes to conditions in group research. Journal of Organizational Behavior , 33: 428-
444.
Hackman, J. R., & Wageman, R. 2005. A theory of team coaching. Academy of Management Review , 30: 269-287.
Hair, J. F., Black, W. C., Babin, B. J., & Anderson, R. E. 2010. Multivariate data analysis: A global perspective  (7th 
ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Hallenbeck, G. S., Jr., Hautaluoma, J. E., & Bates, S. C. 1999. The benefits of multiple boundary spanning roles in 
purchasing. Journal of Supply Chain Management , 35: 38-43.
Hardy, J. H., Day, E. A., & Steele, L. M. 2019. Interrelationships among self-regulated learning processes: Toward 
a dynamic model of self-regulated learning. Journal of Management , 45: 3146-3177.
Hargadon, A. B. 1998. Firms as knowledge brokers: Lessons in pursing continuous innovation. California 
Management Review , 40: 209-227.
Hobfoll, S. E. 1989. Conservation of resources: A new attempt at conceptualizing stress. American Psychologist , 
44: 513.
Hui, R. T., & Sue-Chan, C. 2018. Variations in coaching style and their impact on subordinates’ work outcomes. 
Journal of Organizational Behavior , 39: 663-679.
Ibarra, H., & Scoular, A. 2019. The leader as coach. Harvard Business Review , November-December: 111-119.
Joshi, A., Pandey, N., & Han, G. 2009. Bracketing team boundary spanning: An examination of task-based, team-
level, and contextual antecedents. Journal of Organizational Behavior , 30: 731-759.
Judge, T. A., Thoresen, C. J., Bono, J. E., & Patton, G. K. 2001. The job satisfaction–job performance relationship: 
A qualitative and quantitative review. Psychological Bulletin , 127: 376-407.
Karasek, R. A., Jr., 1979. Job demands, job decision latitude, and mental strain: Implications for job redesign. 
Administrative Science Quarterly , 24: 285-308.
Katz, D., & Kahn, R. L. 1978. The social psychology of organizations . New York: Wiley.
Keller, R. T. 1978. Boundary-spanning activity, role dynamics, and job satisfaction: A longitudinal study. Journal 
of Business Research , 6: 147-158.
Keller, R. T., & Holland, W. E. 1975. Boundary-spanning roles in a research and development organization: An 
empirical investigation. Academy of Management Journal , 18: 388-393.
Kline, R. B. 2005. Principles and practice of structural equation modeling . New York: Guilford Press.
Lanaj, K., & Hollenbeck, J. R. 2015. Leadership over-emergence in self-managing teams: The role of gender and 
countervailing biases. Academy of Management Journal , 58: 1476-1494.
Lee, C., & Bobko, P. 1994. Self-efficacy beliefs: Comparison of five measures. Journal of Applied Psychology , 79: 
364-369.
Lee, R., & Wilbur, E. R. 1985. Age, education, job tenure, salary, job characteristics, and job satisfaction: A multi-
variate analysis. Human Relations , 38: 781-791.
Leifer, R., & Delbecq, A. 1978. Organizational/environmental interchange: A model of boundary spanning activity. 
Academy of Management Review , 3: 40-50.
Liu, C. Y., Pirola-Merlo, A., Yang, C. A., & Huang, C. 2009. Disseminating the functions of team coaching regard -
ing research and development team effectiveness: Evidence from high-tech industries in Taiwan. Social 
Behavior and Personality: An International Journal , 37: 41-57.1157 Marrone et al. / Boundary-Spanning Behavior
Locke, E. A. 1970. Job satisfaction and job performance: A theoretical analysis. Organizational Behavior and 
Human Performance , 5: 484-500.
Locke, E. A. 1976. The nature and causes of job satisfaction. In M. D. Dunnette (Ed.), Handbook of industrial and 
organizational psychology : 1297-1340. Chicago: Rand McNally.
Lord, R., Diefendorff, J., Schmidt, A., & Hall, R. 2010. Self-regulation at work. Annual Review of Psychology , 61: 
543-568.
Lorenzoni, G., & Lipparini, A. 1999. The leveraging of interfirm relationships as a distinctive organizational capa -
bility: A longitudinal study. Strategic Management Journal , 20: 317-338.
Manz, C. C., & Sims, H. P., Jr. 1987. Leading workers to lead themselves: The external leadership of self-managing 
work teams. Administrative Science Quarterly , 32: 106-130.
Marrone, J. A. 2010. Team boundary spanning: A multilevel review of past research and proposals for the future. 
Journal of Management , 36: 911-940.
Marrone, J. A., Ferraro, H. S., & Huston, T. 2018. A theoretical approach to female team leaders’ boundary work 
choices. Group & Organization Management , 43: 825-856.
Marrone, J. A., Tesluk, P. E., & Carson, J. B. 2007. A multi-level investigation of antecedents and consequences of 
team member boundary spanning behavior. Academy of Management Journal , 50: 1423-1439.
Maurer, T. J., & Pierce, H. R. 1998. A comparison of Likert scale and traditional measures of self-efficacy. Journal 
of Applied Psychology , 83: 324-329.
Mitchell, T. R., & Daniels, D. 2003. Motivation. In W. C. Borman, D. R. Ilgen, & R. J. Klimoski (Eds.), Handbook 
of psychology: Industrial and organizational psychology , Vol. 12: 225-254. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Morgeson, F. P. 2005. The external leadership of self-managing teams: Intervening in the context of novel and 
disruptive events. Journal of Applied Psychology , 90: 497-508.
Morgeson, F. P., DeRue, D. S., & Karam, E. P. 2010. Leadership in teams: A functional approach to understanding 
leadership structures and processes. Journal of Management , 36: 5-39.
Mors, M. L. 2010. Innovation in a global consulting firm: When the problem is too much diversity. Strategic 
Management Journal , 31: 841-872.
Mortensen, M., & Haas, M. R. 2018. Perspective—Rethinking teams: From bounded membership to dynamic par -
ticipation. Organization Science , 29: 341-355.
Muthén, L. K., & Muthén, B. O. 1998-2017. Mplus user’s guide  (8th ed.). Los Angeles, CA: Muthén & Muthén.
Nicolaides, V. C., LaPort, K. A., Chen, T. R., Tomassetti, A. J., Weis, E. J., Zaccaro, S. J., & Cortina, J. M. 2014. 
The shared leadership of teams: A meta-analysis of proximal, distal, and moderating relationships. Leadership 
Quarterly , 25: 923-934.
Okhuysen, G. A., Lepak, D., Lee Ashcraft, K., Labianca, G., Smith, V., & Steensma, H. K. 2015. Theories of work 
and working today. Academy of Management Review , 38: 491-502.
Ployhart, R. E., & Vandenberg, R. J. 2010. Longitudinal research. The theory, design, and analysis of change. 
Journal of Management , 36: 94-120.
Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Lee, J. Y., & Podsakoff, N. P. 2003. Common method biases in behavioral 
research: A critical review of the literature and recommended remedies. Journal of Applied Psychology , 88: 
879-903.
Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., & Podsakoff, N. P. 2012. Sources of method bias in social science research and 
recommendations on how to control it. Annual Review of Psychology , 63: 539-569.
Pousa, C., & Mathieu, A. 2015. Is managerial coaching a source of competitive advantage? Promoting employee 
self-regulation through coaching. Coaching: An International Journal of Theory, Research, and Practice , 8: 
20-35.
Ramarajan, L., Bezrukova, K., Jehn, K. A., & Euwema, M. 2011. From the outside in: The negative spillover effects 
of boundary spanners’ relations with members of other organizations. Journal of Organizational Behavior , 
32: 886-905.
Rapp, T. L., Gilson, L. L., Mathieu, J. E., & Ruddy, T. 2016. Leading empowered teams: An examination of the role 
of external team leaders and team coaches. Leadership Quarterly , 27: 109-123.
Raudenbush, S. W., & Bryk, A. S. 2001. Hierarchical linear models: Applications and data analysis methods  (2nd 
ed.). New York: Sage.
Rhodes, S. R. 1983. Age-related differences in work attitudes and behavior: A review and conceptual analysis. 
Psychological Bulletin , 93: 328-367.1158 Journal of Management / May 2022
Rosenkopf, L., & Nerkar, A. 2001. Beyond local search: boundary-spanning, exploration, and impact in the optical 
disk industry. Strategic Management Journal , 22: 287-306.
Rousseau, V., Aubé, C., & Tremblay, S. 2013. Team coaching and innovation in work teams: An examination of 
the motivational and behavioral intervening mechanisms. Leadership & Organization Development Journal , 
34: 344-364.
Salancik, G. R., & Pfeffer, J. 1978. A social information processing approach to job attitudes and task design. 
Administrative Science Quarterly , 23: 224-253.
Singh, J., Goolsby, J. R., & Rhoads, G. K. 1994. Behavioral and psychological consequences of boundary spanning 
burnout for customer service representatives. Journal of Marketing Research , 558-569.
Somech, A., & Khalaili, A. 2014. Team boundary activity: Its mediating role in the relationship between structural 
conditions and team innovation. Group & Organization Management , 39: 274-299.
Stajkovic, A. D., Lee, D., & Nyberg, A. J. 2009. Collective efficacy, group potency, and group performance: Meta-
analyses of their relationships, and test of a mediation model. Journal of Applied Psychology , 94: 814.
Stajkovic, A. D., & Luthans, F. 1998. Self-efficacy and work-related performance: A meta-analysis. Psychological 
Bulletin , 124: 240.
Takeishi, A. 2001. Bridging inter- and intra-firm boundaries: Management of supplier involvement in automobile 
product development. Strategic Management Journal , 22: 403-433.
Tesluk, P. E., & Mathieu, J. E. 1999. Overcoming roadblocks to effectiveness: Incorporating management of perfor -
mance barriers into models of work group effectiveness. Journal of Applied Psychology , 84: 200-217.
Thornhill, A., & Saunders, M. N. K. 1998. What if line managers don’t realize they’re responsible for HR? Lessons 
from an organization experiencing rapid change. Personnel Review , 27: 460-476.
Wageman, R. 2001. How leaders foster self-managing team effectiveness: Design choices versus hands-on coach -
ing. Organization Science , 12: 559-577.
Wang, X., & Howell, J. M. 2012. A multilevel study of transformational leadership, identification, and follower 
outcomes. Leadership Quarterly , 23: 775-787.
Weer, C. H., DiRenzo, M. S., & Shipper, F. M. 2016. A holistic view of employee coaching: Longitudinal inves -
tigation of the impact of facilitative and pressure-based coaching on team effectiveness. Journal of Applied 
Behavioral Science , 52: 187-214.
Weick, K. E. 1995. Sensemaking in organizations  (Vol. 3). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Williams, L. J., Cote, J. A., & Buckley, M. R. 1989. Lack of method variance in self-reported affect and perceptions 
at work: Reality or artifact? Journal of Applied Psychology , 74: 462-468.
Wimmer, J., Backmann, J., & Hoegl, M. 2019. In or out? Exploring the inconsistency and permeability of team 
boundaries. Small Group Research , 50: 699-727.
Yan, A., & Louis, M. R. 1999. The migration of organizational functions to the work unit level: Buffering, spanning, 
and bringing up boundaries. Human Relations , 52: 25-47.1159 Marrone et al. / Boundary-Spanning Behavior
