International Journal of Information Management 30 (2010) 437–444
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
International Journal of Information Management
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ijinfomgt
Innovation and knowledge sharing across professional boundaries: Political
interplay between boundary objects and brokers
Chris Kimblea,b,∗, Corinne Greniera,c, Karine Goglio-Primardd
aEuromed Management, Marseille, Domaine de Luminy, BP 921, 13288 Marseille, Cedex 9, France
bCREGOR Laboratory, Université Montpellier II, France
cCERGAM Laboratory (IMPGT Team), University of Aix Marseille III, France
dEuromed Management ESCT, Toulon, Campus de la Grande Tourrache, BP 261, 83078 Toulon, Cedex 9, France
article info
Keywords:
Boundary objectsBrokersInterplayInnovationKnowledge sharingabstract
The article examines the process of innovation and knowledge sharing from a perspective that focuses
on the inﬂuence that local circumstances can have. In particular, it looks at the problems of knowledgesharing between groups of professionals. It presents a comparative analysis of two studies, one involvingtwo groups of IT professionals; the other a network of healthcare professionals. The data was collectedin two sets. The ﬁrst set consisted of the results from two earlier, independent studies; the second wascollected speciﬁcally for this article. We investigate the role played by boundary objects and brokers.Through an analysis of the interplay between boundary object and broker, we uncover the dynamics ofthe innovation process and show that the role played by the broker can be political. We identify twostrategies that are used by brokers in the selection of a boundary object. The ﬁrst is directed towardsachieving a balance between the actors involved and the second is directed towards controlling theiractivities. We conclude by suggesting that other researchers should also consider the interplay betweenbroker and boundary object when examining cross-boundary knowledge sharing.
© 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
It is now received wisdom that innovation stems from collabo-
ration and knowledge sharing across professional or organizationalboundaries. Conway (1995) traces the idea back to the 1950s;
Teigland and Wasko (2003) claim the idea originated in the 1960s;
Henderson and Clark (1990) draw on the literature from the 1970s.
However, whatever its origin, the idea that innovation requires col-laboration across boundaries is now well established ( Fagerberg,
Mowery, & Nelson, 2005 ).
The majority of the literature dealing with this area tends
towards what Tsoukas (1996) describes as a taxonomic approach:
seeking to discover global, or at least generic, solutions for effectiveknowledge sharing. These often attempt to formulate more or lesscomplete descriptions of the different types of knowledge involvedand to identify the speciﬁc conditions that facilitate their exchange.Such approaches are frequently based on macro-level, multi-ﬁrm
∗Corresponding author at: Euromed Management, Marseille, Domaine de
Luminy, BP 921, 13288 Marseille, Cedex 9, France. Tel.: +33 04 91 82 79 87;fax: +3 3049 18 27 98 3 .
E-mail addresses: chris.kimble@euromed-management.com (C. Kimble),
corinne.grenier@euromed-management.com (C. Grenier), karine.goglio@euromed-
management.com (K. Goglio-Primard).surveys and tend to view knowledge sharing as a continuous pro-
cess ( Bock, Zmud, Kim, & Lee, 2005; Chen & Huang, 2007; Hansen,
2002; Holsapple & Joshi, 2000 ). The spread of electronic communi-
cation ( Coakes, Coakes, & Rosenberg, 2008 ) and notions such as the
resource-based view of the ﬁrm ( Grant, 1996; Wernerfelt, 1984 )
have also contributed to the popularity of this view.
Tsoukas (1996) and Tsoukas and Chia (2002) however claims
that this approach is fundamentally ﬂawed; quoting Boden (1994)
he argues that the structures that shape how knowledge is sharedare always and inevitably inﬂuenced by “ immediate circumstances
and local agendas ”(Boden, 1994 , p. 18). He argues instead for a
view of knowledge that is dispersed with no single actor in a posi-tion to formulate rules or principles to determine what knowledgeshould be shared. This approach tends to view knowledge sharingas an episodic rather than a continuous process. Where categoriesand taxonomies exist, “ The stability of their meanings is precariously
maintained ”(Tsoukas & Chia, 2002 , p. 573): they are stable enough
to be consistently deployed, but are always transient, local and opento negotiation.
Studies that examine collaboration and knowledge sharing from
this perspective have received less attention in the literature andtend to be long-term ethnographic studies that place more empha-sis on group dynamics and organizational politics. Blackler and
McDonald (2000) provide one such example. Taking an action
research approach, they describe the problems of building and
0268-4012/$ – see front matter © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi: 10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2010.02.002438 C. Kimble et al. / International Journal of Information Management 30 (2010) 437–444
maintaining an understanding between a team of researchers and
the company they are investigating in the face of the changingobjectives and boundaries of both. Engeström’s work on activitytheory also provides some examples of this type of approach, forexample when he describes the problems faced by teams of doc-tors in Finnish hospitals ( Engeström, 2001; Engeström, Engeström,
& Vähäaho, 1999 ).
The goal of this article is to make a further contribution to this lit-
erature through an analysis of the issues that arise when groups ofprofessionals from different organizations work together to achievea collective goal; it does this through examining the ﬁndings fromtwo independent case studies. Our approach uses boundary objects(Star & Griesemer, 1989 ) and brokers ( Wenger, 1998 ) to track the
ways in which groups manage the exchange of knowledge acrosstheir respective professional boundaries. In a departure from mostother studies using boundary objects and brokers, we also exam-ine the political interplay between boundary object and broker toreveal the inﬂuence of what Boden terms “ immediate circumstances
and local agendas ” on this process.
2. Innovation and knowledge sharing across boundaries
Perhaps paradoxically, the root of the problem of effective cross-
boundary knowledge sharing is also what makes it of value. Theknowledge within a group tends to reﬂect its own norms and preoc-cupations; this makes it unlikely that the group will generate novelideas on its own. To do this a group needs the stimulus of freshideas and new information from outside. However, this exchangeof knowledge is not without its difﬁculties.
In general terms, if one group does not share the other’s world
view, how can communication between the two ever, in Clark
and Brennan’s (1991) terms, be grounded? If these groups exist
in an environment that is itself changing, how much more difﬁ-cult will the problem be? Finally, the more radical the innovation,the greater will be the potential problems of the redistribution ofpower across boundaries ( Christensen, Bohmer, & Kenagy, 2000 ).
Cohesive groups, such as professional networks, pose a further setof problems.
Groups of professionals readily share knowledge related to their
profession within the network but, for political and professionalreasons, do not share this knowledge with outsiders ( Teigland &
Wasko, 2003 ). Within such networks, informal meetings and work-
ing groups may be established to learn and share knowledge andprovide actors with a space to compare professional practice. Evenif they are not named as such, these often exhibit many of the fea-tures of Communities of Practice ( Wenger, 1998 ): groups that Swan,
Scarbrough, and Robertson, 2002 and Hislop (2003) observe can
also inhibit the sharing of knowledge across boundaries.
Clearly, the sharing of knowledge across professional bound-
aries is both important and problematical. The notions of brokers(Wenger, 1998 ) and boundary objects ( Star & Griesemer, 1989 ) are
widely cited as providing two possible channels through whichsuch epistemically and politically distinct groups can communi-cate.
2.1. Brokers
Brokers are members of multiple communities and are able to
make effective connections between them; they make coordinationpossible by opening up new possibilities for learning and exchange(Brown & Duguid, 1998 ). The broker’s role is essentially that of an
interlocutor: to help other actors transfer, translate or transformthe meanings encountered during joint activities ( Carlile, 2004 ).
Wenger describes it in the following way:“The job of brokering is complex. It involves processes of trans-
lation, coordination and alignment between perspectives. Itrequires enough legitimacy to inﬂuence the development ofa practice .. it also requires the ability to link practices byfacilitating transactions between them and to cause learningby introducing into a practice, elements of another.” ( Wenger,
1998 , p 109)
A broker translates knowledge created in one group into the
language of another so that the new group can integrate it into itscognitive portfolio. To do this, brokers must be able to manage therelations between individuals as well as act as translators.
The broker’s role is a delicate balancing act. To be effective bro-
kers need to have authority within all of the groups to which theybelong. They need to be able to evaluate the knowledge producedby the different groups and to earn the trust and respect of the var-ious parties involved. Over time, the broker”s activities may lead tothe development of a repertoire of shared resources such as rules,procedures and the boundary objects used by the group.
2.2. Boundary objects
Like brokers, boundary objects are also concerned with com-
munication between communities, although their role is moreindirect. The term originates with Star and Griesemer’s (1989)
study of Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zoology where theydescribe a boundary object as “ an object that lives in multiple social
worlds and which has different identities in each ”(Star & Griesemer,
1989 , p. 409).
Boundary objects are artefacts that link different sets of diverse
interests; they are the physical or virtual entities that allow groupsto coalesce and form stable, if transitory, working relationships.They allow coordination without consensus or shared goals, asboundary objects permit an actor’s local understanding to bereframed in the context of a wider collective activity ( Bechky, 2003 ).
When different groups collaborate on a common task, some formof local agreement is necessary for the work to proceed. As thework progresses, these temporary local agreements are subject tonegotiation and re-negotiation; new understandings are forged,new ideas generated and new accommodations made as the groupsinteract with each other.
Boundary objects are often technologies, although they can be
drawings, sets of rules, research projects or documents. Kimble and
Hildreth (2005) , for example, describe how a planning document
that was originally designed for internal use within the UK core of atransnational community of practice became, initially, a boundaryobject between the UK and American cores and later between thecommunity of practice and the functional groups that surroundedit. They describe how:
“During discussions around the document, other new and inno-
vative ideas would often be triggered; as well as identifyingprojects already listed on the document, new ideas emergedthat could form the basis for further participation.” ( Kimble &
Hildreth, 2005 , p. 108)
Carlile (2002) argues that boundary objects have a particular
role to play in supporting the different forms of coordination foundin collaborative working. When a situation is familiar and routine,a simple boundary object, perhaps only a single word, is all thatis needed for a group to coordinate its activities. He terms thissyntactic coordination, effectively a simple process of informationtransfer. As complexity increases, actors need to establish com-mon meanings that are shared by everybody in the group. Herethe boundary object needs greater informational richness in orderto support what Carlile terms semantic coordination, a processinvolving some degree of translation. Finally, in novel situationsthat involve a degree of negotiation and compromise, a boundaryC. Kimble et al. / International Journal of Information Management 30 (2010) 437–444 439
Table 1
Summary of the two data sets.
Content management system Emerging healthcare network
Period of collection for the ﬁrst data set From 2003 to 2006 From 2002 to 2007Number and categories of actors interviewed 20 software engineers (8 from ﬁrm A and 12 from Firm
B), 2 e-business managers and 8 sales engineers (3from Firm A and 5 from Firm B), the systemadministrator who acted as a broker, the President ofthe Sophia Antipolis association and the person incharge of supervising the cluster dealing withinnovation.The number varied from 6 (the initiator of the
network, some physicians, a speech therapist, aneurologist and a neuropsychologist, including the twoactors acting as brokers) to more than 15 actors(additional physicians, speech therapists, togetherwith the two actors acting as brokers)
Period of collection for the second data set November 2008 November 2008
Number and categories of actors interviewed The system administrator that acted as a broker, 5
design engineers, 4 sales engineers, 2 e-businessmanagers, the President of the Sophia Antipolisassociation and the person in charge of supervising thecluster dealing with innovation.Two brokers, three physicians who had been involved
since 2002 and one newly recruited neuropsychologist.
object needs to be ﬂexible enough to allow what he terms prag-
matic coordination, a process involving change or transformation.This form of coordination is the most difﬁcult to achieve as changecan be costly if the actors have a stake in the established way ofdoing things. Carlile (2004) also recognizes the political nature of
these processes, as the positions held by actors can be divergentand contradictory.
3. A comparative analysis of two cases
As we have seen, although the link between knowledge sharing
and innovation is widely recognized, the sharing of knowledge canbe problematical. The goal of this article is to contribute to the liter-ature on knowledge sharing through an analysis of the issues thatarise when groups of professionals work together. In particular, wewish to examine the dynamics and politics of knowledge sharing insuch groups. In order to further our understanding of this process,our study will depart from others in this area and set out to exam-ine the interplay between boundary object and broker to exposethe effect of political and contextual factors on this process.
3.1. Methodology
The data for our studies came from two separate cases. The
ﬁrst was a group of IT professionals from different companies in aFrench science park who collaborated to build a Content Manage-ment System; the second was a series of innovations produced by apluridisciplinary network of heath care professionals in a medium-sized French city. In both cases, the data was collected in two setsthat covered a similar period.
The ﬁrst set of data consisted of two independent studies that
had been carried out by two of the authors in pursuit of theirown individual research interests. The second set of data wascollected by the same two authors who, in order to complete thecomparative analysis presented in this article, returned to theﬁeld and re-interviewed key actors to gain a better understandingof their role (e.g. as broker) and the role of certain artefacts (e.g.boundary objects).In particular, we were interested in the mechanisms by which
the boundary objects were chosen, the different types of boundaryobjects that were deployed and the role of the broker in terms oftheir legitimacy and autonomy within the groups. All of the actorsinvolved were interviewed several times at different points in theprocess; the interviews lasted from 30 to 90 min. The two data setsare summarized in Table 1 below.
The analysis followed what Denzin and Lincoln (2000) describe
as a moderate inductive approach. The set of data from the ﬁrstindependent studies was re-used and, together with the set ofdata from second targeted study, was re-analyzed using a singleset of questions that related to the process of innovation and therole of boundary object and broker ( Thome, 2004 ). Throughout
the analysis, we followed the general principles outlined in Miles
and Huberman’s (1994) methodological framework: data reduc-
tion, coding and analysis based on codes created from a review ofthe literature and emergent codes created during analysis.
The ﬁrst study is based on a single technological innovation
where, in order to succeed, a number of boundary objects, andlater a broker, needed to be deployed. This study shows clearlyhow boundary objects and brokers change according to imme-diate circumstances and the demands of the particular task inhand. The second study concerns three separate, less technologi-cally demanding, innovations each of which use only one boundaryobject and broker. Here we are able to see more clearly, how bound-ary objects, brokers and objectives change over time.
The results of this analysis are presented below in terms of
the innovations that were produced by the groups, the boundaryobjects they used and the role of the broker in the process. Readersshould note that although both studies illustrate the demands of“immediate circumstances and local agendas ”(Boden, 1994 , p. 18),
they differ in character and emphasis.
3.2. Study one: the content management system
The ﬁrst study was based in the Sophia Antipolis Science Park
near Nice in the south of France. Sophia Antipolis is sometimes
Table 2
Actors and motivations in study one.
Principal Actors Areas of expertise/knowledge Motivations
Eight software engineers belonging toa computer services company(Company A)All the actors share the same practices and have
similar technical expertise.Company A wish to appropriate the functionality
of the CMS built by Company B to add value to thebids they make to customers.
Twelve software engineers belongingto a software development company(Company B)All the actors share the same practices and have
similar technical expertise. The actors have alreadysucceeded in creating a CMS that is currently inuse.Company B wants to ﬁnd new applications for
their existing CMS and promote its use in theSophia Antipolis and beyond.
Business customers Domain knowledge of semiconductors, telecom
services, infrastructure services.Customers want straightforward, turnkey
technical solutions to their problems.440 C. Kimble et al. / International Journal of Information Management 30 (2010) 437–444
described as France’s ‘Silicon Valley’; it brings together more than
1300 companies in the life sciences, multimedia, computer andtelecommunications sectors and several educational institutions.In 1991, a group of scientists and engineers created an associa-tion so that people working in the park could exchange ideas andknowledge more freely. Over time, the association grew into a moreformalized multidisciplinary community of professionals, whosemembers meet to discuss their work in expert seminars.
The study focused on two groups of software engineers, one
belonged to a computer services company (Company A); the otherto a software development company (Company B). The engineersfrom Company A wanted to build a particular type of ContentManagement System (CMS) that would increase the value of thebids made by the commercial services division of that company.However, to do this, they needed to work with a second group ofengineers in Company B. Company B had already designed andbuilt a CMS but wanted to improve its functionality by using itin different application areas. Both companies were independentBusiness Units that sold and marketed software solutions, and bothhad a network of local ofﬁces in France. Similarly, both groups ofengineers had professional skills and expertise in their own right,both had speciﬁc knowledge that the other needed, but neither hadknowledge of the other’s practices nor working methods. The prin-cipal actors and their motivations for the ﬁrst study are shown inTable 2 below.
The software engineers in companies A and B recognized the
existence of various boundaries that would inhibit the achievementof their shared goal. The mechanism they used to overcome thesewas to attempt to develop a new system by co-building a web sitefor a customer from Company A. The success of this venture wouldrest on the ability of the two software companies and, to a lesserextent, the two companies and the customer, to share knowledgeand expertise across boundaries.
“We would not have been able to meet the customer’s expec-
tations alone. Our cooperation with Company B, clearly madea difference for the customer and certainly inﬂuenced its ﬁnalselection” (Manager, Company A)
The software engineers in Company A wished to use the CMS
built by Company B in their own company’s products. This wouldmean that they could provide web sites that had more functionalityand were more efﬁcient. Similarly, the engineers from CompanyB wanted to ﬁnd new applications for their software, but lackedknowledge of other domains where it might be used.
Working together on the code for the CMS enabled both ﬁrms to
begin to develop the new system and to consolidate their links withthe customer. They were able to start to combine their technical andcommercial expertise and to mobilize a project team to develop asolution.
The code for the CMS acted as the ﬁrst boundary object and
provided a degree of syntactic coordination, however, the problemsof semantic coordination needed to be resolved using a differentapproach. In Company B, the software engineers knew each otherwell, worked closely together and observed each other’s practices.This enabled them to share their experience and knowledge whendeveloping new versions of the CMS within the company. However,when working with engineers from Company A,
“.. it’s very difﬁcult to develop trust between two competing
ﬁrms because we have strategic skills that we use for the samecustomers” (Engineer, Company B)
The Sophia Antipolis Association exists primarily to facilitate
professional links between organizations in the Sophia AntipolisScience Park. The software engineers from companies A and B wereable to discuss the objectives and the technical problems of theCMS with their peers from other companies, their customers andmembers of the research institutions through seminars and forums
organized by the association. Effectively, the events organized atthe science park became the second boundary object and the mech-anism by which the gap between the two groups was bridged.
“.. our geographic and technological proximity helped us under-
stand each other and be committed to the project” (Manager,Company B)
The association had also developed a professional code of con-
duct to facilitate the inter-ﬁrm cooperation that also helped tominimize any commercial concerns that might otherwise have hin-dered the process.
Finally, to deal with the problems of pragmatic coordination,
the two companies appointed a systems administrator from Com-pany B, the company that developed the original CMS, to act as anintermediary. This systems administrator effectively took on thebroker’s role and was required to give the ﬁnal formal approval tothe software created by the two groups of engineers.
“We appointed an engineer from ﬁrm B to this position. His
speciﬁc role consisted in validating the functionalities createdby our engineers and to inform us of existing functionalities”(Software Engineer, Company A)
However, to fulﬁl this role he needed to be able to coordinate
the activities of other actors, to translate requirements betweenthem and, crucially, to create a space where the actors could workfree from the conﬂicts inherent in this type of venture ( Kaulback &
Bergtholdt, 2008 ).
Through a series of informal meetings, he created a sense of
commitment between the two sets of engineers that allowed themto share their knowledge and develop a mutual understanding. Interms of his wider role, he also helped to differentiate the contri-bution of the two ﬁrms, which in turn made them more attractiveto their respective customers. Finally, he also helped the actors touse, understand and accept the rules of the association. Throughthis, the actors were able to recognize other ﬁrms’ complementaryskills and to learn to trust each other.
Thus, in this case, the role of the two boundary objects was to
enable the coordination of the activities of the groups at the syn-tactic and semantic level. The role of the broker focused mainlyon providing legitimacy for the proposed technical solutions, andon building trust and maintaining a fair and balanced exchangebetween the two ﬁrms. Thus, in this case, the broker’s role was tomanage the relationships between the actors at the pragmatic level.
3.3. Study two: the healthcare network
For many decades, different professional groups in the French
health sector have set up various collective arrangements to helpimprove their knowledge of, and response to, socio-medical issuessuch as AIDS, Alzheimer’s disease and drug or alcohol addic-tion. These collective arrangements are normally set up when aresponse based on a single agency proves unsatisfactory. Thesearrangements are often termed ‘cure and care’ networks. In 1996,regulations began to be introduced that created a framework forsuch networks and set out the conditions under which they couldreceive public funding.
The network in this study is dedicated to the diagnosis, cure
and care of the cognitive diseases. The network started in 2001as an informal ad-hoc group, developed and grew over time, andﬁnally became a publicly funded network at the end of 2004. Thegroup brought together several disparate specialist communitiesthat represented different, and occasionally conﬂicting, interests.The principal actors and their motivations are shown in Table 3
below.C. Kimble et al. / International Journal of Information Management 30 (2010) 437–444 441
Table 3
Actors and motivations in study two.
Actors Areas of expertise/knowledge Motivations
Physicians (general practitioners) Have a general knowledge of the patient and their
medical history but work in isolated practices withno specialist knowledge of cognitive diseases.Interested in any cognitive disorder.
Interested in facilitating diagnosis and the follow-up of the
patient.To enrich practice through maintaining a role in thelong-term follow-up of a patient.
The neurologist Has specialized knowledge in Alzheimer’s disease. Interested in tools to help a neurologist make a more rapid
diagnosis.To maintain the core role of neurologists in diagnosis.
The gerontologist Knowledge of cognitive disorders and other
pathologies in elderly people.Interested in taking part in the diagnosis, including having
the right to make a diagnosis instead of the neurologist.
The coordinator (neuropsychologist) No practice before the emergence of the network
(new role and new knowledge).To maintain a pluridisciplinary-based approach to work
and to coordinate practices.Interested in any social intervention with patients andtheir families.
The speech therapists Mostly involved with elderly and disabled people. To be more involved and to be legitimized as an actor that
participates in the care and cure of people with cognitivedisorders.
Initially, a neurologist, some physicians, a gerontologist and a
speech therapist started to meet on a monthly basis to hold ‘caseconferences’ – collective discussions that allow different points ofview to be heard and common themes to be identiﬁed. In the earlystages of the network, the physicians used their own patient ﬁlesfor these discussions. The case conferences, which were organizedby the neurologist, highlighted the need to have one tool to helpphysicians to quickly and simply differentiate cognitive disordersfrom other disorders with similar symptoms. The rapid memorytest was developed in response to this need.
The neurologist, who effectively acted as a broker, arranged the
network in such a way that it would focus on patients with theproblems that he was skilled in diagnosing and interested in, mainlythose with Alzheimer’s disease.
“.. thanks to [ the network ] I can receive in my ofﬁce one patient
with a richly documented ﬁle, so as to ease the making of thediagnosis” (neurologist)
The selection of patient ﬁles by physicians as boundary objects
strengthened this position. The network preserved an informalbut strongly institutionalized hierarchy that meant neurologistswere the only ones allowed to make a diagnosis of the disease.The neurologist regulated the links between the different profes-sional communities in such a way that he limited the opportunitiesfor different communities to mix. In effect, he reinforced his ownauthority and his community’s professional boundaries.
The rapid memory test was developed based on information
gained from the crossing of boundaries; however, it representedlittle more than a means of improving the links between the workof physicians, who were able to use the test to identify possiblecognitive disorders, and the neurologists, who were able to seethe patient more quickly. Once the rapid memory test had beendeveloped and training sessions in its use had begun, some physi-cians and speech therapists began to discuss the development ofa more comprehensive tool for the assessment of Alzheimer’s dis-ease. This tool, which would allow neurologists to make a moredetailed diagnosis of the disease, became the cross-disciplinaryneuropsychological assessment.
Once again, the neurologist controlled the links between the
professional communities, although he now had to open the dis-cussion to speech therapists and neuropsychologists. He acted as abroker, directing the discussion and validating any proposed solu-tion. For example, he turned down the proposal by a gerontologist,skilled in diagnosing diseases of the elderly, that gerontologists
should play a role in the diagnosis process arguing,
“.. dementia is not Alzheimer disease; dementia is a cognitive
process of cognitive degradation. It is very different from theAlzheimer disease; the latter is much more complex. You can-not make a diagnosis of Alzheimer disease with a gerontologistdiploma” (neurologist)
The gerontologist did not attend any further meetings of the
network.
The development of the cross-disciplinary neuropsychological
assessment was supported by the same boundary object and thesame boundary hardening strategy as the previous example andachieved the same outcome for the neurologist.
“Thanks to the network, I can now concentrate on the diagnosis
of the more complex cognitive cases ... the other less complex
cases are examined and diagnosed by other actors” (neurologist)
However, this innovation was only made possible by an addi-
tional crossing of a professional boundary when the physiciansand the speech therapists began to discuss their respective profes-sional practices together. The actors, involved all agreed that theprocess was slower and more difﬁcult than the ﬁrst, as the physi-cian’s patient ﬁle did not really contain adequate information tobuild a more interdisciplinary form of coordination.
The coordinated patient trajectory was the third innovation
produced by this network. This consisted of a comprehensiveassessment that identiﬁed all the actors concerned with the careand cure of cognitive disorders, from the initial diagnosis to thefollow-up social and medical care. This required the use of a dif-ferent boundary object, the case ﬁles of patients who had alreadybeen followed-up by the network. These ﬁles contained informa-tion collected during other aspects of the network’s activities. Forexample,
“Sometimes patients deliver to the speech therapist or other
actors, information that they would not give to their familyphysicians” (speech therapist)
It also required the opening of discussions to new actors with
expertise in the social and medical follow-up of the patients andof their families. This innovation was made possible by a change ofbroker, which was dictated primarily by a change in local circum-stances. The network was seeking public funding and, in order to442 C. Kimble et al. / International Journal of Information Management 30 (2010) 437–444
Table 4
Political interplay between boundary object and broker.
Collectively oriented strategy Individually oriented strategy
The role of the boundary object The boundary object functions at different levels: it
contains both technical information and offers ways towork collectively.The boundary object is an intermediary object, offering
mainly technical information related to the innovation.
The interplay between broker and
boundary objectThe boundary object is mobilized by the broker to aid
the exchange of information and to facilitatecoordination between the actors in the collective.The boundary object is mobilized by the broker to limit
the amount of information available and to deﬁne thedirection of the joint enterprise.
meet the criteria to receive public funds, it had to show that the
goal of the network was to coordinate the activities of all of theactors involved in the care and cure of the patient. The neurologiststepped down and a neuropsychologist took on a new and moreformal role as network coordinator.
The neuropsychologist was interested in care and cure activ-
ities after the initial diagnosis had been made, and so was opento involvement of groups other than physicians and neurologists.After the coordinated patient trajectory had been developed, it wasaccepted that the initial diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease could bemade either by a neurologist or by a gerontologist, reversing thegroup’s previous decision.
“Thanks to the network, all various actors are now involved and
each one has found his place [ in the coordinated patient trajec-
tory ]” (coordinator)
This case, which covers a longer period and wider range of activ-
ities, presents a rather more complex picture than the ﬁrst as herebrokers, boundary objects and high-level objectives all changedover the period of the study. Consequently, this case more clearlyillustrates the use of the boundary object either to control the direc-tion of the collective action or to open a broader discussion of topicsaround the object.
4. Discussion: the interplay between boundary objects and
brokers
We saw earlier that the literature on innovation and knowl-
edge sharing describes brokers and boundary objects as channelsthrough which epistemically distinct groups can communicate andcollaborate. We adopted this general approach to examine the pro-cess by which knowledge is shared and innovations are producedat a local level.
At ﬁrst sight, the boundary objects in our study simply acted
as a means for transforming and transferring knowledge betweengroups. It appeared that it was mainly the complexity of the innova-tion that determined which boundary object was chosen ( Carlile,
2002, 2004 ). The selection of the boundary object appears to be
a ‘technical’ choice based on the level of information needed tosustain the innovation process; the broker merely acts as tertius
iungens by connecting the interested parties ( Obstfeld, 2005 ).
In the ﬁrst study, the code for CMS (the ﬁrst boundary object)
allowed the actors to develop the concrete technical solutions thatallowed them to make some initial progress with their work. Sim-ilarly, the framework and rules provided by the association (thesecond boundary object) allowed the actors to continue to worktogether in ways that would not have been possible without them.The association fostered the development of trust and commit-ment between the two ﬁrms, ﬁrstly because the association wasitself composed of experts – competence based trust – and sec-ondly because membership of the association bound its membersto a code of behaviour allowing the development of trust based onreciprocity and goodwill.
In the second study, the patient ﬁle created by physicians
(the ﬁrst boundary object) allowed actors to create the ﬁrst twoinnovations, the rapid memory test and the cross-disciplinary neu-ropsychological assessment, but the patient ﬁle created by the
network as a whole (the second boundary object), was requiredto support the third innovation, the coordinated patient trajec-tory. Changes in the boundary object occurred when the formerboundary object was no longer able to sustain the innovation pro-cess because of its inability to support a discussion that includeda wider range of competences. Thus, the second boundary objectwas chosen speciﬁcally in order to embrace these competen-cies.
However, by further examining the interplay between broker
and boundary object, we are able to highlight an additional dimen-sion to the selection of the boundary object: the boundary objectas a resource for actors who wish to further their own interests.Grenier (2006) suggests that the boundary objects are often chosen
by the leaders of groups in accordance with the degree of diver-sity they are prepared to tolerate. Applying this perspective to ourstudy reveals an additional dimension and a more complex story.We propose a ‘political’ interplay between boundary object andbroker.
In the ﬁrst case study, the two software companies were poten-
tial competitors in the same market. Using the CMS code alonelaid one company open to the ‘extortion’ of its knowledge by theother. Consequently, the broker need to introduce a second bound-ary object to maintain fair and balanced cooperation. In doing so,the broker acquired a legitimacy that was beyond a simple recogni-tion of his technical skill which allowed him to set the conditions forcooperation between companies, avoid an unbalanced appropria-tion of knowledge by one company from the other, and maintain astable environment in which the work that they were all engagedin could proceed smoothly. In this example, the selection of theboundary object was a political act taken to maintain the stability ofthe collective that effectively allowed a new inter-ﬁrm communityof practice to emerge based around the common goal of commercialsuccess and the sharing of ideas on the building of a CMS.
The second study presents a slightly different picture from
the ﬁrst. The ﬁrst broker, the neurologist, selected a boundaryobject that favoured the interests of his own and the physician’sprofessional body. This strengthened his position and that of hisprofessional community. The second broker, the neuropsycholo-gist, also made a political choice, but for different reasons. She chosea boundary object that would reorient the network towards thesocial care of the patients rather than the diagnosis of diseases. Sheselected an object that allowed more diversity and acknowledgedthe value of the other actors’ expertise, thus weakening the positionpreviously established by the neurologist. Thus, in this example, thechoice of boundary object was also a political act directed towards(re)deﬁning or steering the direction of the evolution joint enter-prise, by either restricting the ﬂow of information or by giving agreater acknowledgement to the importance of other actors’ exper-tise.
Boundary objects are particularly appropriate for this task as
they have not only symbolic value but also a political message(Swan et al., 2002 ). Viewed in this way, our work complements
that of Gal, Yoo, and Boland (2004 ) who consider boundary objects
to be a resource that can be used to transform social identities. Bylooking more closely at the interplay between broker and bound-C. Kimble et al. / International Journal of Information Management 30 (2010) 437–444 443
ary object we can reveal how the selection of the boundary object
can be a political act directed towards maintaining or redeﬁningthe direction of the group’s activities. Using Obstfeld’s terminology(Obstfeld, 2005 ), in these circumstances, the broker acts as tertius
gaudens (“the third who beneﬁts”) rather than tertius iungens (“the
third who joins”).
Comparing the two cases, we see two forms of political inter-
play emerge: one is more collectively oriented and comes into playwhere a broker selects a boundary object to further collective goals;the other is more individually oriented, and comes into play whena broker chooses a boundary object principally to defend their ownposition. These two political orientations for the interplay betweenboundary object and broker are summarized in Table 4 .
5. Conclusions
Innovation in groups depends on information and knowledge
gained by crossing boundaries between communities of actors. Thisis a difﬁcult and complex process because, for it to be successful,the actors from the different communities must ﬁrst reach a sharedunderstanding about what they are trying to do and how it might beachieved. These problems can be exacerbated when the communi-ties of actors concerned are groups of professionals where theirrespective professional knowledge is what helps to deﬁne theirstatus and is the key to their authority.
Much of the work in this area suggests that the selection of a
boundary object is more or less technical in nature: a matter ofchoosing the right boundary object for a particular set of circum-stances ( Harvey & Chrisman, 1998; Smeds & Alvesalo, 2003 ). Our
studies suggest that this process is more complex, dynamic andcan be explicitly political in nature. We believe that this observa-tion constitutes our ﬁrst contribution to the work in this area. Wetherefore suggest that, in addition to simply looking at the role ofthe boundary object, researchers should also examine the role of abroker in its selection.
Our second contribution is to qualify this political interplay
between boundary object and broker further and identify two dis-tinct strategies by which a broker might use a boundary object. Theﬁrst is directed towards achieving some form of political balancebetween the actors in a community and focuses on making informa-tion more available. The second is directed towards the deﬁnitionor control of the overall direction of the community and is moreconcerned with controlling the ﬂow of information.
We believe that by adopting this approach of examining the
interplay between boundary object and broker, researchers will beable achieve a more rounded view of the dynamics of innovationand knowledge sharing, particularly in situations such as those wedescribe here. We believe that, in turn, this could lead to the con-sideration of other political dimensions in this process, such as whoshould be in charge of the system of brokerage, what that systemshould be and other issues related to what might be termed thegovernance of innovation.
References
Bechky, B. A. (2003). Sharing meaning across occupational communities: The trans-
formation of understanding on a production ﬂoor. Organization Science ,14(3),
312–330.
Blackler, F., & McDonald, S. (2000). Power, mastery and organizational learning.
Journal of Management Studies ,37(6), 833–851.
Bock, G. W, Zmud, R. W., Kim, Y. G., & Lee, J. N. (2005). Behavioral intention for-
mation in knowledge sharing: Examining the roles of extrinsic motivators,social-psychological forces, and organizational climate. MIS Quarterly ,29(1),
87–111.
Boden, D. (1994). The business of talk . Boston: Polity.
Brown, J. S., & Duguid, P. (1998). Organizing knowledge. California Management
Review ,40(3), 90–111.
Carlile, P. R. (2002). A pragmatic view of knowledge and boundaries: Boundary
objects in new product development. Organization Science ,13(4), 442–455.Carlile, P. R. (2004). Transferring, translating, and transforming: An integrative
framework for managing knowledge across boundaries. Organization Science ,
15(5), 555–568.
Chen, C. J., & Huang, J. W. (2007). How organizational climate and structure affect
knowledge management—The social interaction perspective. International Jour-
nal of Information Management ,27(2), 104–118.
Christensen, C. M., Bohmer, R., & Kenagy, J. (2000). Will disruptive innovations cure
health care? Harvard Business Review ,78(5), 102–112.
Clark, H., & Brennan, S. (1991). Grounding in communication. In L. B. Resnick, J.
M. Levine, & S. D. Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on socially-shared cognition (pp.
127–149). Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association.
Coakes, E. W., Coakes, J. M., & Rosenberg, D. (2008). Co-operative work practices and
knowledge sharing issues: A comparison of viewpoints. International Journal of
Information Management ,28(1), 12–25.
Conway, S. (1995). Informal boundary-spanning communication in the innovation
process—An empirical-study. Technology Analysis & Strategic Management ,7(3),
327–342.
Denzin, N. K., & Lincoln, Y. S. (2000). The discipline and practice of qualitative
research. In N. K. Denzin, & Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.), The handbook of qualitative research
(2nd revised edition ed., pp. 1–28). London: Sage.
Engeström, Y. (2001). Expansive learning at work: Toward an activity theoretical
reconceptualization. Journal of Education and Work ,14(1), 133–156.
Engeström, Y., Engeström, R., & Vähäaho, T. (1999). When the center does not hold:
The importance of knot working. In S. Chaiklin, M. Hedegaard, & U. J. Jensen(Eds.), Activity theory and social practice (pp. 345–374). Aarhus: Aarhus Univer-
sity Press.
Fagerberg, J., Mowery, D. C., & Nelson, R. R. (Eds.). (2005). The Oxford handbook of
innovation . Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press.
Gal, U., Yoo, Y., & Boland, R. J. (2004). The dynamics of boundary objects, social infras-
tructures and social identities [Electronic Version]. Sprouts: Working Papers on
Information Systems ,4. Retrieved October 2009 from http://sprouts.aisnet.org/4-
11.
Grant, R. (1996). Toward a knowledge-based theory of the ﬁrm. Strategic Manage-
ment Journal ,17(Special Issue: Knowledge and the Firm), 109–122.
Grenier, C. (2006). Apprentissage de la coordination entre acteurs professionnels—le
cas d’un réseau de santé. Revue Gérer et Comprendre ,83, 25–35.
Hansen, M. T. (2002). Knowledge networks: explaining effective knowledge sharing
in multi-unit companies. Organization Science ,13(3), 232–248.
Harvey, F., & Chrisman, N. (1998). Boundary objects and the social construction of
GIS technology. Environment and Planning A ,30(9), 1683–1694.
Henderson, R. M., & Clark, K. B. (1990). Architectural innovation: The reconﬁguration
of existing product technologies and the failure of established ﬁrms. Adminis-
trative Science Quarterly ,35(1), 9–30.
Hislop, D. (2003). The complex relations between communities of practice and the
implementation of technological innovations. International Journal of Innovation
Management ,7(2), 163–188.
Holsapple, C. W., & Joshi, K. D. (2000). An investigation of factors that inﬂuence
the management of knowledge in organizations. Journal of Strategic Information
Systems ,9(2–3), 235–261.
Kaulback, B., & Bergtholdt, D. (2008). Holding the virtual space: The roles and
responsibilities of community stewardship. In C. Kimble, & P. A. Hildreth (Eds.),Communities of practice: Creating learning environments for educators (pp. 25–44).
Information Age Publishing.
Kimble, C., & Hildreth, P. (2005). Dualities, distributed communities of prac-
tice and knowledge management. Journal of Knowledge Management ,9(4),
102–113.
Miles, M. B., & Huberman, M. A. (1994). Qualitative data analysis: An expanded source-
book (2nd ed.). Sage.
Obstfeld, D. (2005). Social networks, the tertius iungens orientation, and involve-
ment in innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly ,50(1), 100–130.
Smeds, R., & Alvesalo, J. (2003). Global business process development in a virtual
community of practice. Production Planning & Control ,14(4), 361–371.
Star, S. L., & Griesemer, J. R. (1989). Institutional ecology, ‘Translations’ and bound-
ary objects: Amateurs and professionals in Berkeley’s Museum of VertebrateZoology, 1907–39. Social Studies of Science ,19(3), 387–420.
Swan, J., Scarbrough, H., & Robertson, M. (2002). The construction of ‘communi-
ties of practice’ in the management of innovation. Management Learning ,33(4),
477–496.
Teigland, R., & Wasko, M. M. (2003). Integrating knowledge through information
trading: Examining the relationship between boundary spanning communica-tion and individual performance. Decision Sciences ,34(2), 261–286.
Thome, S. (2004). Qualitative secondary analysis. In M. S. Lewis-Beck, A. Bryman, &
T. F. Liao (Eds.), The Sage encyclopedia of social science research methods . Sage.
Tsoukas, H. (1996). The ﬁrm as a distributed knowledge system: A constructionist
approach. Strategic Management Journal ,17, 11–25.
Tsoukas, H., & Chia, R. (2002). On organizational becoming: Rethinking organiza-
tional change.
Organization Science ,13(5), 567–582.
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: learning, meaning, and identity . New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Wernerfelt, B. (1984). A resource-based view of the ﬁrm. Strategic Management
Journal ,5(2), 171–180.
Chris Kimble is an associate professor of Management Information Systems at
Euromed Management in Marseille and is afﬁliated to the CREGOR Laboratory,Université Montpellier II. Before this, he lectured on Information Systems and Man-agement at the University of York (UK), Information Technology at the University of444 C. Kimble et al. / International Journal of Information Management 30 (2010) 437–444
Newcastle (UK) and was a researcher with both the Business School and the Com-
puter Science Department at the University of Northumbria (UK). His broad ﬁeld ofresearch is how to manage the ﬁt between digital technologies and the social world.
Corinne Grenier is an associate professor in Strategy and Innovation at Euromed
Management in Marseille. She is the Scientiﬁc Coordinator of the Social/Health Clus-ter and afﬁliated to CERGAM Laboratory (IMPGT Team), University of Aix MarseilleIII. Her areas of research are the structuring, coordination and governance of organi-zations and networks, the relationships between innovation and diversity of actorsand the reorganization of professional, cognitive and institutional boundaries for
action. Her principal ﬁeld of research is Health and Social Services.
Karine Goglio-Primard is a professor in Industrial Marketing at Euromed Manage-
ment ESCT in Toulon. Her research interests concern the role of learning assets:cognitive communities (communities of practice, epistemic communities), bound-aries processes (boundary practices) and the co-development of solutions betweencompeting ﬁrms inside clusters. Her ﬁeld of research is mainly ICT Networks andICT communities.