INFORMATION TO USERS
This manuscript has been reproduced from the microfilm master. UMI films 
the text directly from the original or copy submitted. Thus, some thesis and 
dissertation copies are in typewriter face, while others may be from any type of 
computer printer.
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the 
copy submitted. Broken or indistinct print, colored or poor quality illustrations 
and photographs, print bieedthrough, substandard margins, and improper 
alignment can adversely affect reproduction.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send UMI a complete manuscript 
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if unauthorized 
copyright material had to be removed, a note will indicate the deletion.
Oversize materials (e.g., maps, drawings, charts) are reproduced by 
sectioning the original, beginning at the upper left-hand comer and continuing 
from left to right in equal sections with small overlaps.
Photographs included in the original manuscript have been reproduced 
xerographically in this copy. 
Higher quality 6* x 9" black and white 
photographic prints are available for any photographs or illustrations appearing 
in this copy for an additional charge. Contact UMI directly to order.
ProQuest Information and Learning 
300 North Zeeb Road. Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346 USA 
800-521-0600
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
HOW DOES CONTEXT MATTER? EXAMINING THE PROCESS AND 
PERFORMANCE OUTCOMES OF WORK TEAM HETEROGENEITY
by
APARNA .ANAND JOSHI 
A Dissertation submitted to the 
Graduate School-New Brunswick 
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey 
in partial fulfillment of the requirements 
for the degree of 
Doctor of Philosophy 
Graduate Program in 
Industrial Relations and Human Resources
written under the direction of 
Prof. Susan E. Jackson
and approved by
New Brunswick, New Jersey
May, 2002
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
UMI Number 3055066
___ 
®
UMI
UMI Microform 3055066 
Copyright 2002 by ProQuest Information and Learning Company. 
All rights reserved. This microform edition is protected against 
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code.
ProQuest Information and Learning Company 
300 North Zeeb Road 
P.O. Box 1346 
Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
ABSTRACT OF THE DISSERTATION 
How Does Context Matter? Examining the Process and Performance Outcomes of Work
Team Heterogeneity 
by APARNA AN AND JOSHI
Dissertation Director:
Prof. Susan E. Jackson
In the past four decades research on team diversity has grown increasingly 
sophisticated incorporating several dimensions of team diversity, performance, and team 
processes. In examining the process and performance outcomes of team diversity, this 
dissertation contributes to extant research primarily in three ways. First, while examining 
the relationship between team diversity and process and performance outcomes, this 
dissertation examined the moderating influence of the organizational demographic 
context. Second, while past research has focused primarily on internal team processes, 
the present research also examined teams’ external relationships. Inter-team cooperation 
as well as intra-team cooperation, were proposed as process outcomes of team diversity. 
Third, by incorporating multiple conceptualizations of diversity (additive and 
configurational) this dissertation attempted to contribute to research on the measurement 
of diversity in organizations.
u
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
Data were collected from a large US based office equipment company. The data 
included employees’ demographic records (age, race, gender, education, tenure), 
attitudinal measures, and team performance measures. Based on available data, the 
dissertation included approximately 1820 service teams organized into 68 service 
regions. A multi-level analyses strategy was used to test the hypotheses proposed. 
Results indicated that certain aspects of organizational demography such as ethnic 
diversity and gender diversity influenced team level relationships between diversity and 
performance. Diverse teams performed better in diverse service regions than in 
homogeneous service regions. Further, at the service region level, gender diversity was 
positively related to cooperation as well as performance. Implications of these findings 
are discussed in relation to past research. Practical as well as theoretical implications of 
the findings are also outlined.
iii
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This dissertation would not have been possible without the support and 
encouragement of a number of exceptional individuals. I must begin by thanking my 
advisor, Prof. Susan E. Jackson, who has been the single greatest influence on this 
research as well as my academic career. I have been extremely fortunate in having had 
the opportunity to work with Susan and leam from her. Her vast and in-depth knowledge 
of the subject no doubt make her best possible advisor a doctoral student can have. 
However, I believe that there is more to being a great advisor and mentor than research 
expertise. Susan embodies the virtues of a true scholar as well as an exceptional human 
being. In my attempts to grasp the complexities of theory and methodology she was 
always patient with me while motivating and constantly challenging me to take a step 
further into the minefield of research. 
She was also supportive of my personal life and 
other challenges associated with it. She will always be my role model and in my attempts 
to meet her high standards of research as well as personal dedication to academics, she 
will continue to guide me in my future academic endeavors.
Other members of my committee have also been supportive and patient with my 
ignorance. Paula Caligiuri has always been a friend and mentor. She shaped my early 
research interests in the field while supporting and initiating me to challenges associated 
with field research. She gave me hands on experience with submitting articles for journal 
review and conference presentations, which will always stand by me. Stan Gully, an 
outstanding researcher and expert of various methodologies, had to put up with long 
emails and phone calls that arose out of the inevitable “methods questions”. I thank him 
for his patience, his advice on research and other matters, as well as his constant words of
iv
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
encouragement. I would also like to thank Maggie Neale for her advice and feedback 
regarding my dissertation.
I would like to dedicate this dissertation to four individuals who have central to 
my life, have provided me with support and inspiration, and put up with my work 
schedule as well as travels away from home. First and foremost, this dissertation is 
dedicated to my son Aaranya Shanbhag. He is the greatest achievement of my life and 
fills me with joy, hope, and wonder. It is only with his collaboration that this dissertation 
and my participation in any other research project has been possible. My husband and 
friend Uday Shanbhag has stood by me for all these years. He inspires me to be a better 
human being and has supported me in all my personal and professional endeavors. I 
thank him for being such a terrific and supportive life partner. My mother, Maya Joshi, is 
my hero and has shaped my values and beliefs. She has always believed in me and her 
strength of character and personal values have guided me this far. I owe all my strengths 
and any achievements to her. I am very blessed to have a wonderful mother-in-law, a 
second mother, Urmila Shanbhag. She has supported me both in the day-to-day struggles 
of taking care of a baby as well as working on my dissertation. I thank her for her 
support, her joi de vivre, and most of all for raising such a wonderful son.
Other members of my family have also been extremely supportive through all 
these years. I would like to thank my father Anand Joshi, my brother Anjaneya Joshi, and 
my father-in-law Vishnu Shanbhag. My brother-in-law, Uttam and his wife Sofia have 
also provided me with encouragement and support when I needed it most and I thank 
them for it. Deepu, Sameer, and their beautiful son Akhil have been a source of great joy 
and have made our stay in California truly memorable.
V
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
I have wonderful friends, Divya and Prashant Chaturvedi, who have always 
welcomed me and given me a roof over my head during my several trips to New Jersey.
I have known Divya for over a decade and I have always been able to count on her for 
support. I am indeed fortunate in having a friend who I can continue to reach out to for 
sharing the bitter as well as sweet experiences that life offers.
During the past six years as graduate student at the School of Management and 
Labor Relations, I have had the good fortune of having number of colleagues in the Ph.D. 
program who have been good friends. I would like to thank Mila, Maryanne, Doug, 
Maya, and Liz for our mutual therapy sessions in the corridors of Levin building. Other 
faculty members such as Jean Phillips and Joe Labianca from Emory University have 
also been a source of great advice and mentoring. The administrative staff have all been 
very helpful. I would like to thank Janice Dillela and Karen Rubarski for their help with 
all the formalities associated with graduating.
I would like to extend my gratitude to the George Harvey Program for Redefining 
Diversity, Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, for providing this dissertation 
with financial support. Particularly, I would like to thank Prof. Karen (Etty) Jehn and 
Prof. Robert Holland for providing this research with their valuable support. I would also 
like to thank Prof. Tom Kochan and the members of the Diversity Research Network for 
giving me the opportunity to work on this project. It has been a truly enriching and 
rewarding experience. Thank you all!
Aparna Joshi
vi
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. 
Abstract of the Dissertation 
............................................. ii.
2. 
Acknowledgements 
............................................. iv.
3. 
Chapter One: Introduction and Literature Review 
..............................................1.
4. 
Chapter Two: Methods 
 
54.
5. 
Chapter Three: Results 
 
69.
6. 
Chapter Four Discussion 
 
88.
7. 
References 
 
105.
8. 
Curriculum Vita 
 
142.
vii
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
LIST OF TABLES (APPENDIX 1)
1. 
Table 1: Team-level Descriptive Statistics and 
...............................................116.
Inter-Correlations.
2. 
Table2: Service Region Level Descriptive 
 
118.
Statistics and Inter-Correlations.
3. 
Table 3: Intra-class Coefficients for Outcome 
...............................................120.
Variables.
4. 
Table 4: Results of HLM Analyses. 
 
122.
5. 
Table 5: Correlations-Configurational Measures 
.............................................. 133.
and Team Processes and Performance.
6. 
Table 6: Regression Analyses for Configurational 
.............................................. 134.
Measures as Predictors of Team Outcomes.
7. 
Table 7: Hierarchical Regression Analyses for 
.............................................. 138.
Relational Configurations.
8. 
Table 8: Hierarchical Regression Analyses for 
.............................................. 140.
Task-related Configurations.
via
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
1
CHAPTER ONE: INTRODUCTION AND LITERATURE REVIEW
The effective functioning of diverse work groups has absorbed researchers in the 
area of workplace diversity over the past four decades. Research on team diversity has 
grown increasingly sophisticated, incorporating several dimensions of team diversity, 
performance, and team processes (Williams & O’Reilly, 1998). Progress in research 
parallels the evolution of organizations into increasingly complex and dynamic forms. 
Miles and Snow (1986) describe a futuristic “network organization” in terms of 
constantly evolving inter-team linkages in response to technological and market changes, 
suggesting that these linkages are critical to the organization’s survival.
In this context, the boundaries between teams and the immediate organizational 
environment have become more permeable creating newer challenges for researchers. 
Keeping in view these challenges, this dissertation considers three specific issues. First, 
the dissertation will attempt to gain a clearer understanding of the context in which 
diverse teams function, suggesting a multi-level approach to the study of diversity in 
organizations. Although research on diversity takes into account outcomes at individual, 
dyadic, team, and organizational levels, the interplay between these levels is considered 
less often (House, Rousseau, & Thomas-Hunt, 1996). While some studies have 
examined the outcomes of similarity between supervisor-subordinate dyads (Tsui & 
O’Reilly, 1989), others have examined firm level performance outcomes of diversity in 
top management teams (Hambrick, Cho & Chen, 1996; Bantel & Jackson, 1989). In this 
dissertation, an effort will be made to contribute to research by incorporating the 
relationship between diversity at multiple levels. Specifically, this dissertation considers
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
2
the organizational demographic context as a moderating influence on team level process 
and performance outcomes of diversity.
In the present business environment, teams’ ability to combine resources with 
other teams, and offer high quality products and services to clients is considered an 
imperative (Hackman, 1999). As teams strive to achieve their goals, they function in 
concert with other teams in the organization. Therefore, a second goal for this dissertation 
is to incorporate a team’s external relationships as outcomes of team diversity. Typically, 
research on work team diversity has considered how processes within teams are shaped 
by the demographic diversity of team members (Williams & O’Reilly, 1998; Milliken & 
Martins, 1996). However, while examining team functioning as an outcome of team 
diversity, research will have to take into account not only processes within teams but also 
between teams as an outcome of team diversity. By including external team 
relationships, this dissertation acknowledges that in team-based organizations 
performance is not merely an outcome of internal functioning of teams. In meeting 
organizational goals, teams external linkages are equally relevant.
A third implication of the present business environment is that as organizational 
structures continue to evolve, more complex conceptualizations of diversity are called 
for. Researchers have often noted that diversity is a multi-dimensional concept (Cox, 
1996). Individual behavior in organizations is shaped not only by one specific trait but 
also by a confluence of traits such as age, ethnicity or educational background.
Therefore, in order to understand the breadth of effects that diversity has on team 
functioning, multiple aspects of diversity in teams will have to be considered 
concurrently. The third goal of this dissertation is to propose a “configurational
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
3
approach” to measuring work team diversity and test whether this approach contributes to 
our understanding of the outcomes of diversity in work teams.
In meeting the three goals discussed above, this dissertation is organized primarily 
into four sections. In Section 1, the theoretical framework provided by the social identity 
theory and the implications of this theory for a cross-level investigation of diversity are 
discussed in detail. This section also outlines the key constructs considered in this 
dissertation. Hypotheses proposing the moderating influence of organizational 
demography on team level process outcomes are proposed in Section 2. In Section 3, the 
moderating influence of the demographic context on the relationship between team 
diversity and team performance will be introduced. It is proposed that the positive 
consequences of diversity can be strengthened and the negative consequences weakened 
by taking into account organizational demography. Finally, in Section 4, the control 
variables that are considered in this dissertation will be outlined.
Figure 1 represents an outline of this dissertation. The two broad hypotheses 
proposed by this dissertation are represented in this figure. Several dimensions of team 
heterogeneity as well as team level outcomes have been considered in this dissertation. 
The subsequent sections will describe these key concepts as well as the relationships 
proposed by the hypotheses in detail.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
4
Figure 1: Outline of the Dissertation
Hypothesis 1
Hypothesis 2
Organizational Demography
Team Performance
Goal Achievement 
Speed of Response
Intra-Team Cooperation 
Inter-Team Cooperation
Team Heterogeneity
Gender Heterogeneity 
Age Heterogeneity 
Ethnic Heterogeneity 
Tenure Heterogeneity
Educational Heterogeneity
FRAMEWORK OF THE DISSERTATION 
Social identity theory provides the theoretical framework for this dissertation. 
Social identification is the process by which individuals situate themselves cognitively in 
the external social environment. In other words, individuals attempt to make sense of the 
social environment that they are placed in by adopting certain social positions or creating 
attachments to social categories (Ashforth & Mael, 1989; Brewer, 1979). Because the 
process of social identification is considered a rudimentary and inescapable feature of an 
individual’s relationship to the social context, it is of particular relevance to the study of 
inter-group behavior and has been the mainstay of workplace diversity research (Brewer, 
1979; Jackson, May & Whitney, 1995).
The process of social identification extends to social categorization (Hogg & 
Terry, 2000). Social categorization is the process by which social identification to groups 
manifests in the formation of in-groups and out-groups. In-groups are groups of
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
5
individuals who share membership of a social group/category. Out-groups are groups of 
individuals who are classified as belonging to other social groups/categories (Ashforth & 
Mael, 1989; Guzzo & Shea, 1992; Tajfel & Turner, 1985). In order to enhance self­
esteem, individuals attribute positive characteristics to in-group members and negative 
characteristics to out-group members (Tajfel, Flament, Billig & Bundy, 1971). Tajfel and 
colleagues (1971) found that even nominal differences between individuals lead to the 
formation of social categories.
Within organizations, social categories are often formed beyond the boundaries of 
departments and other formal structures. Social categories may be formed when 
individuals align on the basis of demographic groups (e.g., race, gender, ethnicity, age) 
since these traits are relatively permanent and tangible (Northcraft, Polzer, Neale, & 
Kramer, 1996). Within teams, the formation of in-groups and out-groups, based on age, 
gender or race, may lead to several negative outcomes. These outcomes include 
prejudice, stereotypes and conflict based on real or perceived competition over scarce 
organizational resources (i.e., power, status, promotion, career advancement) (Ashforth & 
Mael, 1989).
The application of social identity theory to this dissertation involves two 
additional considerations. First, the primary research question posed by this dissertation 
is cross-level and calls for an examination of the moderating influence of organizational 
demography on the team level relationship between diversity and its outcomes, hi order 
to accommodate this cross-level inquiry, this dissertation incorporates an extension of the 
social identity theory: distinctiveness theory. Further, this dissertation extends the
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
6
application of social identity theory to inter-team cooperation as an outcome of team 
diversity.
Application of Social Identity Theory to Inter-Team Relationships
Social identity theory posits that identification based on social categories within a 
team will invariably present difficulties for team functioning on account of biases and 
prejudices between in-groups and out-groups (Ashforth & Mael, 1989). In their seminal 
treatise on the application of social identity theory to organizations, Ashforth and Mael 
(1989) acknowledge that, with regard to inter-group relations, social identity theory 
provides a “fairly pessimistic view of inter-group harmony” (pg.31). Although the 
authors do not directly address demographic diversity in organizations, they outline 
outcomes of social identification such as bias, conflict and prejudice between groups that 
are directly applicable to this research (Ashforth & Mael, 1989).
As such, the conclusions of social identity theory run counter to the “value in 
diversity” approach that some researchers have attempted to demonstrate (Cox, 1993; 
Bantel & Jackson, 1989). Researchers have sought to establish that diversity in work 
teams leads to the availability of cognitive resources that facilitate decision-making and 
hence performance (Bantel & Jackson, 1989). Research has also shown that diversity in 
teams leads to processes such as task conflict that encourage debates and the 
consideration of different perspectives and hence enhance team performance (Jehn, 
Northcraft & Neale, 1997). On the other hand, based on the social identity theory it has 
been hypothesized that diversity in work teams reduces social integration and increases 
emotional conflict in teams and, therefore, has negative outcomes for team functioning 
(Pelled, Eisenhardt, & Xin, 1999).
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
7
In an attempt to resolve this dilemma it must be noted that past research that has 
hypothesized the loss of cooperation as a result of team diversity has focused only on 
intra-team processes (Pelled et al., 1999; Watson, Kumar, & Michaelson, 1993). The 
extension of social identity theory to the relationships between teams allows hypotheses 
that propose that positive outcomes of social identification in work teams. Diverse 
teams, representing a greater number of social categories than homogeneous teams, will 
form external relationships based on these social categories. As a result, diversity in 
teams will be positively related to inter-team cooperation. In an extensive review of 
research on inter-group relations, Tajfel (1982) discussed outcomes for groups composed 
of members representing multiple social categories. The studies reviewed indicated that 
when groups are composed of multiple social categories, there is an improvement in 
relations between groups (Tajfel, 1982). For instance, with reference to an ethnically 
diverse team, team members may form relationships based on social identification with 
individuals of similar ethnicity outside the team’s boundaries. These linkages will 
enhance the team’s external relationship and ultimately improve team functioning 
(Ancona & Caldwell, 1992). The present study will extend the application of the social 
identity theory to teams’external relationships and attempt to reconcile the conclusions of 
social identity theory with the propositions of the “value in diversity” approach.
Application of Social Identity Theory Across Levels in Organizations 
Social identity theory has been applied to outcomes at the individual as well as the 
team level in past research (Brewer, 1996). While focusing on individual level outcomes 
of diversity in organizations, studies have proposed that demographic similarity between 
individuals in organizations influences the level of identification between individuals
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
8
(Tsui, Egan, & O’Reilly, 1992). When individuals are similar to other members of the 
work unit they experience greater identification with the work unit. Social identification, 
in turn, leads to positive outcomes such as commitment, cooperation and intent to stay 
with the organization. On the other hand, when individuals are dissimilar from the work 
unit, they experience lower social identification, which is reflected in turnover and 
reduced cooperation. Using the social identity framework, Tsui and colleagues (1992) 
proposed that an individual’s affective responses to others in the organization are largely 
a function of whether they consider themselves part of the in-group. The study found that 
an individual’s demographic similarity to the team was positively associated with 
perceptions of social integration (Tsui et al., 1992).
Social identity theory has also been applied to the outcomes of diversity at the 
work team level. Studies in a field as well as in laboratory settings suggest that 
identification based on demographic traits leads to outcomes such as biases and conflict 
among team members (Turner, 1981; Tajfel et al., 1971; Ashforth & Mael, 1989).
Studies in a laboratory setting (Kramer & Brewer, 1984) have demonstrated that even in 
minimal group situations the salience of in-groups and out-groups within the team 
impedes cooperation at the group level. Findings from the field setting have been less 
definitive. Pelled et al. (1999) found only partial support for the social identity theory 
while examining the outcomes of diversity in product development teams.
As discussed earlier, few studies have examined outcomes of social identification 
across levels in organizations. However, the demographic context in which teams are 
situated can have a considerable influence on team level outcomes of social 
identification. Distinctiveness theory, an extension of the social identity theory, suggests
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
9
that when an individual’s traits are distinct in relation to the immediate context these 
traits become salient. In other words, an individual’s social identification is at least 
partially environmentally determined (McGuire, McGiure, Child & Fujoka, 1978). 
According to McGuire and colleagues (1978) “ by altering a person’s social milieu so 
that a different physical characteristic becomes distinctive, we can alter the person’s self- 
concept in predictable ways” (pg. 512). Based on an experimental study, the authors 
found support for this proposition with regard to salience of ethnic traits (McGuire et al., 
1978). Cota and Dion (1986) reported similar results with regard to gender salience by 
manipulating the gender composition of the group. The basic proposition of this 
dissertation is that the outcomes of social identification in work teams are a function of 
the salience of team member’s demographic traits relative to the immediate 
organizational environment. The mechanisms by which the organizational demographic 
context can influence team level outcomes will be discussed later in this chapter.
Studying the context of team diversity in organizations provides an opportunity 
for meso level theorizing that finds common ground between micro and macro levels of 
organizational behavior (Cappelli and Sherer, 1991). In order to account for the 
contextual influences this dissertation uses a “mezoscopic” lens (Cappelli and Sherer, 
1991) to the functioning of diverse work teams to examine processes at multiple levels in 
the organization. According to House, Rousseau and Thomas-Hunt (1995), “meso theory 
and research concerns the simultaneous study of at least two levels of analysis” (pg.73).
A “mezoscopic” lens frames this research by incorporating theories and constructs at 
multiple levels (Capelli & Sherer, 1991). By including characteristics of the organization 
in which teams function as factors influencing team processes and performance, the study
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
10
proposes hypotheses that include constructs at multiple levels. This approach 
corresponds to Klein and Kozlowski’s (2000) conceptualization of “cross-level models”. 
Specifically, this research will examine how the relationship between team diversity and 
team process and performance outcomes is moderated by the organizational demographic 
context. It is proposed that the positive outcomes of team diversity (e.g., inter-team 
cooperation) will be enhanced and the negative outcomes (e.g., intra-team conflict) will 
decrease depending on the organization level demography.
Definition of Key Constructs 
In the preceding sections several constructs, pertinent to this dissertation have 
been introduced. Prior to outlining hypotheses, two key constructs fundamental to this 
dissertation will be discussed in this sub-section. These constructs are “team 
heterogeneity” and “organizational demography”.
Team Heterogeneity 
The focal construct in this inquiry is team diversity. Team diversity is measured 
using the compositional approach (Tsui & Gutek, 2000). The compositional approach 
examines the distributional properties of demographic traits like age and gender in 
organizational units. Under this framework, work unit heterogeneity is examined in terms 
of indices of variance of demographic attributes of work group members (Wagner, 
Pfeffer, & O’Reilly, 1984; Jackson et al., 1991). In the present research, the term team 
heterogeneity will represent this approach. Hypotheses relating team heterogeneity to 
performance and process outcomes are outlined along two dimensions:
1) Content of diversity examined (Task related vs. Relations oriented)
2) Measurement approach followed (Additive vs. Configurational)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
11
Broadly defined, the content of diversity has been classified as relations oriented 
and task related (Jackson et al., 1995; Millikin & Martins, 1996). Relations oriented 
diversity relates to demographics such as age, gender and race that do not have direct 
relevance to performance but are instrumental in shaping interpersonal relationships 
(Jackson et al., 1995). Task oriented diversity (i.e., function, tenure, education), as the 
term suggests, is directly related to knowledge, skills and abilities in the workplace 
(Jackson et al., 1995). In this dissertation, hypotheses are proposed with regard to both 
task related and relations oriented heterogeneity.
In terms of the measurement approach to team heterogeneity, research has so far 
focused on the variance in performance or process that can be uniquely attributed to each 
dimension of heterogeneity such as education (Hambrick, Cho & Chen, 1996), tenure, 
(O’Reilly, Caldwell, & Barnett, 1989), or age (Zenger & Lawrence, 1989). This approach 
will be termed the additive approach to measuring the outcomes of team heterogeneity. 
The hypotheses proposing the moderating influence of organizational demography will 
be proposed under the additive framework. However, focusing only on one aspect of 
diversity belies the full spectrum of diversity in organizations (Cox, 1996). For instance, 
in a heterogeneous team individual team members will not identify with only one social 
group at a time. Rather a team member may view herself as well as her team members in 
terms of multiple attributes such as “White female engineer” or “Asian male scientist”. 
Rather than the sum of each dimension of heterogeneity, therefore, behavior in teams 
may be determined by the configuration of the team member’s overall heterogeneity.
This approach will be termed the configurational approach to measuring diversity in
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
12
teams. Since research in this area is nascent, supplementary hypotheses will be proposed 
to test the direct relationship between team configurations and team outcomes.
Organizational Demography as Context 
Since 1966, Equal Employment Opportunity Laws have promoted the 
representation of women and ethnic minorities in the organization. Over the past four 
decades, organizational approaches to workplace diversity have evolved from meeting 
Title VII guidelines to valuing diversity as a business necessity (Jackson & Joshi, 2001). 
Depending on existing policies on workplace diversity as well as economic cycles and 
labor market restrictions, organizations differ in their demographic makeup (Cox, 1993). 
Based on the extent of diversity in the organization, past research has offered typologies 
of organizational demography (Cox, 1993; Thomas & Ely, 1996). For instance, Cox’s 
(1993)1 typology is based on several dimensions such as the level of acculturation in the 
organization, institutional bias in human resource practices, as well as formal and 
informal integration of cultural groups. These aspects of the organizational context, 
while relevant, are outside the purview of this dissertation. Cox’s (1993) typology is 
pertinent to this discussion because it suggests that the demographic makeup of the
1 Cox (1993) differentiates between three types of organizations -Monolithic, Plural and 
Multicultural organizations. Monolithic organizations are culturally homogenous at all levels. 
Organizational values, practices and policies are geared towards maintaining the overall homogeneity in the 
organization and excluding ethnic minorities. Plural organizations have adopted policies aimed at avoiding 
litigation based on Tide VII as well as affirmative action. These practices are reflected in a higher level of 
structural integration and a lower level of institutionalized biases in comparison to Monolithic 
organizations. Finally, “Multicultural” organizations are characterized by organizational culture and values 
that respect cultural differences (Cox, 1993). Policies reflect an absence of institutional bias and all 
cultural groups are fully integrated formally as well as informally in the organization (Cox, 1993). While 
this dissertation does not consider organizational demography on the basis of the three categories discussed 
above, it is pertinent to note that outcomes at the team level may differ based on whether they operate in a 
monolithic, plural or multicultural organization (Cox. 1993; Joshi, 2001). As an illustration, an ethnically 
diverse team will have more positive relationships in a multicultural organization that supports and 
promotes the interests of ethnic minorities than in a monolithic organization that is less supportive of 
minorities.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
13
organization can influence the level of conflict between demographic groups, which, in 
turn, will have consequences for team functioning.
In this dissertation, organizational demography is defined as heterogeneity in the 
organization, and measured as the index of variation in demographic traits among 
employees at managerial levels as well as non-managerial levels in various organizational 
units of a single organization. These organizational units were located all over the United 
States and represented varied demographic profiles. These organizational units may also 
be viewed as the “universe” that would be of immediate relevance to the teams being 
studied. In heterogeneous organizational units no single demographic group will be 
numerically distinctive. As a consequence, in organizational units that are 
heterogeneous at the managerial as well as non-managerial levels, the demographic 
identities of team members will not be salient and the negative outcomes of social 
identification, discussed earlier, will not materialize (Chatman, Berdhal, Boisinier, 
Spataro, & Anderson, 2000). Wharton (1992) reviewed conditions under which social 
categories such as race or gender become salient According to Wharton (1992), in 
organizations characterized by occupational segregation along gender and race, racial and 
gender identification become salient. Thus, the lack of gender and racial integration 
across levels in the organization, reflected in homogeneity at managerial ranks, can 
influence the salience of gender and race based identification in organizations and 
ultimately have negative consequences for diverse teams (Whaiton, 1992).
Other theoretical perspectives also inform this conceptualization of organizational 
demography. Studies on “ethnic niching” in the labor market suggest that individuals 
tend to gain authority positions in labor markets when the labor market is predominantly
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
14
composed of the ethnic group to which the individual belongs (Waldinger, 1996; Smith 
& Elliot, in press). According to Waldinger (1996) in a market predominated by an 
ethnic group, new entrants belonging to that group may gain privileges and protection 
that are not available in a market that has lower density with respect to that ethnicity. 
Within an organization, demographic groups that are in a numerical majority would 
experience relatively positive outcomes in comparison to groups that are 
underrepresented in the organization. In organizations that are predominantly White, for 
instance, a team composed of ethnic minorities may not gain access to social support 
networks outside the team (Friedman & Krackhardt, 1996; Joshi, 2001). As a result, the 
team will not be able to form external relationships that are important for the team’s 
functioning.
Together these perspectives suggest that the organization’s demographic 
composition at managerial as well as non-managerial levels will influence the outcomes 
of team level heterogeneity. In the subsequent sections, hypotheses considering the 
moderating influence of organizational demography on the relationship between team 
heterogeneity and team process and performance outcomes will be discussed.
TEAM HETEROGENEITY AND TEAM PROCESSES
In this section, a review of research relating team heterogeneity to team processes 
is presented. Both the additive and configurational approach are outlined in relation to 
intra-team cooperation as well as inter-team cooperation. Relations oriented 
heterogeneity is considered in terms of gender, ethnicity and age. Dimensions of task 
related heterogeneity considered in this section are tenure and educational background 
heterogeneity.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
15
Additive Model: Team Heterogeneity and Intra-Team Cooperation
The studies discussed below have employed the additive model for the study of 
heterogeneity in teams. Studies under this framework have examined how each 
dimension of heterogeneity such as age, gender, or educational background can influence 
cooperation within the team. The subsequent sub-sections review research on gender, 
ethnicity, age, tenure and educational heterogeneity in organizations. The review 
incorporates research on each of these indices of team heterogeneity in relation to intra­
team cooperation.
As discussed earlier, based on the social identity theory it has been proposed that 
social categorization in teams will lead to the formation of in-groups and out-groups 
based on gender, ethnicity, age or tenure (Ashforth & Mael, 1989). Team members will 
experience positive affect toward in-group members and negative biases toward out­
group members within the team. This process will be reflected in cooperative behaviors 
of team members (Sanchez-Mazas, Roux & Mugny, 1987; Lott & Lott, 1965; Brewer, 
1996). Overall, in a team representing several demographic groups (i.e., a heterogeneous 
team) lack of in-group identification will translate into lack of cooperation among team 
members (Kramer, 1991). On the other hand, in a homogenous team higher levels of in­
group identification will be related to more cooperative behaviors (Kramer, 1991). In 
this sub-section, past research on the relationship between relations oriented as well task 
related heterogeneity and team cooperation is reviewed. Organizational demography is 
proposed as a moderator of the relationship between team heterogeneity and intra-team 
cooperation
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
16
Relations Oriented Heterogeneity and Intra-Team Cooperation 
Research has examined relations oriented attributes such as team age, gender, and 
ethnicity in relation to process outcomes such as conflict and cooperation in teams. The 
following discussion examines the relationship between each dimension of relations 
oriented heterogeneity and intra- team cooperation.
Gender Heterogeneity
A rich body of research has examined the outcomes of gender composition of 
work groups (Kanter, 1977; Israeli, 1983; Tolbert, Andrews & Simons, 1996). The focus 
of this research has been on the consequences of gender proportions for affective and 
behavioral outcomes for men and women (e.g, Kanter, 1977; Wharton & Baron, 1987). 
Some studies have demonstrated that being in a minority position will have negative 
outcomes for women as well as men. As the numbers for the gender group in a minority 
increase, members of the minority group, whether men or women, will experience 
positive psychological outcomes (Kanter, 1977). Because being male or female is closely 
associated with status differentials in organizations, other studies suggest that increasing 
the proportion of the minority group will have different consequences depending on 
whether men or women are in a minority (Konrad, Winter & Gutek, 1992). When the 
proportion of women increases in a group, women will experience negative outcomes 
reflected in an increase in female turnover rates (Tolbert et al., 1996). On the other hand, 
men will experience positive outcomes as the proportion of men in a work group 
increases (Tolbert et al., 1996; Wharton & Baron, 1987). Albeit indirectly, these findings 
are relevant for this dissertation. The studies on gender proportions in work groups 
highlight the fact that numerical composition of work groups has behavioral and affective
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
17
consequences for its members. These consequences will influence intra-team 
cooperation.
The approach to measuring gender composition in this dissertation differs from 
the studies discussed above. The basic research question of direct relevance to this 
dissertation is whether intra-team cooperation in a gender balanced work group (reflected 
in the highest level of gender heterogeneity) will differ from a predominantly male or 
female work group (reflected in the lowest level of gender heterogeneity). Research on 
the relationship between gender heterogeneity and team cooperation has found mixed 
results. In a study of product development teams, Pelted and colleagues (1999) did not 
find a significant positive relationship between gender heterogeneity and emotional 
conflict in organizations. Recently, Lewis and Gibson (2000) found a negative though 
non-significant relationship between gender heterogeneity and perceptions of collective 
efficacy in the group. However, laboratory studies have indicated lower levels of 
“friendliness” and higher levels of conflict in mixed work groups in comparison to 
homogenous work groups (Alagna, Reddy & Collins, 1982). Further, Tsui et al., (1992) 
found that individual’s similarity to the group based on gender is positively associated 
with measures of social integration. At the team level, lack of perceived social 
integration may lead to negative outcomes. Thus, it may be proposed that gender 
heterogeneity is negatively related to intra-team cooperation.
Ethnic Heterogeneity
In this dissertation the terms “race” and “ethnicity” are closely related and 
subscribe to the “ethnic” categories in the 1990 Census as well as the Equal Employment 
Opportunity guidelines. The studies discussed below focus on race relations (primarily
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
18
between Blacks and Whites) and are relevant to the present inquiry, as they suggest that 
the proportions of race/ethnic groups in a team will influence relationships between these 
groups.
As with regard to gender, a significant body of research has addressed the issue of 
racial composition of work groups. Predominantly, two approaches characterize this 
research. The first approach is based on social contact theory. This approach suggests 
that as the proportions of racial minorities in a work group increases, owing to an 
increased propensity of social contact between majority and minority members, inter-race 
relationships will improve (Blau, 1977; Allport, 1954; Hewstone & Brown, 1986). A 
second approach based on theories of competition suggest that an increase in the 
percentage of minorities will be viewed as a threat and associated with a real or perceived 
competition over scarce resources (Blalock, 1967). In support of this view, early research 
in an era of de-segregation in the United States found negative outcomes such as increase 
in racial conflict as a result of an increase in relative proportions of Blacks in 
predominantly White communities (Blalock, 1967; Reed, 1972).
Studies have also examined the direct relationship between ethnic heterogeneity 
and cooperation. Based on social identity theory, ethnic heterogeneity in teams will 
result in lower cooperation owing to social categorization on the basis of ethnicity (Tajfel 
et al., 1971). In a laboratory study of ethnically mixed and homogenous student groups, 
Watson, Kumar, and Michaelsen (1993) found that homogenous groups showed more 
cooperative group processes than heterogeneous groups. In a field setting, in a study of 
work groups developing new processes and electronic products, Pelled and her colleagues
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
19
(1999) found that ethnic heterogeneity was positively associated with emotional conflict 
in teams.
Age Heterogeneity
Research on the relationship between age heterogeneity (variance in age of team 
members) and team processes is based on the premise that age differences among team 
members translate into differences in attitudes, values and beliefs, detrimental to team 
functioning (Lawrence, 1988). Knight and colleagues (1999) examined the mediating 
role of agreement seeking behavior between top management teams’ age composition 
and strategic consensus. The study indicates a significant negative relationship between 
age heterogeneity and agreement seeking behavior in top management teams (Knight et 
al., 1999). The study also points to a positive though non-significant relationship 
between interpersonal conflict and teams’ age heterogeneity (Knight et al., 1999). Other 
studies on top management teams have found significant relationships between teams’ 
age heterogeneity and behavioral outcomes such as turnover (Jackson et al., 1991; 
Wiersnia & Bird, 1993). Pelled et al. (1999) report a contradictory finding in their study 
on work groups in three electronic divisions. Results of the study indicated that age 
heterogeneity was negatively related to emotional conflict in teams. Pelled et al., (1999) 
explain these findings by pointing out that individuals belonging to a similar age group 
may form rivalries and compete for playing the role of “leader” in teams. Overall, the 
findings with regard to the relationship between age heterogeneity and intra-team 
cooperation are mixed.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
20
Relations Oriented Team Heterogeneity and Intra-Team Cooperation: Moderated bv
Organizational Demography 
In organizations, biases reflected in recruitment and selection strategies are geared 
towards maintaining existing demographic profiles at all levels of the organization 
(Heilman, Block & Martell, 1996). These policies eventually result in occupational 
segregation along demographic lines (Mittman, 1992; Wharton, 1992). Wharton (1992) 
reviewed conditions under which social categories such as race or gender become salient 
and proposed that occupational segregation reinforces gender and race based 
identification leading to greater conflict between demographic groups and greater 
solidarity within demographic groups (Wharton, 1992). Overall these observations 
suggest that organizational demographic patterns are shaped by policies of recruitment, 
selection and career development. These patterns, in turn, shape group level processes in 
organizations.
With regard to intra-team processes, it may be argued that the outcomes of social 
identification in teams can be shaped by the organization’s demographic context.
Ashforth and Mael (1989) suggest that even “negatively valued” distinctions in 
organizations strengthen identity salience (pg. 24). Chatman and her colleagues (2000) 
recently found support for the main effect of numerical distinctiveness on gender identity 
salience in majority male, majority female, and mixed groups (Chatman et al., 2000). 
Mehra, Kilduff and Brass (1998), in a sample of MBA students, found that ethnic 
minority groups were marginal in the friendship networks and formed homophilous ties 
(i.e., relationships with individuals of the same ethnicity). Taken together, these studies 
indicate that the demographic distinctiveness of one’s identity group in organizations
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
21
increases salience with respect to that identity. In teams, identity salience will manifest 
in diminished cooperation when the immediate organizational environment is 
homogeneous. In heterogeneous organizations, no single demographic group will appear 
distinctive. As a result, demographic identities will not become salient and team 
heterogeneity will not manifest in diminished cooperation. The following is proposed: 
Hypothesis la. Organizational demography will moderate the relationship 
between relations oriented team heterogeneity and intra-team cooperation. There 
will be a negative relationship between team heterogeneity and intra-team 
cooperation when organizational heterogeneity is low. This relationship will not 
be significant when organizational heterogeneity is high.
Task Related Heterogeneity and Intra-Team Cooperation 
As discussed earlier, diversity in organizations may be task related or relations 
oriented (Jackson et al., 1995; Millikin & Martins, 1996). So far the dimensions of 
heterogeneity that have been discussed are considered relations oriented as they have no 
direct relationship to the performance of tasks. Tenure and educational background, on 
the other hand, may be considered traits that are directly associated with work 
experiences. Organizational tenure may bestow knowledge, skills and abilities that are 
job relevant by virtue of on-the job training or firm specific skills. Educational 
background confers task-based skills to individuals (Jackson et al., 1995).
Tenure Heterogeneity
Studies of tenure heterogeneity in organizations propose that individuals that enter 
organizations at the same time share similar experiences (Pfeffer, 1983). Wagner et al. 
(1984) suggest that individuals who join the company at the same time develop sim ilar
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
22
values and patterns of communication. Thus, it may be proposed that work groups 
composed of team members that have joined the organization at the same time have 
common attitudes and values, may create stronger in-group identification, lower conflict, 
and higher levels of cooperation. At the same time, in work groups characterized by 
higher levels of tenure heterogeneity differences in attitudes and values may discourage 
cooperation.
Based on the social comparison theory and social identity theory, Pelled et al. 
(1999) proposed competing hypotheses with regard to the effects of tenure heterogeneity 
in organizations. Based on social comparison theory, Pelled et al. (1999) proposed a 
negative relationship between tenure heterogeneity and conflict. This hypothesis was 
based on the rational that in teams were homogeneous on the basis of tenure, there would 
be a tendency among team members to compare themselves to each other leading to more 
conflict. The study, however, found support for the social identity theory, in that tenure 
heterogeneity was positively related to conflict in teams. This result is corroborated by 
Knight et al. (1999) who found that tenure heterogeneity was positively related to 
interpersonal conflict and negatively associated with agreement seeking behavior in 
teams. However, neither of these relationships approached statistical significance (Knight 
et al., 1999).
Educational Background Heterogeneity
A second element of task related heterogeneity is the nature of education that 
individuals receive. These differences translate into different knowledge bases as well as 
work experiences for individuals (Jackson et al., 1991; Jehn, Chadwick & Thatcher, 
1997). The nature of the training or education received as well as the level of education
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
23
may be viewed as indicators of task related differences among team members. Based on 
the social identity perspective, differences in attitudes and values will trigger social 
categorization and diminish cooperation in the team (Brewer, 1996). At the individual 
level, Jehn et al. (1997) found that when individuals differed in terms of educational 
background in relation to the group they perceived greater conflict in the group. This 
hypothesis was also supported at the team level. In a study of a household goods moving 
firm, Jehn and colleagues (1999) found that when informational heterogeneity was higher 
in teams so was task conflict (Jehn, Northcraft, & Neale, 1999). Knight et al. (1999) 
found that in top management teams educational heterogeneity was negatively related to 
strategic consensus among team members. Strategic consensus was defined as the shared 
perception of firm strategy (Knight et al., 1999).
Task Related Team Heterogeneity and Intra-Team Cooperation: Moderated bv
Organizational Demography 
With regard to tenure based cohorts in organizations, Pfeffer (1983) notes that “in 
organizations cohorts produce two important effects-potential conflict across cohort 
groups, and sponsorship, solidarity, and mutual choice within such groups” (pg.335). 
Further, these intra-cohort and inter-cohort dynamics are unavoidable unless 
organizations hire on a regular basis diminishing the possibility of distinct cohorts 
(Pfeffer, 1983). Davis-Blake (1992) suggests that another method to avoid distinct 
cohorts is to create internal career ladders that allow individuals to move from lower to 
middle to upper levels in the organizations. However, in reality, few organizations are 
able to follow these procedures that would diminish cohort effects.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
24
A similar argument can be made with regard to educational background.
Common educational backgrounds can create strong bonds between individuals in 
organizations (Wiersema & Bantel, 1989). Thus, organizational task related 
heterogeneity can influence the salience of identification with task related traits such as 
tenure or education in teams. In heterogeneous organizations, no single tenure or 
educational background based group will appear distinctive. As a result, team 
heterogeneity in heterogeneous organizations will not manifest in diminished 
cooperation. The following is proposed:
Hypothesis lb. Organizational demography will moderate the relationship 
between task related team heterogeneity and intra-team cooperation. There will be 
a negative relationship between team heterogeneity and intra-team cooperation 
when organizational heterogeneity is low. This relationship will not be significant 
when organizational heterogeneity is high.
Configurational Model: Team Heterogeneity and Intra-Team Cooperation 
The structure of diversity discussed thus far relates to team heterogeneity along a 
single dimension. For example, researchers have investigated heterogeneity in terms of 
age or tenure in relation to outcomes such as turnover or commitment (O’Reilly et al., 
1989; Wagner et al., 1984; Tsui et al., 1992; Jackson et al., 1991). In posing hypotheses 
relating diversity (at the dyadic level) to outcomes for leader-member dyads, Tsui & 
O’Reilly (1989) state that “while focussing on the main effects of each [diversity 
measure they] assume constancy for all others” (pg.l 14). It has been acknowledged that 
diversity is a multi-dimensional construct and that the interplay between different types 
of diversity in work groups needs examination. Focusing on single attributes belies the
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
25
full spectrum of diversity in work teams (Pelled et al., 1999; Jackson & Joshi, 2001; Lau 
& Mumighan, 1999; Tsui & Gutek, 2000). Jehn et al. (1999) studied the interaction 
between value diversity, social category diversity and task-related diversity on work 
group performance. The results suggest that task-related diversity was positively related 
to work group performance when value diversity and social category diversity are low 
(Jehn et al., 1999). These observations suggest that examining diversity along multiple 
dimensions is relevant.
Tsui and Gutek (2000) note that attempts to construct composite measures of 
heterogeneity along multiple attributes have been largely unsuccessful. A notable 
theoretical contribution in this regard is by Lau and Mumighan (1999). They note that 
when individual demographic factors align along the lines of distinct attributes faultlines 
are formed in the group. In groups, fewer faultlines indicate more distinct sub-groups.
On the other hand, multiple faultlines indicate diffuse sub-group membership. Distinct 
sub-group formations have the potential for creating conflict in teams (Lau & Mumighan, 
1999). Recently, Randel (2000) operationalized faultlines in a field setting as the 
formation of subgroups along the lines of race, gender, and occupation. Randel’s (2000) 
study examined the number of faultlines as an antecedent to identity salience in work 
groups. The study was undertaken at the individual level and found that the number of 
faultlines was negatively related to the gender based identity salience in individuals.
In theory, the conceptualization of faultlines discussed above is interesting. 
Measuring faultlines in a field setting, however, can prove to be a challenge. The present 
study extends past work in this regard by offering a team level construct of multi­
dimensional heterogeneity. By creating a composite index of team’s configuration along
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
26
multiple dimensions the study examines outcomes at the team level. For the purpose of 
reducing the complexity associated with creating this multidimensional construct two 
types of configurations are proposed in this research. The first relates to relations 
oriented configurations that include race, gender and age. The second relates to task 
related configurations that are based on educational and tenure characteristics of team 
members. This differentiation also subscribes to the categorization of demographic 
attributes developed by past research (Jackson et al., 1995; Jehn et al., 1999)
Relations Oriented Configurations and Intra-Team Cooperation
In a review of psychological research on gender, ethnic and class identities Frable 
(1997) suggests that research on each of these identities needs to be combined in order to 
“see people as a whole”. Studies on authority attainment in the labor market have noted 
that outcomes of investment in human capital differ based on race as well as gender 
(Smith & Elliot, in press; Friedman & Krackhardt, 1997). For instance, White males gain 
the maximum returns out of investment in human capital in comparison to White females, 
or black males (Smith & Elliot, in press). Thus, group differences based on multiple 
dimensions have received some attention in research. However, the composition of work 
team based on these multiple dimensions is yet to be explored.
In organizations, interactions among individuals are seldom governed by an 
individual’s attribute in terms of ethnicity, gender or age alone. Similarly, in teams the 
configuration of team members attributes in terms of ethnicity, age and gender may 
influence process outcomes such as intra-team cooperation. Allen, Wilder and Atkinson 
(1983) note that a number of group memberships together influence an individual’s 
experience of social identification in organizations. According to Allen et al. (1983),
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
27
when individuals in a group overlap on social group membership along multiple 
dimensions the identities become “concordant” . When the individuals in a group 
represent multiple social categories the identities in a group become discordant. The lack 
of “harmony” between social identities among group members impedes the formation of 
a group level identity (pg. 98). Since, research on the configurational properties of teams 
along multiple dimensions is in its infancy, based on the social identity perspective the 
following is hypothesized:
Supplementary hypothesis la. Relations oriented configurational heterogeneity 
will be negatively related to intra-team cooperation.
Task Related Configurations and Intra- Team Cooperation 
Task related configuration of the team would be relevant to staffing and training 
related decisions in organizations (Guzzo & Dickson, 1996). As mentioned earlier, 
common tenure and educational background create common attitudes and values among 
individuals (Wiersema & Bird, 1993). Educational and tenure backgrounds may together 
influence behavior. For instance, two individuals may share similar educational 
backgrounds but may belong to different tenure groups and as a result have dissimilar 
experiences in organizations. The individual with the higher tenure may have more power 
and status in the organization and be in a position to enforce his decision within the team 
unlike his junior counterpart. On the other hand, when team members with higher 
education but lower tenure try to influence decision making in a team they may be 
viewed as “upstarts” by colleagues with lower education but higher tenure. Thus, task 
related configurational heterogeneity may impede the formation of a common team level
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
28
identity and hence cooperation within the team. The present research hypothesizes the 
following:
Supplementary hypothesis lb. Task related configurational heterogeneity in a 
team will be negatively related to intra-team cooperation.
Additive model: Team Heterogeneity and Inter-Team Cooperation 
In this section, an effort will be made to relate team level heterogeneity to 
external relationships. Studies based on the social identity perspective have hitherto 
focused on the relationship between heterogeneity and processes within teams (e.g., 
Pelled et al., 1999). Examining teams’ activities beyond the team boundaries has been the 
domain of researchers who have focused on teams from an "external" perspective 
(Ancona & Caldwell, 1992; Gladstein, 1984).
One of the earliest contributions to the development of an external perspective on 
team functioning was by Homans (1950). Homans (1950) observed that a team’s 
environment is composed of both an internal and an external system. A team’s internal 
and external environments continually shape each other. Homans (1950) illustrated this 
process in the Bank Wiring Observation Room in the Hawthorne Experiments. Five 
decades later, with the increasing adoption of team based organizational structures 
(Sundstorm, DeMeuse, & Feutrell, 1990), this perspective continues to be relevant to 
research on teams (Hackman, 1999).
In organizations, interactions among employees are shaped by processes of social 
identification and extend outside the formal boundaries of teams and departments (Ibarra 
& Smith-Lovin, 1997). In teams that reflect multiple social categories the probability of 
forming relationships based on these social categories outside the team is also greater
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
29
(Ashforth & Mael, 1989; Ancona & Caldwell, 1998). Ancona and Caldwell (1992) 
recognize that a team’s composition is a key determinant of a team’s external behavior. 
According to Ancona and Caldwell (1992) tenure and functional heterogeneity will 
determine the extent to which teams engage in “boundary spanning” behaviors (i.e., 
interactions outside the team boundary). They do not, however, acknowledge all the 
aspects of team heterogeneity that may influence this relationship. To be specific, the 
authors ignore relations oriented heterogeneity such as race, or gender that may influence 
team members’ behavior.
Ashforth and Mael (1989) provide insights that would further aid the 
understanding of the relationship between teams’ heterogeneity and external 
relationships. Ashforth and Mael (1989) suggest that homogeneity in work teams 
increases the salience of team based social categorization and reduces the permeability of 
group boundaries. Individuals in homogenous groups find all their social identification 
needs satisfied within the team and hence do not feel the need to interact with individuals 
outside the group (Ashforth & Mael, 1989). Similarly, Brewer and Miller (1984) observe 
that the overlap of group identities based on different dimensions increases the salience 
of group boundaries and leads to "convergent group boundaries" (pg. 283). The present 
research will examine team heterogeneity in relation to teams' external relationships. 
Along with task related heterogeneity, i.e., tenure and educational heterogeneity, this 
study will examine age, gender and ethnic heterogeneity as predictors of teams’ external 
relationships.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
30
Relations-oriented Heterogeneity and Inter-Team Cooperation 
In organizations, informal relationships and roles often transcend formal positions 
and hierarchies. Informal relationships in organizations are based on individual’s social 
identification with extra-organizational communities such as age groups, racial groups or 
gender based groups (Ibarra, 1992, 199S). Thus, relations oriented attributes such as race, 
age or gender may influence a team member’s external relationships.
Gender Heterogeneity
Kanter (1977) observed that when women are in token positions in organizations 
they face social isolation and negative outcomes such as the pressure to succeed as 
representatives of their gender group. From a social identity perspective, these 
observations suggest that women may be treated as the out-group in organizations and 
therefore be subject to biases and prejudice. Research has indicated that the gender 
identification in organizations is reflected in organizational social networks (Ibarra & 
Smith-Lovin, 1997). In a study of male and female managers in an advertising firm, 
Ibarra (1992) found that men form homophilous (same gender) networks that are both 
social and instrumental in nature. Women, on the other, hand form multiplex (cross- 
gender) networks that are instrumental in nature while forming homophilous networks 
that are of a social nature (Ibarra, 1992).
Given the propensity of individuals to form same gender relationships across the 
organization, gender heterogeneity in teams may indicate the extent to which team 
members form same gender relationships outside the team. In comparison to 
homogeneous teams, in teams that are heterogeneous on the basis of gender, boundaries 
may be more permeable as both men and women seek same gender relationships outside
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
31
the team. A mix of male and female members within the team will increase the 
probability of team member seeking same gender relationships outside the team. Based 
on these relationships, team members may cooperate with individuals outside the team. 
Ethnic Heterogeneity
Anthropological studies have found a reduction in tribal hostilities as a result of 
individuals from one tribe crossing over to the "enemy" tribe (Levine and Campbell, 
1972). In studying tribes that were historically in conflict with each other, researchers 
found that when individuals from one tribe married into the other tribe, they began to 
identify with both tribes. Over time, these relationships led to a reduction of conflict 
between the tribes (Levine & Campbell, 1972). Similarly in an experimental setting, 
when respondents belonging to two distinct social categories were “criss-crossed” 
between these categories there was a decline in inter-group discrimination (Deschamps & 
Doise, 1978). These studies indicate that in organizational work groups that reflect 
multiple group memberships team members’ display more cooperative external 
behaviors.
Cox, Lobel, and McLeod (1991) conducted a laboratory study on the influence of 
ethnic composition of groups of cooperative behaviors. Cox and colleagues (1991) drew, 
upon cross-cultural theories to propose that non-white ethnic groups (Blacks, Asians and 
Hispanics) were oriented towards collectivist values and were more likely to display 
cooperative behaviors towards other groups than were Whites. White Anglo-Americans 
were more likely to display individualistic values and were hence less likely to be 
cooperative towards other groups. The study found support for this proposition. On 
average, teams that comprised of non-white ethnic groups were more willing to cooperate
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
32
with other teams on a Prisoners’ Dilemma task. The authors conclude that ethnic 
heterogeneity enhances cooperative work behaviors and inter-team cooperation in 
organizations (Cox et al., 1991). These findings suggest that ethnically heterogeneous 
teams, comprising of non-White ethnic groups, will display more cooperative behaviors 
towards other teams in the organization than ethnically homogenous White teams.
Age Heterogeneity
As discussed earlier, individuals belonging to similar age groups share common 
experiences, attitudes and values (Lawrence, 1988). Zenger and Lawrence (1989) note 
that although age similarity may promote social communication outside the work group 
this communication may also reinforce task related communication. In a study of project 
groups in a research division of an electronics firm, Zenger and Lawrence (1989) found 
that individuals communicated with others outside the group based on similarity in age. 
Based on the findings discussed above it may be proposed that groups that represent 
several age categories will communicate more frequently with individuals of similar ages 
outside the team. By virtue of membership that is diverse in terms of age the probability 
of seeking relationships based on age outside the team would increase. On the other 
hand, if teams are homogenous on the basis of age will have relationships restricted only 
to single age group outside the team. Task-related and social relationships outside the 
team may reflect in greater cooperation between teams.
Relations Oriented Team Heterogeneity and Inter-Team Cooperation: Moderated by
Organizational Demography 
The preceding section proposed that intra- team cooperation is influenced by the 
extent of heterogeneity of the immediate organizational context This proposition is also
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
33
relevant for relationships between teams in organizations. Studies on the access of 
women and minorities to social capital in organizations incorporates the influence of the 
organization’s demographic context on the marginalization of these gender and racial 
groups and provide insights in this regard (Ibarra, 1992,1995; Ely, 1994,1995).
As discussed earlier, the social construction of gender and race in organizations 
(reflected in occupational segregation) reinforces identification on the basis of gender or 
race (Ely, 1995; Wharton, 1992; Nkomo, 1992). This identification is reflected in social 
networks in organizations (Ibarra & Smith-Lovin 1997). Women and minorities are 
typically isolated from social and instrumental exchanges in organizations (Ibarra, 1992, 
1995). Lack of access to social capital is often a barrier to the advancement of women 
and minorities in organizations (Ragins & Sundstorm, 1990; Friedman & Krackhardt,
1997). Representation of women and minorities in all ranks of the organizational 
hierarchy is one way of promoting access to social capital (Morrison & Von Glinow, 
1990). When the organizational demographic context is characterized by heterogeneity 
across levels, individuals will be able to access social networks outside the team. In other 
words, the heterogeneity of the immediate organizational context will place limits on the 
extent of relationships that team members have outside the team. Heterogeneous teams 
will be able to realize the benefits of their composition, in terms of positive external 
relationships, only in heterogeneous organizational settings.
Based on the social identity theory it has been proposed that homogeneous teams 
form impermeable boundaries in comparison to heterogeneous teams and form fewer 
relationships outside the team (Ashforth & Mael, 1989). However, the extent to which a 
team is able to form external relationships is determined by the team’s demographic
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
34
composition as well as the demographic composition of the immediate context. In a 
heterogeneous organization, a team’s demographic composition will not constrain the 
team’s external relationships. Thus, the following is proposed:
Hypothesis 1c. Organizational demography will moderate the relationship 
between relations oriented team heterogeneity and inter- team cooperation. There 
will be a positive relationship between team heterogeneity and inter-team 
cooperation when organizational heterogeneity is high. There will be a non­
significant relationship between team heterogeneity and inter-team cooperation 
when organizational heterogeneity is low.
Task Related Heterogeneity and Inter-Team Cooperation 
As in the case of relations oriented heterogeneity, it has been proposed that task 
related heterogeneity can trigger social categorization in organizations. Often in 
organizations departmental memberships or functional expertise can create common 
behaviors, languages and attitudes among employees (Kramer, 1991; Alderfer, 1988). 
Similarly common tenure or educational background may foster common attitudes and 
values that lead to relationships across teams. Memberships in alumni or professional 
associations based on educational background may encourage interactions across teams. 
As such, task related heterogeneity may influence team’s external relationships.
Tenure Heterogeneity
Individuals who enter the organization at the same time share similar 
organizational experiences and have similar attitudes and values towards work (Zenger & 
Lawrence, 1988; Wagner et al., 1984; Jackson et al., 1991). Zenger and Lawrence (1989) 
examined technical communications outside the work group as a function of similarity in
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
35
tenure among a relevant set of individuals outside the group. The study found that tenure 
similarity with individuals outside the group was positively associated with the frequency 
of technical communications outside the group. Ancona and Caldwell (1998) note that 
tenure heterogeneity in teams promotes certain types of boundary spanning behaviors that 
will enhance a team’s effectiveness. For instance, representatives with long tenure in the 
organization may provide avenues of access to upper levels of management. On the other 
hand, newcomers in the organization may form relationships with other newcomers 
outside the team and gain access to the latest technical know-how (Ancona & Caldwell,
1998). Forming relationships outside the team based on tenure will increase cooperative 
behaviors with individuals outside the team.
Educational Background Heterogeneity
When individuals in a team represent multiple educational backgrounds the 
tendency to form relationships outside the team based on these backgrounds may 
increase. Ancona and Caldwell (1992) found that functional heterogeneity in teams is 
positively related to the team’s external relationships. Educational background may be 
viewed as a precursor to an individual’s functional expertise. Thus, a similar logic may be 
extended to educational heterogeneity in relation to a team’s external relationships. 
Wiersema and Bantel (1991), in a study of top management teams in Japan, found that 
university prestige determined social interactions in organizations. Based on the social 
identity framework, educational background may generate identification across team 
boundaries that is reflected in team’s external relationships.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
36
Task-related Team Heterogeneity and Inter-Team Cooperation: Moderated bv
Organizational Demography 
Pfeffer (1983) argues that distinct cohorts in organizations have consequences for 
relationships within groups as well as between groups. In organizations, distinct cohorts 
will constrain relationships outside the team based on tenure or educational background. 
While cohorts foster solidarity within these groups, relationships between individuals 
belonging to different cohorts may be characterized by lack of cooperation and even 
animosity (Pfeffer, 1983; Mittman, 1992). A heterogeneous team will represent a greater 
number of cohort groups than a homogeneous team. However, the extent to which these 
cohorts are represented in the organization at large, will determine the extent to which 
team members can form relationships outside the team. Thus, the following is proposed: 
Hypothesis Id. Organizational demography will moderate the relationship 
between task related team heterogeneity and inter-team cooperation. There will be 
a positive relationship between team heterogeneity and inter-team cooperation 
when organizational heterogeneity is high. There will be a non-significant 
relationship between team heterogeneity and inter-team cooperation when 
organizational heterogeneity is low.
Configurational Model: Team Heterogeneity and Inter-Team Cooperation 
The following discussion focuses on team relations oriented and task related 
configurations in relation to inter-team cooperation.
Relations Oriented Configurations and Inter-Team Cooperation 
As discussed in the previous section, gender, race, and age heterogeneity in a 
team are positively related to a team’s external relationships. Based on the social identity
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
37
theory and social network research, it was proposed that when team members represent 
multiple social categories the probability of their forming relationships outside the team 
based on membership to that category, will increase (Tajfel, 1982; Ashforth & Mael, 
1989). Although heterogeneity along each demographic attribute may contribute unique 
variance to the level of inter-team relationships in a team, the team’s relations oriented 
configuration may indicate the precise combination of age, gender, and ethnic attributes 
that lead to inter-team cooperation may be established. Although each attribute may not 
be significantly associated with inter-team cooperation, a combination of these 
characteristics may be significant. Thus, the present study hypothesizes the following: 
Supplementary hypothesis lc. Relations oriented configurational heterogeneity is 
positively related to inter-team cooperation.
Task Related Configurations and Inter-Team Cooperation 
In teams, the educational and tenure configuration may also predict the level of 
cooperation between teams. Pfeffer (1983) proposes that tenure cohorts share similar 
experiences in organizations and hence form similar attitudes and values. Similarly, 
individuals identify with others who share a similar educational background (Wiersema 
and Bird, 1991). Based on the configurational approach it may be proposed that tenure 
and educational backgrounds together influence inter-team relationships. In other words, 
in a team, educational heterogeneity alone may not sufficiently predict inter-team 
relationships. However, educational and tenure heterogeneity together may influence 
these relationships. In a team of individuals with different educational backgrounds, 
common tenure in the organization may discourage interactions outside the team. 
However, when individuals are heterogeneous based on both education and tenure they
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
38
may be forced to look outside the organizations for information exchange and social 
support.
Supplementary hypothesis Id. Task related configurational heterogeneity is 
positively related to inter-team cooperation.
Additive Vs. Configurational Approaches 
In proposing the configurational model, this research proposes a multidimensional 
perspective on heterogeneity in teams that expands on the knowledge accumulated on the 
relationships between each attribute of heterogeneity and team processes. In general, as 
the review in the preceding sections indicates, the results reviewed under the additive 
model are mixed. The results of recent meta-analyses suggest that research generally has 
shown non-significant findings (Webber & Donahue, 1999). The estimated correlation 
between team heterogeneity and team processes such as social integration and cohesion 
was -.03 (Webber & Donahue, 1999). With regard to the configurational model, research 
is still in its early stages. Recently, efforts have been made to relate individual’s diversity 
profiles to boundary spanning behavior at a conceptual level (Thomas- Hunt &
Gruenfeld, 1998) and to relate group faultlines to identity salience at the individual level 
(Randel, 2000). The present research extends the findings of past research to create 
diversity profiles at the team level. Given that this research is nascent, the contention 
that the configurational approach contributes to our understanding of team processes 
must be tested. As such the present study hypothesizes the following:
Supplementary hypothesis le. Configurational heterogeneity (both relations and 
task) will predict team processes over and above each additive measure of 
heterogeneity.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
39
TEAM HETEROGENEITY AND TEAM PERFORMANCE 
In demonstrating the benefits of diversity to team performance, two types of 
arguments are presented. The first set of arguments derive from the social identity theory 
(Tajfel, 1978; Ashforth & Mael, 1989). Based on the social identity theory, it may be 
proposed that social categorization based on age, race, or gender negatively influences a 
team’s effectiveness on account of the negative affect triggered by in-group/out-group 
based biases among team members (Tajfel, 1978; Ashforth & Mael, 1989). Another set of 
arguments is offered by the proponents of the value in diversity approach (Cox, 1991; 
Bantel & Jackson, 1989). These researchers argue that heterogeneity in teams offers 
diversity in perspectives and a broad base of cognitive resources that are beneficial to the 
team’s functioning. The debate between the pros and cons of diversity has been termed 
the “double edged sword” of diversity (Williams, 1999; Webber & Donahue, 1999).
In organizations, teams are charged with accomplishing various types of tasks.
The relationship between team heterogeneity and team performance also depends on the 
type of task that has to be performed (Jackson, 1992). For instance, when teams are 
charged with accomplishing performance tasks geared toward achieving efficiency, team 
heterogeneity may inhibit team performance (Jackson, 1992). On the other hand, when 
teams have to perform intellective (problem solving tasks) or creative decision making 
tasks team heterogeneity enhances performance as team members bring diverse 
perspectives that facilitate these tasks (Jackson, 1992).
Past research on the relationship between team diversity and performance have 
also looked at other aspects of team task such as routineness and complexity (Pelled et 
al., 1999; Jehn et al., 1997). Findings suggest that the negative outcomes of team
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
40
diversity such as emotional conflict may be less pronounced when teams perform routine 
tasks (Pelled et al., 1999). The positive outcomes of diversity will be relevant when 
teams perform complex tasks that call upon the use of diverse skills and perspectives 
(Jehn et al., 1999). This dissertation does not directly test the influence of task 
routineness and complexity as moderators. The teams studied in this dissertation perform 
fairly routine tasks that call upon the use of use of problem solving skills involving the 
optimum utilization of resources. The subsequent sections discuss the relationship 
between team heterogeneity with regard to two types of tasks relevant for this research: 
one that requires speed and efficiency and the other that requires problem solving and 
decision making. Both additive and configurational models will be discussed in relation 
to these performance outcomes.
Additive Model: Team Heterogeneity and Team Performance 
This section review literature on the relationship between team level 
heterogeneity and team performance. Hypotheses proposing the moderating influence of 
organizational demography on this team level relationship are offered.
Relations Oriented Heterogeneity and Team Performance 
The relationship between task related heterogeneity and performance can be 
explained in terms of team’s access to diverse cognitive resources of relevance to job 
performance (Bantel & Jackson, 1991). The relationship between relations oriented 
heterogeneity and team performance is relatively ambiguous. As such the underlying 
assumption behind the proposed hypotheses is that heterogeneity in terms of gender, race 
and ethnicity, reflects diverse attitudes, values and behaviors that may impede or enable 
team performance.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
41
Gender Heterogeneity
Based on a large body of evidence on gender differences in organizations it may 
be concluded that males and females have differential experiences in organizations 
(Eagly, Makhijani, & Klonsky, 1992; Ohlott, McCauley & Ruderman, 1994; Powell & 
Butterfield, 1997) that reinforce gender based identification. Within groups, the outcomes 
of gender based identification are stereotypes and evaluative biases among men and 
women (Lindeman & Sundvik, 1993). As a result, social identification based on gender 
may be considered to have negative outcomes for a team’s functioning and as a result for 
team performance. This line of reasoning predicts that teams that are heterogeneous in 
terms of gender will perform at lower levels than teams that are homogeneous.
A second line of research has suggested that diversity in terms of attitudes and 
perspectives has positive consequences for teams performance when team performance 
requires diversity of cognitive resources. Research has indicated that heterogeneity 
allows teams to utilize a diversity of perspectives that benefits team performance (Bantel 
& Jackson, 1991; Jehn et al., 1997, 1999).
Studies that have directly examined the relationship between group performance 
and gender heterogeneity have found mixed results. In a study of groups of medical 
students, Alagna and Reddy (1982) found that groups that were heterogeneous on the 
basis of gender rated themselves lower on a measure of group functioning than groups 
that were homogeneous (all male). In a laboratory setting, Clement and Schiereck (1973) 
found that groups that were heterogeneous on the basis of gender rated themselves poorly 
on a visual signal detection task in comparison to groups that were either all male of all
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
42
female. In a field setting, no significant relationships have been found between gender 
heterogeneity and team performance (Pelled et al., 1999; Lewis & Gibson, 2000).
Ethnic Heterogeneity
Studies of ethnic differences in organizational outcomes have indicated that 
significant differences exist among ethnic groups with regard to career development, 
authority attainment and returns on investment in human capital (Smith, 1997; Smith & 
Elliot, in press). Nkomo (1992) proposes that the differential treatment of employees 
based on ethnicity in organizations triggers in-group/out-group categorizations based on 
ethnicity. Tsui et al., (1992), deriving hypotheses from the social identity theory, found 
that ethnic similarity to the team was positively associated with measures of social 
integration in a study of work groups in three large organizations. When individuals 
were dissimilar on the basis of ethnicity they were also likely to be less socially 
integrated and more likely to turnover. These findings support the contention, borne out 
of the social identity theory, that ethnicity based identification will impede team 
functioning and as a result team performance. In support of this proposition Kirkman, 
Tesluk, and Rosen (2000), in a recent study on three manufacturing organizations, found 
that ethnic heterogeneity in work groups was significantly negatively related to ratings of 
productivity and customer service by both team members as well as external team 
leaders. In a similar manufacturing setting, Horn, Manz and Millikin (1998) found that 
ethnic heterogeneity was negatively related to module productivity.
In a laboratory setting, Watson et al. (1993) found that ethnically homogenous 
teams outperformed heterogeneous teams in all aspects of complex problem solving in 
the initial phases of team formation. Over time, however, heterogeneous teams were able
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
43
to outperform homogeneous teams in terms of range of ideas and alternatives generated. 
Watson and colleagues (1993) conclude that although heterogeneous teams may take 
longer than homogeneous teams to reach optimal efficiency once they have overcome 
initial hurdles they can outperform homogeneous teams. Based on these findings it may 
be concluded that ethnically heterogeneous team may perform better with regard to 
performance dimensions that require team members to draw on a range of diverse 
perspectives. However, for task dimensions that call upon speed of implementation, 
homogeneous teams may perform better than heterogeneous teams.
Age Heterogeneity
Lawrence (1988) observes that age is a determinant of individual’s attitudes and 
values because individuals that belong to similar age groups share similar experiences 
outside the organization. For instance, individuals in their fifties may have children that 
left for college at the same time, have similar tastes in music and so on. These 
similarities are reflected in shared values that may influence behaviors at work 
(Lawrence, 1988). Zenger and Lawrence (1988) found that similarity in age determines 
the frequency of technical communication within and outside the work group. As with 
the case of gender and ethnic heterogeneity, it may be argued that age heterogeneity may 
have positive as well as negative effects on team performance. Positive outcomes of age 
heterogeneity will emerge when team performance requires the use of diverse 
perspectives. In a study of banking innovation as an outcome of heterogeneity in top 
management teams, Bantel and Jackson (1989) found that age heterogeneity was 
positively but non-significantly related to banking innovations. In a study of product 
development teams, Pelled et al. (1999) found no significant relationships between age
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
44
heterogeneity and team performance. In summary, findings from past studies indicate 
that the direct relationship between team age heterogeneity and performance has not been 
established in either top management teams (e.g., Bantel & Jackson, 1989) or lower level 
teams (e.g., Pelled et al., 1999).
Relations Oriented Team Heterogeneity and Performance: Moderated bv Organizational
Demography
The mixed findings with regard to ethnic, gender, and age heterogeneity can be 
better understood by taking into consideration the demographic context in which teams 
function. While examining the relationship between team heterogeneity and outcomes 
researchers have begun to take into consideration the role of the context (Chatman et al., 
1998; Richards, 2000). The role of the organizational demographic composition in 
shaping the outcomes of team heterogeneity is relatively under researched. Recently, the 
importance of context was underlined by a study of the relationship between cultural 
heterogeneity and firm performance (Richards, 2000). The study found that there was a 
direct relationship between cultural heterogeneity and firm performance. However, this 
relationship was significant only when the moderating influence of firm’s strategy was 
taken into account. Cultural heterogeneity was positively related to firm performance in 
firms that followed a policy of growth (emphasis on global expansion, broad risk base, 
transfer of skills). However, in firms that followed a policy of downsizing (efficiency, 
cost-cutting) cultural heterogeneity was not related to firm performance (Richards, 2000).
Organizational level policies determine the level of heterogeneity in an 
organization, which in turn influences the performance of heterogeneous teams. 
Lefkowitz (1994), while conducting a test validation study, found a pattern of “ethnic
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
45
drift” in the nature of placements in a commercial bank. The study reported that 
subordinates were assigned to supervisors who belong to the same ethnic group 
(Lefkowitz, 1994). Ethnic drift in organizations eventually leads to occupational 
segregation (Lefkowitz, 1994). Characteristics of organizational demography, such as 
occupational segregation, influence the level of social identification in gender or ethnic 
based groups (Wharton, 1992) which may have consequences for team functioning.
Thus, taking into account the organizational context allows a fuller appreciation of the 
performance outcome of work team heterogeneity.
Ely (1995) observes that single level analysis of diversity in organization would 
risk ignoring significant structural determinants of interpersonal interactions in 
organizations. In a study of relationships among female lawyers Ely (1995) found that in 
firms that were well integrated on the basis of gender women were able to gain higher 
social capital from their same-gender relationships. As discussed earlier, the ability of 
women and minorities to access personal networks and capitalize on resources within the 
firm would be, to a large extent, determined by the extent of heterogeneity in the 
organization (Ely, 1995). Ely’s observations may also be relevant for observing team 
level outcomes.
In summary, characteristics of organizational demography (such as occupational 
segregation) determine the equitable distribution of organizational resources (i.e., social 
capital as well as technical resources) (Waldinger, 1996; Wharton, 1992). Based on the 
availability of resources, in organizations that are well integrated, heterogeneous teams 
(that represent women and minorities) will be able to perform better than organizations 
that are not well integrated. As a result, with regard to aspects of team performance that
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
46
call upon the use of cognitive resources, the positive relationship between team 
heterogeneity and performance (Bantel & Jackson, 1989) will be strengthened in 
heterogeneous organizations. At the same time, the negative relationship between team 
heterogeneity and speed of implementation may be neutralized in heterogeneous 
organizations. The negative outcomes of heterogeneity in teams will be offset by the 
potential for heterogeneous teams to access diverse social resources outside the team and 
enhance performance. Thus, the following set of hypotheses are proposed:
Hypothesis 2 a. Organizational demography will moderate the relationship 
between relations oriented team heterogeneity and team performance in terms of 
goal achievement. The magnitude of the positive relationship between team 
heterogeneity and goal achievement will increase as organizational heterogeneity 
increases.
Hypothesis 2 b. Organizational demography will moderate the relationship 
between relations oriented team heterogeneity and team performance in terms of 
speed of response to customers. The relationship between team heterogeneity and 
speed of response will be negative in organizations that are homogeneous and 
non-significant in organizations that are heterogeneous.
Task Related Heterogeneity and Team Performance 
With regard to task related measures of team heterogeneity such as education and 
tenure, the argument for increased performance as a consequence of team heterogeneity 
may be based on the broader set of skills available to a heterogeneous team for 
performing a task (Bantel & Jackson, 1989). However, Hambrick, Cho and Chen (1996) 
argue that the dimension of performance being considered governs this relationship.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
47
Heterogeneous teams will perform better with regard to the magnitude of the task, but 
poorer with regard to speed of implementation (Hambrick et al., 1996). Based on the 
social identity theory it may also be argued that in-group out-group formation based on 
task related groups may negatively influence team’s functioning (Kramer, 1991). Similar 
arguments may be based on Pfeffier’s (1983) organizational demography model.
Tenure Heterogeneity
Organization demography researchers consider tenure heterogeneity a significant 
predictor of individual and team level outcomes (Wagner et al., 1984; O’Reilly et al.,
1989). Tenure based cohorts will display solidarity toward members and antipathy 
toward non-members (Pfeffer, 1983). Based on this logic, in teams that include 
individuals from multiple tenure groups, team functioning and hence team performance 
will be impeded. Social identity theory would predict a similar outcome (Tajfel et al., 
1971; Kramer, 1991). On the other hand, length of service in the organization is a source 
of firm specific skills that are a resource for teams (Jackson et al., 1995). When 
individuals with different tenure levels come together they also combine the unique 
perspectives and knowledge that length of service bestows on them. Long tenured 
individuals, may have the experience to overcome day to day road blocks in 
organizations, while short tenured individuals may contribute fresher perspective from 
their organizational experiences in previous jobs.
These opposing arguments have not been resolved by empirical research. In a 
study of top management teams, Bantel and Jackson (1989) reported a non-significant 
relationship between team tenure heterogeneity and team performance. Ancona and 
Caldwell (1992) have used product development teams to find that tenure heterogeneity
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
48
is negatively related to team performance. On the other hand, Pelled et al. (1999) report a 
positive relationship between tenure heterogeneity and manager rated performance.
These mixed findings may be explained by the demographic context in which teams 
function.
Educational Heterogeneity
Educational background bestows knowledge, skills, and abilities that are directly 
relevant to the task. Heterogeneity of educational background can have positive effects 
on team performance (Bantel & Jackson, 1989; Wiersema & Bantel, 1993). As with 
tenure heterogeneity, however, the argument based on social identity theory can be made 
that educational heterogeneity may also have negative consequences. The findings of 
research have been mixed. Bantel and Jackson (1989) found a positive relationship 
between educational heterogeneity in top management teams and banking innovations. 
Pelled et al. (1999) found that heterogeneity in terms of function (which may be viewed 
as a reflection of educational background) was significantly positively related to team 
performance. Hambrick et al. (1996) found that in top management teams, educational 
heterogeneity was positively related to the magnitude and noteworthiness of the task and 
negatively related to the speed dimension of task performance.
Task-related Team Heterogeneity and Performance: Moderated bv Organizational
Demography
As with regard to organizational level relations oriented heterogeneity, task 
related heterogeneity in the organization will influence team level performance outcomes 
of heterogeneity. For instance, in a team that is heterogeneous in terms of tenure, the 
ability to combine resources with other teams to meet performance requirements will be
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
49
constrained in an organization that is homogeneous with regard to tenure across levels. 
Similarly the representation of diverse educational backgrounds across levels in an 
organization will also influence team performance. Thus, the following is hypothesized: 
Hypothesis 2 c. Organizational demography will moderate the relationship 
between task-related team heterogeneity and team performance in terms of goal 
achievement. The magnitude of the positive relationship between team 
heterogeneity and goal achievement will increase as organizational heterogeneity 
increases.
Hypothesis 2 d. Organizational demography will moderate the relationship 
between task-related team heterogeneity and team performance in terms of speed 
of response to customers. The relationship between team heterogeneity and speed 
of response will be negative in organizations that are homogeneous and non­
significant in organizations that are heterogeneous.
Configurational Model: Team Heterogeneity and Team Performance 
In Section 1, two approaches to examining team heterogeneity were proposed.
The first, termed the additive approach, examined each indicator of team heterogeneity 
(age, ethnicity, gender) in relation to team performance. An alternative to this approach 
involves examining a composite measure of team heterogeneity. Recently, researchers 
have developed increasingly sophisticated conceptualizations of heterogeneity in teams 
(e.g., Lau & Mumighan, 1999). The present study attempts to extend this area of 
research by proposing two types of composite demographic measure - one that captures 
team members’ relations oriented configuration and a second that captures team members 
task related configuration.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
50
Relations Oriented Configurations and Team Performance 
As discussed earlier, an individual’s relations oriented attributes may often be a 
surrogate for competency based traits (Jackson et al., 1995). For instance, an older white 
male in a group may be viewed as senior in rank, while a younger Asian male may be 
considered technically more qualified. At the team level, the configurations of individual 
members may influence team level outcomes. With regard to international joint venture 
teams, Thatcher and Jehn (1998) propose that fewer demographic differences along 
multiple dimensions will lead to greater salience of social categorization in teams. This 
proposition is close to Lau and Mumighan’s (1999) notion of faultlines. The number of 
differences along multiple dimensions in teams will be negatively related to the strength 
of faultlines within the team. These propositions are yet to be tested empirically at the 
team level. By creating an index of a team’s relations oriented configuration along 
multiple dimensions it may be possible to test these propositions. As with regard to the 
additive model, it may be argued that team configurational heterogeneity is positively 
related to team performance when performance would require a broad base of cognitive 
resources. Team heterogeneity would be negatively related to team performance when 
performance requires speed of implementation. The following is proposed by the present 
study:
Supplementary hypothesis 2 a. Relations oriented configurational heterogeneity is 
positively related to the team’s performance in terms of achievement of goals. 
Supplementary hypothesis 2 b. Relations oriented configurational heterogeneity is 
negatively related to team’s performance in terms of speed of response to 
customers.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
51
Task Related Configurations and Team Performance 
Task related configurations may confer unique skills on individuals. For instance, 
an individual who has several years of organizational tenure combined with specialized 
technical training would considered extremely valuable in the team. At the same time an 
individual with fewer years of experience, but the latest technical know how may offer a 
unique skill set to the team. The combined characteristics of the team members along 
multiple task-related dimensions and team performance would, therefore, be related. 
Thus, the following is proposed:
Supplementary hypothesis 2 c. Team’s task related configurational heterogeneity 
is positively related to the team’s performance in terms of achievement of goals. 
Supplementary hypothesis 2 d. Team’s task related configurational heterogeneity 
is negatively related to team’s performance in terms of speed of response to 
customers.
Additive Vs. Configurational Approach 
The review of literature in this section indicates that the relationship between 
team performance and team heterogeneity has not been established. The lack of findings 
may indicate that past research has not adequately captured the multi-dimensional aspects 
of team heterogeneity. By proposing the configurational approach this research attempts 
to overcome this lacuna. However, in order to establish the contribution of the 
configurational approach the following is proposed:
Supplementary hypothesis 2 e. The configurational measures of team 
heterogeneity will explain variance in team performance over and above the 
effects of additive measures.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
52
CONTROL VARIABLES 
While examining the effects of heterogeneity on team process and performance 
researchers include a number of variables as controls. The subsequent sections elaborate 
on the control variables considered in this study.
Team Size
In past research on outcomes of heterogeneity in teams team size has been 
included as a control variable. Team size has been considered an important attribute of 
team composition, in models of team effectiveness (Hackman, 1987; Sundstorm et al.,
1990). Team size has been found to be positively related to heterogeneity (Bantel & 
Jackson, 1989). In larger teams the probability of having women or members of 
minorities may be greater. Also in smaller teams the inclusion of one more member of a 
minority or a female may cause a disproportionate change in the teams’ heterogeneity 
(Jackson et al., 1991). Thus, team size is included as a control variable in this study.
Average Age, Tenure, and Education Level 
While examining the influence of team heterogeneity on outcomes such as 
performance or conflict, researchers have included the average of each of these 
demographics as control variables (Jackson et al., 1991). The average levels of 
demographic attributes such as age, tenure or education level influence team level 
outcomes (Bantel & Jackson, 1989). Bantel and Jackson (1989) found that apart from the 
coefficient of variation in age and tenure, the average team age and tenure were also 
significantly related to innovative behaviors. Thus, while considering the relationship 
between team age and tenure heterogeneity and outcomes average tenure and age of the 
team will be included as controls.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
53
SUMMARY
This chapter outlined the key relationships that will be examined in this research. 
The dissertation attempts to contribute to extant research in several ways. First, while 
examining the relationship between team heterogeneity and process and performance 
outcomes the research examines the moderating influence of the organizational 
demographic context. Second, while past research has focused primarily on teams’ 
internal processes, the present research also considers teams’ external relationships. 
Inter-team cooperation as well as intra-team cooperation, are proposed as process 
outcomes of team heterogeneity. Third, by incorporating multiple conceptualizations of 
heterogeneity (additive and configurational) this dissertation will attempt to contribute to 
extant research on heterogeneity in organizations. Finally, the dissertation will examine 
objective indicators of team performance in relation to team heterogeneity. The 
subsequent chapter outlines the methodology (i.e., research setting and the measures) 
used in this dissertation.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
54
CHAPTER TWO: METHODS
In this chapter the research setting and measures used for testing the hypotheses 
proposed in Chapter One will be discussed in detail.
RESEARCH SETTING
The research setting for this study was a Fortune 500 US based equipment 
manufacturing company. The pseudonym Company ABC will be used to describe the 
company. Over the past several decades Company ABC has consistently promoted 
diversity in terms of increasing the proportions of women and minorities in the work 
place. Several national awards have recognized these efforts. Company ABC’s efforts at 
managing diversity are reflected in staffing, performance appraisals, and training 
procedures.
In terms of staffing policies all divisions of Company ABC must meet annual 
targets for the representation of majority and minority males and females in each 
employee grade level. Availability of minority and majority males and females was 
determined by examining the internal labor pools as well as US Census data. As of 1995, 
based on the company newsletter, 18% of the Vice- Presidents in Company ABC were 
members of minority groups and, 24% of senior management (corporate officers) were 
women. Of the entire work force, 32% were women, 14% were African- Americans, 7% 
were Hispanics, and Asian and other ethnic groups comprised 5%.
In order to enforce the annual targets described above, performance appraisals for 
line managers included measures of managers’ ability to achieve the targets. The 
performance appraisals were used for making promotion and compensation related 
decisions.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
55
Training practices included intensive diversity training. Trainers used behavioral 
modeling techniques to help develop managerial capabilities of interacting with 
subordinates and colleagues irrespective of demographic differences. Employees of the 
service division of Company ABC participated in the present study. The subsequent 
section describes the participants of this study in greater detail.
Participants
Participants in this research were employees of the service division of Company 
ABC including service technicians (n=8636) and their managers (n=429). Among 
service technicians, 8121 (89.6%) were men and 515 (10.4%) were women. Service 
technicians comprised of 6566 (72.4%) Whites, 922 (10.7%) Blacks, 751 (8.6%) 
Hispanics, 331 (3.8%)Asians, and 66 (.7%) Native Americans. On average, employees 
were 45.05 years old, with an organizational tenure of 19.02 years. Service employees on 
average had spent 2.3 years in post high school education. Majority of service 
technicians (n=2437, 72.2%) had obtained professional diplomas. Among the rest, 227 
(6.7%) were Business majors, 143 (4.2%) had degrees in Engineering, 52 (1.5%) had 
degrees in Arts/Humanities, 80 (2.4%) had degrees in Social Sciences, and 397 (11.8%) 
had degrees in Natural Sciences.
Among the managers, 342 (79%) were men and 87 (21%) were women.
Managers comprised of 289 (67.4%) Whites, 80 (18.6%) Blacks, 43 (10.02%) Hispanics, 
10 (2%)Asians, and 7(1%) Native Americans. On average, managers were 48.3 years 
old, with an organizational tenure of 23.15 years. Managers on average had spent 2.8 
years in post high school education. The majority of managers, 101 in number (43.9%), 
were engineers or had technical degrees. Among the rest, 74 (31.2%) were Business
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
56
majors, 28 (12.2%) had degrees in Arts/Humanities, 8 (3.5%) had degrees in Social 
Sciences, 7 (3.0%) had degrees in Natural Sciences, and 9 (3.9%) had obtained 
professional diplomas.
The service division is organized in 68 service regions. On average a service 
region comprised of 133.34 individuals. On the whole, service technicians were 
organized into 1820 teams. For the purpose of this study only teams that were composed 
of three or more individuals were included. This led to a sample of 1401 service teams, 
with an average team size of 5.77 individuals.
Task Description
Service personnel provided technical support to customers. Their task involved 
responding to customer calls for repair services. These services included ongoing 
maintenance of company machines, unscheduled calls and calls initiated by the company 
(as opposed to the customer). Service teams were highly interdependent in terms of both 
their tasks and outcomes. Each team is charged with responding to customer service calls 
within a customer service area. These calls included routine maintenance calls as well as 
non-scheduled calls regarding the breakdown of equipment. Calls were received at a 
calling center and are then routed to the specific teams. Teams discussed the priority of 
these calls and the amount of resources in terms of materials as well as manpower to be 
allocated to each call. The team’s response to customer calls, completion of scheduled as 
well as non-scheduled maintenance calls, and achievement of organizationally 
benchmarked goals are determined at the team level only. The performance of the team 
on these dimensions is reflected in compensation of team members.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
57
Data Sources
Data were obtained through three archival databases provided by the company. 
The first database, employee personnel records, provided information regarding 
employees’ demographics. The second database included performance measures at the 
work group level. The third database included employee responses to annual employee 
motivation and satisfaction surveys. The data on employee demographics and 
performance was matched using employee identifiers. Since survey responses cannot be 
matched to individuals, data were matched to the survey responses using team identifiers. 
The final data set included records on service technicians (n=8636) as well as managers 
(n=429) in the company.
MEASURES 
Demographic Measures 
Information obtained from archival personnel records were used to compute 
heterogeneity measures. Personnel records were kept at the individual level of analysis. 
Codes for individual level data are described next, followed by the procedures used to 
create heterogeneity measures.
Individual Level Demographics
Relations Oriented Traits
Gender was a categorical demographic variable that was coded as Female=l and 
Male=0. Ethnicity was a categorical demographic variable. Ethnic group categories were 
coded as White=l, Black=2, Hispanic=3, Asian=4, Native American=5. Age was a 
continuous variable measured in years.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
58
Task Related Traits
Organizational tenure referred to the length of service in years that individuals 
have spent in the organization. Organizational tenure was a continuous variable and was 
measured in years.
Education level referred to the years spent by individuals in post higher secondary 
education. The number of years in education following high school was determined 
based on the degree earned by the individual. For instance, an Associates degree was 
coded as 2 years in post higher secondary education, an undergraduate degree was coded 
as 4 years, a Masters degree was coded as 6 years, and a degree after Masters (i.e. a 
Ph.D.) was coded as 8 years in post higher secondary education.
Educational major referred to the subject that individuals majored during post 
higher secondary education. Educational major, a categorical variable, was coded as 
Business/Management major=l, Arts/Humanities major=2, EngineeringATechnical 
major=3. Social Science major=4, Natural Science major=5, Professional diploma=6. 
Individuals who had secured degree/diplomas requiring professional certification were 
grouped under the sixth category. These diplomas included physiotherapy, nursing, 
architecture, law etc.
Heterogeneity
Heterogeneity measures capture the dispersion of demographic traits in 
organizations. Several types of heterogeneity were assessed at the team and regional 
levels.
Team Heterogeneity
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
59
A team was defined as a group of three or more individuals assigned to a common 
goal of responding to customers unscheduled maintenance calls as well as providing 
scheduled maintenance services to customers.
Relations oriented heterogeneity. Team gender heterogeneity was measured using 
Blau’s (1977) index for calculating heterogeneity for categorical variables!
(1-2 pi 2)
where p is the proportion of group members in a category, i is the number of different 
categories in the group. Team ethnic heterogeneity was also calculated using Blau’ s 
(1977) index for categorical variables in the manner described above. Team age 
heterogeneity in teams was measured as the coefficient of variance of age in teams. This 
is calculated as the standard deviation divided by the average age in teams.
Task related heterogeneity. Team tenure heterogeneity was measured as the 
coefficient of variation of tenure in work teams. Team education-level heterogeneity was 
measured the coefficient of variation in the number of years spent in post higher 
secondary education. Team education major heterogeneity was measured using Blau’s 
(1977)index.
Organizational Demography: Service Region Level Heterogeneity
As discussed earlier, service teams are organized into service regions (n=68). 
Service regions were operationalized as organizational units and heterogeneity at the 
service region level was operationalized as “organizational demography”. Service 
regions were used as proxies for “organizations” in this dissertation because these units 
served as the relevant population for the teams considered. For the participants in this 
research, these service regions comprised the individuals that they perceived as co-
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
60
workers and management. Further, these service regions are located all over the United 
States and represented the varied demographic profiles of the various geographic regions 
in the country. Although diversity related policies are formulated at the corporate level, 
discussion with key informants in the organization suggested that their implementation in 
these service regions differ. As such, the service regions may be viewed as distinct 
organizational units for the purpose of this research.
On average, service regions comprised of 151 non-managers and 6.1 managers. 
Service region level heterogeneity was calculated by taking into account both managerial 
and non-managerial employees in a region. Heterogeneity among managers reflected the 
level of structural integration in the service region. Heterogeneity among non-managers 
was a measure of heterogeneity among the peers of service technicians (i.e., the non­
managers). As discussed in Chapter One, both aspects of the demographic composition 
of the service region are relevant to this dissertation. At the regional level, relations 
oriented heterogeneity (age, ethnic and gender) and task related heterogeneity (tenure, 
education level and education major) were calculated corresponding to team 
heterogeneity in the manner described above bv including all the managerial employees 
as well as service technicians in the region.
Performance Measures
Performance measures for service technicians are described below. Performance 
measures were available for service technicians at the team level.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
61
Achievement of Goals
All service teams were responsible for maintaining reliable machines while 
utilizing resources effectively. Thus, achievement of goals was measured in terms of the 
reliability of machines assigned to each service team. The reliability of machines 
assigned to a service team was a reflection of the technical expertise that teams provided 
their customers. The measure also reflected the team’s ability to prioritize calls and make 
decisions regarding the allocation of resources to these calls to the satisfaction of 
customers as well as organizationally set standards. Two measures of goal achievement 
were used. For both measures, the performance scores assessed the team’s performance 
during the last three months of 1999.
Goal Achievement in Terms of Service Hours
Goal achievement in terms of service hours was the number of machine service 
hours required on machines. This measure was calculated by dividing the actual number 
of machine service hours (MSH) that teams have spent on machines by historically 
benchmarked data on the number of machine service hours required on each machine. 
Historical data took into account the type of machine and the typical performance of such 
machines. The resulting value was expressed as a percentage. Available data on this 
measure was based on team performance during a three month period. If teams scored 
greater than 100% it indicated that teams have exceeded their targets. A score greater 
than 100% indicated that the quality of repair service was better than the standard and 
machines assigned to these teams were more reliable. Teams were able to utilize 
resources effectively by keeping the machine service hours lower than the standard for 
the machine being serviced. A score lower than 100% indicated that teams have failed to
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
62
achieve the target. Teams with a score lower than 100% were unable to utilize resources 
(i.e. machine service hours) and maintain reliable machines within the standard number 
of machine service hours determined for the machine assigned to them.
Goal Achievement In Terms of Maintenance
Goal achievement in terms of maintenance was determined by dividing the actual 
number of ongoing maintenance calls made by teams by the number of ongoing 
maintenance (OGM) calls required for machines (based on organizational 
benchmarking). This measure was expressed as a percentage. A value greater than 100% 
indicated that teams were able to exceed their targets. These teams were able to maintain 
reliable machines by utilizing minimum resources in terms of service hours as well as 
total number of calls made to the customer site. A value lower than 100% indicated that 
teams were unable to meet targets. These teams made more calls to the customer site 
than was mandated by organizational standards. In other words, these teams were not 
able to maintain reliable machines within the resource parameters.
Speed of Implementation
Response Time as Percent of Target
Response time referred to the amount of time taken by service technicians to 
arrive at a customer site from the time that the call was first received. Response time as a 
percent of target referred to the average time taken by a service team to respond to 
unscheduled maintenance calls in relation to the target response time set by the 
organization. Targets for service teams were set based on the product mix that teams are
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
63
called upon to service as well as the location of the teams. This measure was expressed 
as a percentage. A value over a 100% indicated that teams were able to exceed the target 
(i.e., keep response times lower than the target). A value lesser than a 100% indicated 
that teams were not able to meet the target (i.e. the response time was on an average 
higher than the target).
Response Time in Terms of Upper Specification Limit
The upper specification limit was twice the targeted response time described 
above. For instance, if the targeted response time for a particular machine was an hour, 
the upper specification limit would be two hours. Response time greater than upper 
specification limit (USL) referred to the percentage of calls (of the total number of calls 
taken by a team) above the upper specification limit. A higher score on this measure 
indicated poor performance. A score of 0% on this measure indicated that none of the 
calls taken by the teams were above the upper specification limits. This measure is 
negatively related to Response Time as Percent of Target Response time in terms of 
upper specification limit was reverse scored for purposes of data analysis. After recoding 
this measure a higher score indicated better performance.
Team Process Measures 
Data for the measures described below were obtained through the company’s 
archival database of annual employee motivation and satisfaction survey responses 
obtained in 1999. Surveys were administered and the data retained by an external vendor 
employed by the company. Responses were both anonymous and confidential. They 
could be linked only to the respondents’ work team and not to individuals. Therefore, 
responses were aggregated to the team level. Exploratory factor analyses were conducted
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
64
using responses from the original 48-item scale. Items for measuring intra-team 
cooperation loaded on one factor, with a factor loading greater than .40 and an eigen 
value greater than one (Kim & Mueller, 1978).
Intra-Team Cooperation
Intra-team cooperation assessed the perceptions of cooperation within the team. 
This scale comprised 13 items. Items were measured on a Likert type scale (l=Strongly 
disagree, 5= Strongly agree). Internal consistency for this scale was .96. The items were 
as follows:
a. Members of my work group take time to listen to each other.
b. My work group has a climate where diverse perspectives are valued.
c. My work group explores alternatives to obtain resources to meet objectives
d. My work group members take the initiative to get necessary information.
e. The people in my work group are receptive to each other’s suggestions for 
improvement.
f. The feedback I get from my work group focuses on strengths and areas of 
improvement.
g. The people in my work group cooperate to get the job done.
h. The people in my work group are able to resolve conflicts.
i. 
The people in my work group share resources with each other.
j. 
The people in my work group speak openly and honestly even when the news is bad. 
k. The people in my work group can be counted upon to meet commitments.
1. 
My work group has a clear understanding of customer’s needs.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
65
Inter-Team Cooperation 
A single item “My work group cooperates with other work groups to achieve 
business objectives” measured perceptions of inter-team cooperation. Items were 
measured on a Likert type scale (l=Strongly disagree, 5= Strongly agree).
Measures for Supplementary Hypotheses 
Each of the dimensions of heterogeneity discussed earlier in this chapter (gender, 
age, ethnicity, tenure, and education) represented the additive approach to measuring 
team heterogeneity. Each measure of team heterogeneity was seen as adding to the 
variance explained in the process and performance outcomes of heterogeneity. An 
alternative measurement approach that incorporated multiple dimensions of team 
heterogeneity simultaneously is proposed in this section. This approach is termed the 
configurational approach to team heterogeneity. Supplementary hypotheses 1 and 2 ask 
whether relational and task configurations explain process and performance outcomes 
over and above each dimension of team heterogeneity.
Relations Oriented Configurations 
The relations oriented configuration of a team was an index of composition of 
individual team member along three dimensions- gender, age, and ethnicity. Individual 
level data on gender, ethnicity, and age were used to create the relations oriented 
configurational measure. This measure combined individual level data on relations 
oriented traits such as gender, ethnicity, and age. Each individual in a team was assigned 
a score based on his/her gender, ethnicity and age. hi order to create this measure, 
continuous variables such as age were converted into categorical variables. For age, the 
first category included individuals aged 20 to 34 years, the second category comprised of
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
66
individuals aged 35 to 50 years, the third category included 51 to 65 years and the fourth 
category included individuals over 66 years of age. This led to age being converted into 
a categorical variable with four categories. These categories corresponded to commonly 
understood generations such as the generation X, Baby-boomers generation. Depression 
era generation (Hays, 1999). Gender is measured along two categories (Male and 
Female) and ethnicity includes five categories (White, Black, Hispanic, Asian, Native 
American).
For each team in the sample the following steps were undertaken. In the first 
step, a similarity matrix was created along each measure of heterogeneity. For instance, 
at the end of Step 1, a hypothetical Team A would have three matrices depicting 
similarity between team members for age, gender and ethnicity. Each of these three 
matrices contained binary values. A value of 1 indicated similarity and a value of 0 
indicated a difference between every pair of individuals in the matrix. Thus, for the age 
similarity matrix if two team members belonged to the same age group they got a score of 
1 and if individuals did not belong to the same age category they got a score of 0. In the 
second step these three similarity matrices were added. The final matrix was viewed as 
the relational matrix. A score of 3 on this matrix indicated that the two individuals in the 
team shared similar gender, age and ethnic characteristics. A score of 0 in the relational 
matrix indicated that individuals did not share either gender, ethnic or age based 
characteristics. The density of the scores as well as the variance of scores of the resulting 
relational matrix were computed to indicate the heterogeneity of the team along three 
dimensions- age, gender and ethnicity. The density (mean scores in the off diagonal) of 
the matrix was termed Average relational similarity (p) and was calculated as follows:
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
67
n 
n
ZlXij
U  = if1 Jmi+l 
*  
(n -  l)n
Where n is the number of individuals in the team, Xij refers to the extent to which 
individual i and individual j share the same traits. The denominator refers to the number 
of individuals in the off diagonal of the matrix. A score on this index indicated the extent 
to which team members were similar to each other in terms of three dimensions- age, 
gender, and ethnicity. For example, a score of two on this index indicated that on 
average team members are similar in terms two relations oriented dimensions.
The variance (dispersion of scores in the off diagonal) of the matrix was termed as 
relational dissimilarity (a2) and was calculated as follows:
_2 
»*l y«i+-l
<7 
= ---------------
Where n is the number of individuals in the team, Xij refers to the extent to which 
individual i and individual j share the same traits. The numerator represents the sum of 
squared differences of an individual’s score Xij from the mean Qi) of the team. A high 
score indicated high variability in team members’ similarity to each other. While one 
pair of team members may share all the traits represented by this measure, another pair 
may not share any traits at all. The relational dissimilarity measure captured this variance 
in team members’ similarity to each other.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
68
Task Related Configurations 
The task related configuration of a team was an index of composition of 
individual team member along two dimensions: tenure and education-level. To create 
task related configurations individual level data on employee tenure and education-level 
were used. As in the case of age, a continuous variable, tenure was transformed into a 
categorical variable. Four categories were created for tenure. The first category 
comprised of individuals who have been in the organization under S years, the second 
category comprised of individuals with 6-15 years of organizational tenure, the third 
category comprised of individuals with 16-25 years of organizational tenure, and the final 
category comprised of individuals with over 25 years of organizational tenure. 
Education-level is also measured as a categorical variable. Education-level included 
categories for individuals with Associates degrees, 3-4 years in college, undergraduate 
degree, and masters’ degree and above. Similar steps, as described with regard to 
relations oriented configurations, were used to measure task related configurations for 
each team along two dimensions: Average task related similarity and task related 
variance.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
69
CHAPTER THREE: RESULTS
This chapter describes the results of this dissertation. Prior to reporting results 
with regard to the hypotheses proposed, the results of preliminary analyses will be 
discussed in detail.
DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS 
Table 1 in Appendix 1 represents team level descriptive statistics and 
intercorrelations. Regional level descriptive statistics and inter-correlations are 
represented in Table 2.
PRELIMINARY ANALYSES 
Prior to testing the hypothesis proposed in Chapter One, preliminary analyses 
were run to address issues such as multicollinearity, power, and missing data. These 
analyses are described below.
Addressing Multicollinearity 
Intercorrelations among variables were examined in order to address 
multicollinearity among the independent variables. Multicollinearity is especially 
relevant to the cross level analyses undertaken in this dissertation. At the team level, 
percent females in teams was significantly correlated with gender heterogeneity (r = .97, 
p<.01). At the regional level also percent females in region was significantly positively 
correlated with regional gender heterogeneity (r = .99, p<.01). Hence, at the team as well 
as regional level percent females and was not included as a control variable in the 
regression analyses and in the hierarchical linear modeling (HLM) procedures. Percent 
in ethnic groups was significantly correlated with ethnic heterogeneity. Percent Blacks in 
team (r = .49, p<-01), percent Hispanics in team (r = .33, p<.05), and percent Asians in
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
70
team (r = .18, p<-05) were significantly correlated with ethnic heterogeneity. Similarly at 
the regional level, percent Blacks in team (r = .49, p<.01), percent Hispanics in team (r = 
.46, p<.01), and percent Asians in team (r = .27, p<.05) were significantly correlated with 
ethnic heterogeneity. Based on these results, percent in ethnic groups were not included 
as control variables in the subsequent analyses. Only team size, average team age, 
average team tenure, and average years in post higher secondary education were included 
as control variables at the team level (see Table 1 for intercorrelations) and regional size 
and average regional age, tenure, and years in post higher secondary education at the 
regional level were included as control variables (see Table 2 for intercorrelations).
Data Aggregation
The data analyzed in this dissertation exist at three levels- the individual level, the 
team level and the service region unit level. For the team process measures, data were 
aggregated from the individual to the team level. Table 3 in Appendix 1 presents ICC 
coefficients for the aggregation of the team process variables from individual to the team 
level. The ICCs for this aggregation range from .10 ( for intra-team cooperation) to .07 
(for inter-team cooperation) with an average ICC of .08. These results suggest that on 
average 8% of the variance in the team process measures were explained by differences 
between teams. Table 3 also presents ICC coefficients for the aggregation from the team 
to the service region level. The ICCs for this level of aggregation ranges from .08 to .12. 
The average ICC for process outcomes for this level of aggregation was .10 suggesting 
that on average 10 % percent of the variance in service region level outcome variables is 
attributable to differences between service region. Although the ICCs calculated may be
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
71
considered low, they are considered acceptable in published research (see Klein, Conn & 
Sorra, in press).
Power
At the team level (n=140l), the power to detect small effects for the model being 
tested was .90. The service teams are organized into 68 regional units. Sample size at 
the second level of analysis, i.e., the service region level, after accounting for missing 
data was 56 regional units. For the model being tested in this dissertation, the power to 
detect small effects was .30, the power to detect medium effects was .60 and the power to 
detect large effects .90 at the second level of analysis (Cohen, 1988). While the power to 
detect small effects is low at the second level, for the HLM analyses the sample sizes 
within each unit are also a consideration. According to Hofmann and colleagues (2000) 
the rule of thumb for power of .90 for a cross level model is 30 respondents in 30 groups 
(Hofmann, Griffin, & Gavin, 2000). The sample size in this dissertation approximated 
this requirement with an average of 26 teams organized into 56 regions.
Missing Data
While conducting cross level analyses, it was discovered that the sample size 
shrank from 68 service regions to 56 units, depending on the model considered. This 
shrinkage in sample size was due to missing data for the independent variables, 
particularly for the demographic data at the managerial levels in the organization, hi 
order to address any bias in the findings, analyses were run for the entire model first and 
then for each independent variable in turn. The results for the analyses with each 
independent variable did not differ from the results of the full model.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
72
HYPOTHESIS 1: ORGANIZATIONAL DEMOGRAPHY AS A MODERATOR OF 
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN TEAM HETEROGENEITY AND TEAM
PROCESSES
Hypothesis I proposed that organizational demography (in terms of heterogeneity 
at the service region level) would moderate the relationship between team heterogeneity 
and intra-team cooperation and inter-team cooperation. The subsequent sections discuss 
the results with regard to this hypothesis.
Correlational Analyses
At the team level, the results suggest that there are no significant relationships 
between relations oriented team heterogeneity variables and the measures of perceptions 
of intra-team cooperation and inter-team cooperation. With regard to task related 
heterogeneity, team education major heterogeneity was positively related to perceptions 
of intra-team cooperation (r = .10, pc.01) as well as inter-team cooperation (r = .08
p<-01).
At the service region level, regional gender heterogeneity was positively related 
to intra-team cooperation (r = .22, p<.05). At the regional level, education major 
heterogeneity was negatively related to inter-team cooperation (r = -.20, p<.05).
HLM Procedures
In order to test the cross level hypothesis 1, two sets of HLM analyses were 
performed. The first set of analyses included relations oriented heterogeneity at the team 
and service region levels (age, ethnicity and gender) in relation to perceptions of team 
processes. The second set of analyses included task related heterogeneity at the team and 
regional levels.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
73
The HLM procedure in both sets of analyses required two stages (Hoffman et al., 
2000). In the first stage, relationships between team level variables were determined 
within each organizational unit. In the second stage, the parameters (slopes and 
intercepts) generated by each of these regression equations were treated as dependent 
variables and service region heterogeneity was treated as the independent variable. The 
second stage of analysis determined whether service region heterogeneity moderated the 
relationship team heterogeneity and outcome variables. Results are represented in Table 
4 (i) through (ii) in Appendix 1.
The following two steps were followed to test hypothesis 1:
Level 1 (Team Level):
— Team Process = (3o + Pi Team Size + 
Average Team Age + 
Team Age 
Het. + P4 Team Ethnic Het. + Ps Team Gender Het................(1)
Level 2 (Regional Level):
— Po = Yo + Yoi Service Region Size + Y02 Average Service Region Age + Y03 
Service Region Age Het. + Ym Service Region Ethnic Het. + Yos Service 
Region Gender Het.................. (2)
—  
P3(age heterogeneity) = Yio + Yi i Service Region Age Het 
(3)
Similar equations for Pgcnder heterogeneity, and Pethnic heterogeneity'
Similar equations were tested for task related heterogeneity at the team and 
service region levels. The significance of Yy parameter (Equation 3) would indicate 
support for hypothesis 1. Prior to testing hypothesis 1 using HLM, preliminary analyses
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
74
were run to test whether the conditions for running these analyses were met. These steps 
(Step 1, Step 2, and Step 3) are described below.
Step 1: Testing Variance in Team Process Outcomes Across Service Regions 
An ANOVA model was run to assess whether the data for the team level 
dependent variables met the preconditions for HLM analyses. The ANOVA model 
partitions variance in the dependent variable into within service region and between 
service region components. If between service region variance in dependent variables is 
significant, the first condition for applying HLM analyses is met. Significant between 
service region variance (Too) was found for all the dependent variables being considered 
in this dissertation. Results for perceptions inter-team cooperation (Too -  03, df = 59, x2 
= 123.77, p< .001) and intra-team cooperation (Too = -03, df=59, x2 = 114.93, p< .001) 
suggest that between service region variance was significant for process outcomes of 
team heterogeneity.
Step 2:Testinp Variance in Team Level Intercepts and Slopes Across Service Regions 
This model estimates whether there is systematic variance between service regions 
in intercept parameters (P o) and slope parameters (fly) representing the relationships 
between team level variables, x2 tests for variance in intercepts (Too) and variance in 
slopes (Tjj) provide evidence for systematic between service region variance in intercept 
and slope parameters. Systematic variance in intercepts (Too) indicates support for the 
main effect or a direct relationship between service region heterogeneity and dependent 
measures (team process and performance at the service region level). Systematic variance 
in slopes (Ty) indicates support for the cross level moderating effects of organizational
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
75
demography variables (service region heterogeneity) on the relationship between team 
heterogeneity variables and team level process measures.
The analysis indicated significant between service region variance in intercepts 
for perceptions of inter-team cooperation (too = 02, df = 59, x2 = 125.06, px .001) and 
intra-team cooperation (Too = 08, df = 59, x2 = 157.32, p< .001). Between service region 
variance in slopes (tij) was not significant for any of the dependent variables. These 
results suggest that further analyses may test the direct relationship between service 
region heterogeneity and service region level process outcomes. In other words, so far 
the results suggest that the proposed moderators mav. in fact, have a main effect on 
dependent measures rather than a moderating effect.
Team Level Results
This step of HLM also generates pooled slope (frj) parameters that represent the 
relationship between team level heterogeneity and team level perceptions of inter-team 
cooperation and intra-team cooperation. These parameters are included in parentheses in 
Tables 4(i) and 4(ii). Team level results based on the pooled slope parameters 2 
generated at this stage indicated that there were no significant relationships between team 
level heterogeneity and perceptions of intra-team cooperation and inter-team 
cooperation.
Step 3: Service Region Level Results
A model that examined the intercept (0o) as outcome of service region level 
independent variables represented service region level results (Equation 2). Tables 4 (i) 
through (ii) present results of this “intercept as outcome model” in the top portion of the
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
76
table. The significance of the Yoj parameter indicated support for the direct relationship 
between service region heterogeneity variables (both task and relations oriented) and 
perceptions of team processes. Results indicated that with regard to relations oriented 
heterogeneity, service region gender heterogeneity was positively related to intra-team 
cooperation (yoj = .689, p<.l) (Table 4 (i) a and 4 (ii) a ).
With regard to task related heterogeneity, service region tenure heterogeneity 
significantly positively predicted intra-team cooperation (Yoj = .125, pc.l) and service 
region major heterogeneity was negatively predicted intra-team cooperation CYoj = -.358, 
p<. 1). Service region task related heterogeneity was not significantly related to inter- 
team cooperation.
Step 4: Cross Level Results 
The slopes as outcomes model provides evidence for cross level moderating 
effects by regressing the level 1 (team level) slope parameters on second level (service 
region level) independent variables. The significance of the Yij parameter indicates 
support for the cross level moderating effects of the organizational demography variables 
(service region heterogeneity). (See Equation 3).
Although Step 2 did not provide sufficient evidence for between service region 
variance in slopes, since the primary hypotheses of this dissertation relate to cross level 
moderating effects of organizational demography (represented by between service region 
variance in slopes) Step 4 was included in the analyses. Tables 4 (i) and (ii) represent 
results of these analyses in the bottom panel of the tables.
2 HLM procedures generate 68 slope parameters since there are 68 service regions considered. These slope 
parameters are pooled to reflect team level relationships while controlling for service region effects.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
77
Hypothesis 1(a) & 1(b): Intra-Team Cooperation
Results do not indicate support for hypothesis 1(a). For the relationships between 
team heterogeneity and intra-team cooperation, none of the cross level relations oriented 
moderators emerged significant (Table 4 (i) a ). Results indicated partial support for 
hypothesis 1(b) which proposed task-related service region heterogeneity as a moderator 
of the relationship between task related team heterogeneity and intra-team cooperation. 
Service region education level heterogeneity was a positive cross level moderator of team 
education level heterogeneity and intra-team cooperation (Yij = 2.886, p<.01). In service 
regions with high levels of education-level heterogeneity there was a positive relationship 
between team education-level heterogeneity and intra-team cooperation.
Hypothesis 1(c) & (d): Inter-Team Cooperation
Table 4 (ii) presents the results for the slopes as outcomes model in the bottom 
portion of the tables. No support was found for hypothesis 1(c) with regard to relations 
oriented heterogeneity. Task related heterogeneity at the service region level also did not 
emerge as significant cross level moderator of the relationship between task related team 
heterogeneity and inter-team cooperation.
HYPOTHESIS 2: ORGANIZATIONAL DEMOGRAPHY AS A MODERATOR OF 
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN TEAM HETEROGENEITY AND TEAM
PERFORMANCE
Hypothesis 2 proposed that organizational demography (in terms of heterogeneity 
at the service region level) would moderate the relationship between team heterogeneity 
and team level goal achievement and speed of response. The subsequent sections discuss 
the results with regard to this hypothesis.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
78
Correlational Analyses 
With regard to relations oriented team heterogeneity, team gender heterogeneity 
was significantly negatively correlated with response time in terms of upper specification 
limit (r = -.08, p<.05). None of the team level heterogeneity variables were significantly 
correlated with other team performance measures.
At the service region level, gender heterogeneity was significantly negatively 
related to response time in terms of specification limit (r = -.24, p<.05). Education level 
heterogeneity at the service region level was negatively related to goal achievement in 
terms of service hours (r = -.24, p<.01) and education major heterogeneity was positively 
related to response time in terms of upper specification limit (r = .28, p<.05).
HLM Procedures
In order to test hypothesis 2, HLM analyses were performed using the following
model:
Level 1 (Team Level):
— Team Performance = Po + Pi Team size + P2 Average Team Age + P3 Team 
Age Het. + P 4 Team Ethnic Het. + P s  Team Gender Het................(4)
Level 2 (Service Region Level):
— 
Po = Yo + Y01 Service Region size + Y02 Average Service Region Age + Y03 
Service Region Age Het. + Ym Service Region Ethnic Het. + Yos Service 
Region Gender Het...................(5)
—  
P3(age heterogeneity) = Yio + Yi i Service Region Age Het 
(6)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
79
Similar equations for Pgendcr heterogeneity, and Pethnic hrterogeneity-
Similar equations were tested for task related heterogeneity at the team and service region 
heterogeneity. The significance of Y«j parameter (Equation 6) would indicate support for 
hypothesis 2.
Prior to testing hypothesis 2 using HLM, preliminary analyses were run to test 
whether the conditions for running these analyses were met. These steps (Step 1 and Step 
2) are described below. Tables 4 (iii) through 4 (vi) in Appendix 1 represent these 
results.
Step 1: Testing Variance in Team Process Outcomes Across Service Regions 
An ANOVA model was run to assess whether the data for the team level 
performance variables met the preconditions for HLM analyses in the manner described 
above. Significant between service region variance (Too) was found for the team 
performance variables, goal achievement in terms of service hours (Too = 03, df = 59, x2 
= 127.38, p< .001) goal achievement in terms of maintenance (Too = 03, df = 59, x2 = 
83.93, p< .001), speed of response in terms of target (Too = 03, df = 59, x2 = 135.86, p< 
.001), and speed of response in terms of specification limit (too = 03, df = 59, x2-  
154.22, p< .001). Thus, the Erst condition for testing hypothesis 2 was satisfied.
Step 2: Testing Variance in Team Level Intercepts and Slopes Across Service Regions 
This model estimated whether there was systematic variance between service 
regions in intercept parameters (Po) and slope parameters (Py) representing the 
relationships between team level variables, x2 tests for variance in intercepts (Too) and 
variance in slopes (Ty) provided evidence for systematic between unit variance in
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
80
intercept and slope parameters. Systematic variance in intercepts (Too) indicated support 
for the main effect or a direct relationship between organizational demography variables 
(service region heterogeneity) and team performance variables. Systematic variance in 
slopes (Xij) indicated support for the cross level moderating effects of organizational 
demography variables (service region heterogeneity) on the relationship between team 
heterogeneity variables and team level performance variables.
The analyses reveal significant variance between service regions in intercepts for 
goal achievement in terms of service hours (Too -  29.79, df = 59, %2 ~ 159.42, p< .001), 
goal achievement in terms of maintenance (Too = 153.61, df = 59, x2 -  95.40, px .001), 
speed of response in terms of target (Too = 63.42, df = 59, x2 = 158.18, p< .001), and 
speed of response in terms of specification limit (Too = 11-59, df = 59, x2 = 165.50 p< 
.001).
Between unit variance in slopes (Tjj) was significant for goal achievement in terms 
of service hours (Tjj = 141.50, df = 59, x2 = 84.31, p< .001) and response time in terms of 
target (Tjj = 343.21, df = 59, x2 = 101.38, p< .001). Thus, the second condition for testing 
the cross level hypothesis 2 was satisfied for these two variables.
Team Level Results
This step of HLM also generated pooled slope (ftj) parameters that represent the 
relationship between team level heterogeneity and team level performance. These 
parameters are included in parentheses in Tables 4 (iii) through 4(vi). Team level results 
based on the pooled slope parameters generated at this stage indicated that team ethnic 
heterogeneity negatively predicted goal achievement in terms of service hours (P = -5.88, 
p<.05), team gender heterogeneity was also a negative predictor speed of response in
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
81
terms of target (0 = -12.40, p<.05) and speed of response in terms of specification limit 
(P = -4.07, p<.05). Team age heterogeneity also negatively predicted speed of response 
in terms of target (P = -25.69, p<.05) and speed of response in terms of specification limit 
(P= -16.21, p<.05).
Step 3: Service Region level Results 
A model that examined the intercept (Po) as outcome of service region level 
independent variables represented service region level results (Equation 5). Tables 4 (iii) 
through (vi) present results of this “intercept as outcome model” in the top portion of the 
table. The significance of the Yoj parameter indicated support for the direct relationship 
between service region heterogeneity variables (both task and relations oriented) and 
perceptions of team performance.
Table 4 (iii a) through (vi a) represent results for service region performance with 
regard to relations oriented service region heterogeneity. Service region gender 
heterogeneity approached significance as a predictor of goal achievement in terms of 
service hours (Yoj = 29.37, pc.l), goal achievement in term of maintenance (Yoj = 55.33, 
p<.l), response time in terms of target (Yoj -  43.76, p<.l) and response time in terms of 
upper specification limit (Yoj = 13.47, pc.l). Task related service region heterogeneity 
was not significantly related to team performance.
Step. 4: Cross Level Results 
Tables 4 (iii) through (vi) present the results for the slopes as outcomes model in 
the bottom portion of the tables, which directly tests hypothesis 2.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
82
Hypothesis 2(a) & 2(c): Goal Achievement
Hypothesis 2(a) and 2(c) were not supported. None of the relations oriented or 
task related measures of heterogeneity were significant moderators of the relationship 
between team task related heterogeneity and goal achievement.
Hypothesis 2(b) & 2(d): Speed of Response
Hypothesis 2(b) received mixed support. With regard to relations oriented 
heterogeneity, service region age heterogeneity approached significance as a negative 
cross level moderator of the relationship between team age heterogeneity and response 
time in terms of target (Yij = -14S7.50, p<.l) and response time in terms of specification 
limit (Yij = -610.10, p<.l). As discussed earlier, at the team level there existed a negative 
relationship between team age heterogeneity and speed of response. The negative 
moderating effect of service region age heterogeneity suggests that the team level 
negative relationship was diminished when service region level age heterogeneity 
increased. In other words, in service regions with a high level of age heterogeneity, there 
existed a non-significant relationship between team age heterogeneity and speed of 
response. Hypothesis 2(d) was not supported. None of the task related measures of 
heterogeneity were significant moderators of the relationship between team task related 
heterogeneity and speed of response.
SUPPLEMENTARY HYPOTHESIS 1: CONFIGURATIONAL 
HETEROGENEITY AND TEAM PROCESSES 
In order to examine the direct relationships between relational and task 
configurational measures and team processes preliminary correlational analyses were 
conducted and are reported in Table S. Neither relational nor task related measures of
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
83
team configurations correlated with team process variables. Regression analyses 
(represented in Tables 6a and 6c) indicate no support for supplementary hypothesis 1(a) 
through 1(d).
Supplementary hypothesis 1(e) proposed that configurational measures (average 
similarity and dissimilarity) would predict team outcomes over and above each additive 
measure of heterogeneity (age, gender, ethnic, tenure, and educational heterogeneity). 
The hierarchical regression analyses did not indicate support for this hypothesis with 
regard to team process outcomes (Tables 7a and 8a). Overall, neither additive nor 
configurational measures significantly predicted team processes.
SUPPLEMENTARY HYPOTHESIS 2: CONFIGURATIONAL 
HETEROGENEITY AND TEAM PERFORMANCE 
Based on the results of correlational analyses, average relational similarity was 
found to be significantly positively related to goal achievement in terms of service hours 
(r = .076, p<.01). Relational dissimilarity was significantly negatively related to goal 
achievement in terms service hours (r = -.080, p<.01). Average task related similarity 
was negatively related to speed of response in terms of target (r = .11, p<.05). Results of 
the regression analyses conducted to examine these results (Tables 6b and 6d) further 
indicate that average relational similarity emerged was a significant positive predictor of 
goal achievement in terms of service hours ((5 = .076, p<.05). This finding suggests that 
when team members shared similar age groups, gender, and ethnicity, teams performed at 
their highest levels and supports supplementary hypothesis 2(a) (R2 = .173, F = 3.43, p 
<.05, df = 1376). Supplementary hypothesis 2(b) through 2(d) did not receive any 
support.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
84
Supplementary hypothesis 2(e) proposed that configurational measures (average 
similarity and dissimilarity) would predict team outcomes over and above each additive 
measure of heterogeneity (age, gender, ethnic, education, and tenure heterogeneity). The 
hierarchical regression analyses found support for this hypothesis with regard to team 
goal achievement in terms of service hours. Average relational similarity (combined 
index of age, gender, and ethnicity) positively predicted goal achievement in terms of 
service hours (0 = .102, p<.05) (Table 7b) (R2 = .129, F = 3.91, p <.01, df = 1376). 
ADDITIONAL ANALYSES: EXAMINING PEER AND MANAGERIAL
HETEROGENEITY 
In the preceding analyses, organization level demography was measured as 
heterogeneity among the combined sample of managerial and non-managerial employees 
in the service region. As is evident in the preceding sections, few significant 
relationships emerged using this operationalization of organizational demography. In 
order to better understand the influence of organizational demography on team level 
outcomes, two aspects of service region heterogeneity were considered separately in the 
following analyses: heterogeneity among peers of team members (i.e., non-managerial 
employees) and heterogeneity among managers. The significant findings are discussed 
below and are used to bolster the findings from the previous analyses in the final Chapter 
Four.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
85
Hypothesis 1: Organizational Demography as a Moderator of the Relationship between
Team Heterogeneity and Team Processes 
Service Region Level Results
At the service region level, managerial gender heterogeneity (y0j =.31, p<.05 ) as 
well as peer gender heterogeneity (y0j =1.09, p<.05) significantly predicted intra-team 
cooperation. In other words, service regions that were heterogeneous with regard to 
gender at the managerial and peer levels were more cooperative than service regions that 
were homogeneous in terms of gender. Peer ethnic heterogeneity also approached 
significance as a predictor of service region level cooperation (y0j =. 29, pc.l).
Similar results were also found with regard to inter- team cooperation.
Managerial gender heterogeneity was a positive predictor of service region level inter­
team cooperation (Yoj = 38, p<.05) as was peer gender heterogeneity (y0j = 1.02, 
p<.05). Peer ethnic heterogeneity also positively predicted inter-team cooperation (y0j = 
.28, p<.l).
Cross Level Results
In support of hypothesis 1, peer gender heterogeneity emerged as a positive cross 
level moderator of the relationship between team gender heterogeneity and team 
cooperation (Yij = 2.30, pc.l). Gender heterogeneous teams were more cooperative in 
service regions that were heterogeneous in terms of gender than in regions that were 
homogeneous in terms of gender.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
86
Hypothesis 2: Organizational Demography as a Moderator of the Relationship between 
Team Heterogeneity and Team Performance 
Service Region Level Results 
Peer level gender heterogeneity was positively related to goal achievement in 
terms of service hours (Yoj = 34.25, p<.05) and in terms of maintenance (Yoj = 62.10, 
p<.05). In this study, gender heterogeneity was positively correlated with the proportion 
of females in the region (r = .99, p<.01). Therefore, this result may be interpreted as a 
positive relationship between the number of women in a service region and goal 
achievement.
Peer level gender heterogeneity in the service region also positively predicted 
speed of response in terms of upper specification limit (Yoj = 43.76, p<.05). This finding 
suggests that there is a positive main effect of peer level gender diversity on speed of 
response in terms of specification limit. Ethnic heterogeneity at the service region level 
did not emerge as a significant predictor of team performance. The subsequent 
discussion will focus on the cross level analyses that directly test the hypotheses 
proposed.
Cross Level Results 
Hypothesis 2 (a) predicted that the positive moderating effect of service region 
heterogeneity on the relationship between team level heterogeneity and performance.
This hypothesis was supported with regard to service region ethnic heterogeneity. Peer 
level ethnic heterogeneity in the service region was a positive cross level moderator of 
the relationship between team level heterogeneity and goal achievement (Yij = 57.56, 
p<.05). This result suggests that ethnically heterogeneous teams will perform better in
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
87
regions that are ethnically heterogeneous at the peer levels than in regions that are 
homogeneous at the peer levels.
Hypothesis 2 (b) was not supported with regard to service region level gender and 
ethnic heterogeneity among peers and managers. Neither service region level gender 
heterogeneity among peers and managers nor ethnic heterogeneity among peers and 
managers emerged as significant cross level moderators. Peer age heterogeneity 
approached significance as a negative cross level moderator of the relationship between 
team age heterogeneity and speed of response in terms of target (Yij = -1718.19, p=.08). 
This finding is consistent with the results using the total number of employees in a 
service region discussed earlier. The negative moderating effect of peer age heterogeneity 
suggests that the team level negative relationship was diminished when peer level age 
heterogeneity increased. In other words, in service regions with a high level of age 
heterogeneity among peers, there existed a non-significant relationship between team age 
heterogeneity and speed of response.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
88
CHAPTER FOUR: DISCUSSION
Past research has often characterized the outcomes of team heterogeneity as a 
“double edged sword” (Williams & O’Reilly, 1998). This cliche suggests that workplace 
heterogeneity can have both positive and negative outcomes in organizations. While 
acknowledging past efforts in this regard, this dissertation attempted to contribute to 
extant research in three ways. First, the dissertation included inter-team cooperation as 
an outcome of heterogeneity in work teams. A second goal of this dissertation was to test 
the moderating influence of organizational demographic context on the process and 
performance outcomes of team level heterogeneity. Finally, this dissertation proposed 
configurational measures of team heterogeneity that examined multiple demographic 
attributes of team members simultaneously. Overall, the findings of this dissertation 
indicate mixed support for the hypotheses proposed. Before discussing significant 
findings of this dissertation, it would be pertinent to dwell on some of its limitations.
While the present study attempted to make a contribution to the research on work 
team heterogeneity by considering multiple levels of analysis, some inherent limitations 
of the research setting need to be acknowledged. This dissertation was conducted in a 
single organization with uniform policies with regard to workplace diversity. The 
organization’s commitment to diversity and its long history with diversity related 
practices may limit the generalizability of the finding, discussed in this chapter, to other 
organizations that may not have a similar approach to managing diversity. The 
implementation of diversity related practices could bias the findings in two ways. First, 
diversity management policies may heighten awareness and make individuals more
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
89
sensitive to issues related to race or gender thereby increasing the possibility of finding 
significant effects of team diversity. On the other hand, diversity related interventions 
might allow employees to be blind to demographic differences and thereby mute the 
effects of team diversity. Future research may test the generalizability of these findings 
across multiple organizations. Further, service regions that were located all over the 
United States served as proxies for multiple organizations. Although diversity related 
practices are formulated at the corporate level, the service regions represented varied 
demographic characteristics and there existed statistically significant differences in 
gender and ethnic diversity across regions. However, partial support for hypotheses 
proposed, may be explained by these specific attributes of the research setting.
A second source of limitations is the teams considered in this dissertation.
Service technicians are interdependent on each other to meet team goals. However, 
reliance on external relationships may not be as critical as it would be for a cross­
functional team. It must be noted that the organization does place value on cooperation 
between teams and an understanding of common goals across teams. This is reflected in 
items of the employee satisfaction survey administered annually. However, the mixed 
findings with regard to some of the hypotheses proposed may be explained, to some 
extent, by the nature of the team’s task. A related issue is that service teams perform 
routine tasks that are not very complex. These attributes of the team task may diminish 
the effects of team diversity. As discussed in Chapter One, when teams perform routine 
and simple tasks both the positive as well as negative outcomes of team diversity may not 
materialize (Pelled et al., 1999; Jehn et al., 1999). Future research could test the
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
90
hypotheses proposed in the context of top management teams or cross-functional teams. 
Keeping in view the constraints imposed by the research setting, the subsequent sections 
outline the main findings of this dissertation. Implications of these findings for theory 
and practice are also discussed.
HYPOTHESIS 1: ORGANIZATIONAL DEMOGRAPHY AS A MODERATOR OF 
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN TEAM HETEROGENEITY AND PROCESSES 
In this dissertation it was hypothesized that organizational demography would 
moderate the relationship between team heterogeneity and process outcomes such as 
intra-team cooperation and inter-team cooperation. The central proposition of this 
dissertation was that the outcomes of social identification in teams are a function of the 
demographic distinctiveness of team members relative to the organizational demographic 
context. The findings discussed in the preceding chapter indicate that this approach is 
justified with regard to some of the dimensions of team heterogeneity.
With regard to relations oriented as well as task related dimensions of team 
heterogeneity, the findings were not significant when heterogeneity among the total 
number of managerial and non-managerial employees was considered at the service 
region level. However, when additional analyses were undertaken that separately 
examined heterogeneity among peers (non-managerial service technicians) and 
heterogeneity among managers, some significant patterns emerged. These findings are 
discussed below at the team level, service region level, as well as in relation to the cross 
level hypotheses.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
91
Team Level Findings 
At the team level, there were no significant relationships between team 
heterogeneity and inter-team cooperation as well as intra-team cooperation. These non­
findings may be explained by the setting in which this research has been undertaken. As 
mentioned earlier, the company in which this research was conducted has a long tradition 
of diversity related interventions. Within work groups, these practices may have served 
to neutralize the process related outcomes of heterogeneity. In addition, the teams 
examined are stable and team members have relatively long tenures in the organization. 
The length of time that team members have spent with each other may also account for a 
non-significant relationship between team heterogeneity and process outcomes (Harrison, 
Price, & Bell, 1998). An examination of responses to survey items, which were used to 
measure inter-team and intra-team cooperation, suggests that this organization is 
characterized by high levels of cooperation both within and between teams. Responses 
on a five-point scale were on average above four, with very low variance in team level 
scores of cooperation. This lack of variance may also account for non-significant 
findings with regard to inter-team and intra-team cooperation. From a theoretical 
perspective, the high levels of cooperation in this organization reflect identification with 
superordinate goals that may supersede identification with demographic sub-groups 
(Brickson, 2000). In such an organizational setting, the predicted outcomes of team 
heterogeneity, based on identification with demographic sub-groups, may not materialize. 
A final explanation for the non-findings at the team level, with regard to inter-team 
cooperation, may be the nature of the measures used. In this dissertation I relied on
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
92
archival data, collected as part of a larger employment satisfaction survey. Only one item 
measured inter-team cooperation. In the future, a more detailed multi-item survey 
instrument may be used to measure inter-team cooperation. Having discussed these non­
findings at the team level, let us turn our attention to the findings at the service region 
level and across team and regional levels.
Service Region Level Findings
At the service region level, gender heterogeneity among peers as well as 
managers was positively associated with cooperation within teams. In this study, gender 
heterogeneity among peers and heterogeneity at the managerial levels in the service 
region were positively associated with percentage of women in the service region. The 
findings, therefore, suggest that a higher percentage of women at managerial and non- 
managerial levels in the service region were associated with higher levels of cooperation. 
Past research on the interaction and leadership styles of women may explain these 
findings (Carli, 1999; Eagly & Johnson, 1990).
In contrast to men, women display a higher level of team-oriented behaviors such 
as seeking agreement among group members, reducing conflicts, and solidarity with the 
group (Mabry, 1985; Piliavin & Martin, 1978). These differences are associated with 
status differentials among men and women. Since, women are the low status group in 
most organizational settings, they try to gain acceptance by displaying agreeable social 
behaviors (Carli, 1999). In support of past research, the findings of this study suggest 
that in regions with a greater percentage of women among peers, there was greater 
overall cooperation. Regardless of the gender composition of the team, teams that were
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
93
located in regions with a higher percentage of women were more cooperative than teams 
located in regions with fewer women. Stated in another way not only did a greater 
proportion of women engender cooperative behaviors between men and women in gender 
balanced teams, they also increased cooperation among men and among women in the 
region. Although this study did not directly test the organizational climate in the service 
regions, the findings suggest that a greater number of women may be associated with a 
greater climate of cooperation in the region. This finding may also be corroborated by 
research suggesting that female dominated work settings are characterized by more 
egalitarian attitudes that may encourage cooperation in teams regardless of team 
composition (Konrad, Winter, & Gutek, 1992).
Greater number of female managers in the region also predicted greater 
cooperation in teams, irrespective of the team’s gender composition. Research on gender 
differences in the ability or aptitude to lead is controversial (Eagly & Johnson, 1990). 
However, a survey of existing research in this area concludes that women tend to lead 
more democratically than men (Eagly & Johnson, 1990). In service regions with a 
greater number of female managers, a democratic style of leadership may encourage 
greater cooperation within all teams.
Another interesting finding at the service region level is that ethnic heterogeneity 
among peers is positively associated with cooperation in the region. In comparison to 
Whites, Blacks, Asians, and Hispanics have been attributed with more collectivistic 
orientations (Triandis, Bass, Ewen, & Mikesell, 1963). A collectivistic orientation may 
contribute to greater cooperation in ethically diverse teams in comparison to all White
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
94
teams (Cox et ah, 1991). A similar finding is revealed in this dissertation at the service 
region level. A greater number of ethnic minorities in the service region contribute to 
higher levels of cooperation in the region as a whole.
Cross Level Findings 
Cross level findings in this study provide the test for the hypothesized moderating 
influence of organizational demography on team level process outcomes. Based on the 
distinctiveness theory, it was proposed that the outcomes of social identification in teams 
will be influenced by the distinctiveness of team members’ demographic traits in relation 
to the immediate organizational context (Chatman et al., 2000; McGuire et ah, 1978). In 
a heterogeneous team, identification to demographic categories will not be salient when 
those demographic categories are represented outside the team. As a result, the negative 
outcomes of social identification in a heterogeneous team (i.e., diminished intra-team 
cooperation) will be rendered non-significant in organizations that are heterogeneous. 
Findings of this dissertation provide some support for this proposition. Results suggest 
that gender heterogeneous teams are more cooperative in service regions with high levels 
of gender heterogeneity than in regions with lower levels of gender heterogeneity. Since 
neither women nor men will be numerically distinctive in this setting, their gender 
identities will not be salient in an environment that has an equal number of men as well 
as women (Chatman, et al., 2000). As a result, in a gender heterogeneous organizational 
setting, team gender heterogeneity will not negatively predict cooperation as proposed by 
social identity theory (Northcraft et al., 1996; Jehn et al., 1997).
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
95
With regard to task related measures of heterogeneity, education level 
heterogeneity was a positive cross level moderator of the relationship between team 
education level heterogeneity and intra-team cooperation. Distinctiveness theory can also 
be extended to explain these findings. Educational backgrounds create strong bonds of 
solidarity and can shape an individual’s values and behavior in organizations (Wiersema 
& Bird, 1993). Processes related to social identification are, therefore, applicable to 
education level heterogeneity as well. In organizational settings that are heterogeneous in 
terms of education-level, team education level heterogeneity will not be negatively 
related to intra-team cooperation (Northcraft et al., 1996; Jehn et al., 1997).
HYPOTHESIS 2: ORGANIZATIONAL DEMOGRAPHY AS A MODERATOR OF 
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN TEAM HETEROGENEITY AND
PERFORMANCE
Hypothesis 2 predicted that organizational demography will moderate the 
relationship between team heterogeneity and team performance (i.e., goal achievement 
and speed of response to customers). The logic for this hypothesis was based on social 
identity theory as well as social network theory. It was proposed that heterogeneous 
teams will be able to maximize their performance outcomes when they are placed in a 
heterogeneous setting which allows them to access diverse social identification based 
networks outside the team (Friedman & Krackhardt, 1997; Mehra et al., 1998). By 
considering organizational demography both in terms of total heterogeneity in the service 
region as well as peer and managerial heterogeneity, separately, a more holistic picture of 
the results was possible.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
96
Team Level Findings 
At the team level, findings suggest that heterogeneity along the dimensions of age 
and gender slowed teams down in responding to customer calls. These findings are 
corroborated by past research on the outcomes of team heterogeneity that suggest that 
heterogeneous teams are faced with process losses as a social category based differences 
in the team (Jehn et al., 1997; Jackson, 1992). In other words, the “double edged sword” 
of diversity does have a negative edge with regard to speed of response to customers. 
Findings were not significant with regard to goal achievement as an outcome. From the 
organization’s perspective this finding may be troubling. These results indicate that the 
positive outcomes of work team heterogeneity are not being full realized and the negative 
outcomes are still evident.
Service Region Level Findings 
Gender heterogeneity at the service region level (i.e., with the total sample of 
managerial and non-managerial employees) has a positive main effect on team 
performance in the organizational unit as a whole. This finding was also supported when 
peer (non-managerial service technicians) and managerial heterogeneity at the service 
region level were examined separately. As mentioned earlier, the setting in which the 
present study was carried out was male dominated. As a result, gender heterogeneity was 
collinear with the proportion of women in the workplace. Institutional theories of gender 
composition suggest that increasing proportions of women in the workplace have 
differential outcomes for men and women (Konrad, Winter & Gutek, 1992). hi the 
present study, the findings suggest that men as well as women in teams are pushed
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
97
toward performing at higher levels when the workplace is characterized by a greater 
number of women. Based on past findings, it may be proposed that the mechanisms by 
which men and women may be performing at higher levels differ (South, Bonjean, 
Markham & Corder, 1982; Izraeli, 1983; Konrad et al., 1992). Greater proportions of 
women in the workplace, particularly at higher levels in the organization, may counter 
effects of tokenism for women (Kanter, 1977) and be a reflection of supportive policies 
toward women in the workplace thereby enabling women to contribute more to team 
performance. In terms of the interaction between men and women, increased social 
contact will help in the revision of stereotypes toward women and enable team 
functioning. Studies have indicated that, in comparison to male dominated settings, in 
mixed gender settings women (as well as men) perceive women as more effective (South 
et al., 1982). Positive attitudes toward female team members may positively influence 
supportive behaviors and cooperation within the team and ultimately improve team 
functioning. In terms of the interaction between men, a greater proportion of women in 
the workplace may generate egalitarian attitudes that encourage teamwork not only 
between men and women but also between men (Konrad et al., 1992). Overall, the 
positive outcomes for men as well as women in the workplace may translate into 
improved team functioning.
Cross Level Findings 
Age heterogeneity in the service region as well as age heterogeneity among peers 
was a negative cross level moderator of the relationship between team age heterogeneity 
and speed of response. Based on social identity theory and social network theory, this
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
98
dissertation proposed that the negative outcomes of heterogeneity would be reduced in 
organizational context that are heterogeneous. Heterogeneous teams would have access 
to diverse networks outside the team (Ibarra, 1992, I99S). Access to these external 
networks would offset the negative outcomes of social identification. In the present 
study, there was a negative relationship between age heterogeneity and performance at 
the team level. However, this negative relationship was reduced when the age 
heterogeneity among managerial as well as non-managerial ranks in the organization was 
taken into account. This finding supports the hypothesis proposed. In organizations, in­
group based identification may extend outside the boundaries of teams (Brewer, I99S; 
Ibarra, 1992, 1995). Individuals may identify with and form relationships outside the 
team with age based cohorts, thereby counteracting the negative influence of team age 
heterogeneity, to improve team performance (Zenger & Lawrence, 1989). Older team 
members may have access to age based cohorts at higher levels in the organization and 
gain access to unique informational resources and support, enhancing the performance of 
the team. Younger team members may have access to age cohorts who are relatively 
recent hires with new information on technological developments, which will also 
enhance team performance.
Ethnic heterogeneity among peers in the service region also emerged as a 
significant positive cross level moderator of the relationship between team ethnic 
heterogeneity and goal achievement. This finding supports the hypothesis proposed. 
Teams that were ethnically heterogeneous were able to perform better in service regions 
that were ethnically diverse, than ethnically heterogeneous teams in regions that were
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
99
homogeneous. This finding suggests that ethnically heterogeneous teams were able to 
leverage the benefits of their ethnic heterogeneity by drawing on social networks based 
on ethnicity outside the team (Ibarra, 1995). Ethnic caucus groups in organizations are 
often founded on the principle that members of ethnic minorities will be able to draw on 
both formal and informal networks to enhance their performance (Friedman, 1996). In 
support of this approach, this dissertation suggests that ethnically diverse teams are able 
to maximize their performance when they are placed in organizational settings that 
provide them with access to social capital outside the team.
SUPPLEMENTAL FINDINGS 
Supplementary hypotheses proposed in this dissertation examined the relationship 
between team configurational heterogeneity and team process and performance 
outcomes. Overall regression analyses did not indicate support for the supplementary 
hypotheses. One significant finding was a positive relationship between similarity on the 
basis of gender, ethnicity, and age and goal achievement. Teams comprised of members 
who were similar in terms of their gender, ethnicity and age performed better than teams 
with members who were dissimilar on the basis of these attributes. These findings are 
contrary to past research suggesting that diverse team perform better on intellective 
problem solving tasks (Jackson, 1992). Past research has not examined configurational 
measures of team diversity. However, this finding should be interpreted with caution as 
no consistent patterns of relationships were detected in this dissertation with regard to the 
configurational measures. Future research will need to be undertaken to reexamine the 
configurational measures proposed in this dissertation.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
100
IMPLICATIONS FOR THEORY
This dissertation proposed a reexamination of the application of social identity 
theory to diversity in work teams. Social identity theory posits that identification based 
on social categories within a team will lead to negative outcomes that hamper team 
functioning (Ashforth & Mael, 1989). By incorporating distinctiveness theory to 
acknowledge the demographic context in which teams function, this dissertation sets the 
social identity theory, as applicable to research on diversity in work teams, in a “meso” 
framework (Capelli & Sherer, 1992). Distinctiveness theory suggests that identity 
salience is a function of the milieu in which individuals are placed (McGuire et al., 1978). 
Based on the results discussed in this chapter, distinctiveness theory has implications for 
the outcomes of social identification in teams. Team members’ identification with 
demographic sub-groups and the negative consequences thereof will materialize in 
contexts where these demographic sub-groups are numerically distinctive (Chatman et 
al., 2000). This application of distinctiveness theory supports the building of cross level 
theoretical propositions with regard to the outcomes of social identification in teams.
Social network theory also complements the application of social identity theory 
to the study of work team heterogeneity. Social network perspectives suggest that team 
members’ identification with individuals is reflected in their interpersonal interactions 
(Ibarra, 1992,1995). Interactions outside the team can have consequences for team 
functioning. As the results of this dissertation with regard to ethnic heterogeneity in 
service regions suggest, ethnically heterogeneous teams are able to perform at higher 
levels regions that are ethnically heterogeneous. In heterogeneous regions, the
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
101
probability of forming networks outside the team would be higher for a ethnically 
heterogeneous team. The team would be able to harness diverse networks outside the 
team to enhance its performance.
A related theoretical consideration is the demographic composition of the 
organizations across structural levels. Identification with demographic sub-groups may 
be a necessary condition, but it is not sufficient to generate negative outcomes (Wharton, 
1992; Ely, 1994). The segregation of organizations based on demography creates 
conditions where the negative outcomes of identification are realized (Wharton, 1992). 
While understanding the outcomes of heterogeneity in teams, the structural aspects of the 
organization’s demographic composition are also important. Social networks across 
structural levels in an organization represent access to social capital and can have 
implications regarding the extent to which diverse demographic groups in a team can 
contribute to team functioning (Friedman & Krackhardt, 1997). In this dissertation, when 
heterogeneity among peers (non-managerial service technicians) and managers in service 
regions were considered separately, significant patterns emerged. Overall, these findings 
suggest that, in the future, considering heterogeneity at higher levels and lower levels 
separately is relevant.
IMPLICATIONS FOR PRACTICE
Nearly a decade ago, Labor Secretary Lynn Martin presented the report of the 
Glass Ceiling Commission (Karr, 1992). Findings of the report indicated that women and 
minorities continued to be under-represented at the upper levels of management in 
organizations (Karr, 1992). Researchers have attempted to demonstrate that increasing
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
102
diversity in organizations is positively associated with business outcomes (Bantel & 
Jackson, 1989; Jackson, 1992). The findings of this dissertation provide further support 
for this argument. Based on the findings of this dissertation, companies may be 
encouraged to increase the representation of women and minorities at entry levels as well 
as at higher levels in the organization. Overall, a holistic approach to diversity related 
interventions are suggested in this dissertation.
Findings suggest that diversity among peers as well as among managers can have 
independent effects on team level outcomes. For instance, ethnic diversity among peers 
enhances the functioning of ethnically diverse teams. Gender diversity at the managerial 
levels is positively associated with greater cooperation in service regions. As a first step, 
keeping these complex multi-level findings in view, a holistic approach to diversity 
interventions would involve a diversity audit. A diversity audit would consider not only 
the absolute numbers of minorities and females in the organization but also the extent to 
these demographic groups are integrated across all levels in the organization. 
Emphasizing the material costs associated with maintaining certain demographic 
structures within the organization (e.g., lower team level productivity) may motivate 
managers to conduct such an audit and reconsider existing policies and procedures related 
to recruitment, selection, and training. While examining team composition in relation to 
team level functioning is certainly important, it does not reveal the full picture of the 
outcomes of diversity in organizations. By examining the composition of the team’s 
immediate environment, managers will able to determine whether there exist the
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
103
necessary conditions for teams to maximize the benefits and minimize the losses 
associated with team diversity
Findings of this dissertation suggesting that diverse teams are able to perform 
better in diverse settings, are also relevant for the implementation of caucus groups in 
organizations. While examining the growth of female and minority network groups in 
organizations, Friedman (1996) argues that when historically disadvantaged groups form 
networks they are able to harness the benefits of solidarity for career development. The 
findings of this dissertation suggest that, apart from being beneficial for individual career 
advancement, social support networks outside the team, implemented through caucuses, 
can also enhance team functioning.
An interesting finding of this dissertation was that regions with a greater number 
of female managers and regions with greater ethnic diversity are more cooperative. 
Research on gender and ethnic differences in interaction styles and leadership may be 
controversial. However, while designing diversity training interventions, the cultural 
antecedents of interaction styles (reflected in ethnicity) may be pertinent. Interaction 
styles associated with certain ethnic groups (Asians, African Americans) may be more 
conducive to team functioning (Cox et al., 1993). These interaction styles could be used 
in developing behavioral competencies suited for managing diverse employees for 
managers. Similarly, female leadership styles that may be specially suited for 
engendering egalitarian and team oriented attitudes in organizations and can serve as a 
model for all managers.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
104
CONCLUSION
While making a case for the value of diversity in organizations researchers are 
often stymied by the incoherence of past findings. Several explanations have been put 
forth to explain disparate findings that range from mixed to non-significant (Williams & 
O’Reilly, 1998). A common theme in this regard is the consideration of cross level 
moderating variables that may influence the outcomes of work team diversity (Jackson et 
al., 1995). From a broader perspective, this theme parallels a growing concern among 
organizational behavior theorists that research has gravitated towards micro or individual 
level analysis at the cost of considering organization-level factors (Capelli & Sherer, 
1991). This dissertation attempted to make a contribution to research on work team 
heterogeneity by incorporating the organization’s demographic context as a cross level 
moderator of team level outcomes. The findings of this study shed light on the complex 
multilevel effects of workplace diversity.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
105
REFERENCES
Alagna, S., Reddy, D„ & Collins, D. (1982). Perceptions of functioning in mixed-sex 
and male medical training groups. Journal of Medical Education. 57. 801-803.
Alderfer, C. (1988). An intergroup perspective on group dynamics. In J. Lorsch (Ed.), 
Handbook of organizational behavior (pp. 190-222). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall.
Allen, V., Wilder, D., & Atkinson, M. (1983). Multiple group membership and social 
identity. In T. R. Sarbin & K. Scheibe (Eds.), Studies in social identity (pp. 92- 
115). New York: Praeger.
Allport, G. W. (1954). The nature of prejudice. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.
Ancona D. G, & Caldwell, D. F. (1998). Rethinking team composition from the
outside in. In M. A. Neale & E. A. Mannix (Eds.), Research on managing groups 
and teams (Vol. 1, pp. 21-37). Stamford CT: JAI Press.
Ancona D. G., & Caldwell, D. F. (1992). Bridging the boundary: External activity and 
performance for organizational teams. Administrative Science Quarterly. 37. 
634-665.
Ashforth, B„ & Mael, F. (1989). Social identity theory and the organization. Academy 
of Management Review. 14. 20-39.
Bantel, K. A., & Jackson, S. E. (1989). Top management and innovations in banking: 
Does the composition of the top management team make a difference? Strategic 
Management Journal. 10.107-124.
Blalock, H. M. (1967). Toward a theory of minority group relations. New York: Wiley.
Blau, P. M. (1977). Inequality and heterogeneity: A primitive theory of social structure. 
New York: Free Press.
Brewer, M. B. (1996). Managing diversity: The role of social identities. In S.E. Jackson 
& M. Ruderman (Eds.), Diversity in work teams: Research paradigms for a 
changing workplace (pp. 47-68). Washington, D.C: American Psychological 
Association.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
106
Brewer, M. B. (1979). In-group bias in the minimal intergroup situation: A cognitive- 
motivational analysis. Psychological Bulletin. 86. 307-324.
Brewer, M. B., & Kramer, R. (1985). 
The psychology of intergroup attitudes and 
behavior, Annual Review of Psychology. 36, 219-243.
Brewer, M. B., & Miller, N. (1984). Beyond the contact hypothesis: Theoretical
perspectives on desegregation, hi N. Miller & M. B. Brewer (Eds.), Groups in 
contact: The psychology of desegregation (pp. 281-302). Academic Press: New 
York.
Brickson, S. (2000). The impact of identity orientation on individual and organizational 
outcomes in demographically diverse settings. Academy of Management Review. 
25, 82-101.
Carli, L. (1999). Gender differences in interaction style and influence. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology. 56. 565-576.
Capelli, P., & Sherer, P. (1991). The missing role of context in OB: The need for a meso- 
level approach. In L. L. Cummings & B. M. Staw (Eds.), Research in 
organizational behavior (Vol. 13, pp. 55-110). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Chatman, J. A., Polzer, J. T., Barsade, S. G., & Neale, M. A. (1998). Being different yet 
feeling similar: The influence of demographic composition and organizational 
culture on work processes and outcomes. Administrative Science Quarterly. 43. 
749-780.
Chatman, J., Berdhal, J., Boisinier, A., Spataro, S., & Anderson, C. (2000). The typical, 
the rare, and the outnumbered: Distinguishing the effects of historical typicality 
and numerical distinctiveness in work groups. Paper presented at the Academy of 
Management Conference, Toronto, Canada.
Clement, D., & Schiereck, J. (1973). Sex composition and group performance in a signal 
detection task. Memory and Cognition, i, 251-255.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences. Hillsdale, NJ: 
Erlbaum Associates.
Cota, A. A., & Dion, K. L. (1986). Salience of gender and sex composition of ad-hoc 
groups: An experimental test of distinctiveness theory. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology. 50.770-776.
Cox, T. (1993). Cultural diversity in organizations: Theory, research and practice. San 
Francisco: Berrett-Koehler Publishers.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
107
Cox, T. H., Lobel, S. A., & McLeod, P. L. (1991). Effects of ethnic group cultural 
differences on cooperative versus competitive behavior on a group task.
Academy of Management Journal. 34. 827-847.
Cox, T. (1996). The complexity of diversity: Challenges and directions for future 
research. In S.E. Jackson & M. Ruderman (Eds.). Diversity in work teams: 
Research paradigms for a changing workplace (pp. 235-246). Washington D.C: 
American Psychological Association.
Davis-Blake, A. (1992). The consequences of organizational demography: Beyond social 
integration effects. In P. Tolbert & S. Bacharach (Eds.), Research in the 
sociology of organizations. (Vol. 10, pp. 175-198). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Deschamps, J., & Doise, W. (1978). Crossed category memberships in intergroup
relations. In H. Tajfel (Ed.), Differentiation in social groups: Studies in the social 
psychology of intergroup relations (pp. 395-429). London: Academic Press.
Eagly, A. H., Makhijani, M. G., & Klonsky, B. G. (1992). Gender and the evaluation of 
leaders: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin. 111. 3-22.
Eagly, A. H., & Johnson, B. (1990). Gender and leadership style: A meta-analysis. 
Psychological Bulletin. 108. 233-256.
Ely, R. (1995). The power in demography: Women’s social constructions of gender 
identity at work. Academy of Management Journal. 38. 589-634.
Ely, R. (1994). The effects of organizational demographics and social identity on
relationships among professional women. Administrative Science Quarterly. 39. 
203-238.
Frable, D. (1997). Gender, racial, ethnic, sexual, and class, identities. Annual Review of 
Psychology. 48. 136-162.
Friedman, R. (1996). Defining the scope and logic of minority and female network 
groups: can separation enhance integration? hi G. Ferris (Ed.), Research in 
personnel and human resource management (Vol. 14, pp. 307-349). Greenwich, 
CT: JAI.
Friedman, R. A., & Krackhardt, D. (1997). Social capital and career mobility: A
structural theory of lower returns to education for Asian employees. Journal of 
Applied Behavioral Science. 33.316-334.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
108
Gladstein, D. (1984). Groups in Context: A model of task group effectiveness, 
Administrative Science Quarterly. 29.499-517.
Guzzo, R. A., & Shea, G. P. (1992). Group performance and intergroup relations in
organizations. In M. D Dunnette & L. M. Hough (Eds.), Handbook of industrial 
and organizational psychology (Vol.3, pp. 269-313.). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting 
Psychologists Press.
Guzzo, R., & Dickson, M. (1996). Teams in organizations: Recent research on
performance and effectiveness. Annual Review of Psychology. 47. 307-338.
Hackman, R. (1987). The design of work teams. In J. Lorsch (Ed.), The handbook of 
organizational behavior (pp. 315-342). Englewood-Cliffs: Prentice Hall, NJ.
Hackman, R. (1999). Thinking differently about context. In M. A. Neale & E. A.
Mannix (Eds.), Research on managing groups and teams (Vol. 2, pp. 233-247). 
Stamford, CT: JAI Press
Hambrick, D. C., Cho, T. S., & Chen, M. (1996). The influence of top management team 
heterogeneity on firms’ competitive moves. Administrative Science Quarterly.
41, 659-684.
Harrison, D. A., Price, K. H., & Bell, M. P. (1998). Beyond relational demography:
Time and the effects of surface and deep-level diversity on work group cohesion. 
Academy of Management Journal. 41.96-107.
Hays, S. (1999, November). Generation X and the art of reward. Workforce. 45-47.
Heilman, M., Block, C., & Martell, R. (1995). Sex stereotypes: Do they influence the 
perceptions of managers? Journal of Social Behavior and Personality. 10. 237- 
252.
Hewstone., M., & Brown , R. (1986). Contact is not enough: An intergroup perspective 
on the contact hypothesis. In M. Hewstone & R. Brown, (Eds.), Contact and 
conflict in intergroup encounters (pp. 1-44). Oxford: Blackwell.
Hofmann, D., Griffin, M., & Gavin, M. (2000). The application of hierarchical linear 
modeling to organizational research. In K. Klein & S. Kozlowski (Eds.), 
Multilevel theory, research, and methods in organizations (pp. 423-468V San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Hogg, M. A., & Terry, D. J. (2000). Social identity and self-categorization processes in 
organizational contexts. Academy of Management Review. 25.121-140.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
109
Homans, G. (1950). The human group. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
Horn, P., Manz, C., & Millikin, J. (1998). When self-managing work teams work: How 
self management and demographic diversity influence team effectiveness. Paper 
presented at the Academy of Management Meetings, San Diego.
House, R., Roussueau, D., & Thomas-Hunt, M. (1995). The meso paradigm: A
framework for the integration of micro and macro organizational behavior. 
Research in Organizational Behavior. 17.71-114.
Ibarra, H. (1995). Race, opportunity, and diversity of social circles in managerial 
networks. Academy of Management Journal. 38.673-703.
Ibarra, H. (1992). Homophily and differential returns: Sex differences in network
structure and access in an advertising firm. Administrative Science Quarterly. 37. 
422-447.
Ibarra, H. & Smith-Lovin, L. (1997). New directions in social network research on 
gender and organizational careers. In C. L. Cooper & S. E. Jackson (Eds.), 
Creating tomorrow’s organizations: A handbook for future research in 
organizational behavior (pp. 359-384). New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Izraeli, D.N. (1983). Sex effects or structural effects? An empirical test of Ranter’s 
theory of proportions. Social Forces. 6 2 .153-165.
Jackson, S.E., & Joshi A. (2001). Research on domestic and international diversity in
organizations: A merger that works? In N. Anderson, D. Ones, H. Sinangil, & C. 
Visweswaran (Eds.), Handbook of work and organizational psychology (pp. 206- 
231). London: Sage Publications.
Jackson, S. E., May K. E., & Whitney, K. (1995). Under the dynamics of diversity in 
decision-making teams. In R. A. Guzzo & E. Salas (Eds.), Team effectiveness 
and decision making in organizations (pp. 204-261). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Jackson, S. E. (1992). Team composition in organizational settings: Issues in managing 
an increasingly diverse work force. In Worchel, S., Wood, W. & Simpson, J. A. 
(Eds.), Group process and productivity (pp. 204-261). Newbury Park: Sage 
Publications.
Jackson, S. E., Brett, J. F., Sessa, V. I., Cooper, D. M., Julin, J. A., & Peyronnin, K.
(1991). Some differences make a difference: Individual dissimilarity and group 
heterogeneity as correlates of recruitment, promotions, and turnover. Journal of 
Applied Psychology. 76.675-689.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
110
Jehn, K. A., Northcraft, G. B., & Neale, M. A. (1999). Why differences make a
difference: A field study in diversity, conflict, and performance in workgroups. 
Administrative Science Quarterly. 44. 741-763.
Jehn, K. A., Chadwick, C., & Thatcher, S. (1997). To agree or not to agree: Diversity, 
conflict, and group outcomes. International Journal of Conflict Management. 8, 
287-306.
Joshi, A. (2001). The context in which some differences make a difference. Paper
presented at the Annual Academy of Management Meetings, Washington, DC.
Kanter, R. M. (1977). Men and women of the corporation. New York: Basic Books.
Karr, A. (1992, August 12). Progress seen in breaking “glass ceilings”. Wall Street 
Journal. A8.
Kim, J., & Mueller, C. (1978). Factor analysis: Statistical methods and practical issues. 
Newbury Park: Sage Publications.
Kir km an, B., Tesluk, P., & Rosen, B. (2000). The impact of race heterogeneity and team 
leader-team member demographic fit on team empowerment and effectiveness. 
Paper presented at the 15th annual meeting of the Society of Industrial and 
Organizational Psychology, New Orleans, Louisiana.
Klein, K., Conn, A.B., & Sorra, J.S. (in press). Implementing computerized technology: 
An organizational analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology.
Klein, K., & Kozlowski, S. (2000). From micro to meso: Critical steps in
conceptualizing and conducting multilevel research. Organizational Research 
Methods. 3.211-236.
Knight, D., Pearce, C. L., Smith, K. G., Olian, J.D., Sims, H. P., Smith, K.A. & Flood, P. 
(1999). Top management team diversity, group process, and strategic consensus. 
Strategic Management Journal. 20.445 — 465.
Konrad, A., Winter, S., & Gutek, B. (1992). Diversity in work group sex composition: 
Implications for majority and minority members. In P. Tolbert & S. Bacharach 
(Eds.), Research in the sociology of organizations (Vol.10, pp. 115-140). 
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
I ll
Kramer, R. (1991). Inter-group relations and organizational dilemmas: The role of
categorization processes. In L.L. Cummings & B.M. Staw (Eds.), Research in 
organizational behavior (Vol. 13, pp. 191-228). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Kramer, R.M., & Brewer, M.B. (1984). Effects on group identity on resource use in a 
simulated common dilemma. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 46. 
1044-1057.
Lau, D. C., & Mumighan, J. K. (1998). Demographic diversity and faultlines: The 
compositional dynamics of organizational groups. Academy of Management 
Review. 23. 325-340.
Lawrence, B. S. (1988). New wrinkles in a theory of age: Demography, norms, and 
performance ratings. Academy of Management Journal. 31. 309-337.
Lefkowitz, J. (1994). Race as a factor in job placement: Serendipitous findings of ethnic 
drift. Personnel Psychology. 47.497-513.
Levine, R., & Campbell, D. (1972). Ethnocentrism: Theories of conflict, ethnic attitudes 
and group behavior. New York: Wiley.
Lewis, K., & Gibson, C. (2000). The efficacy advantage: Observing and modeling the 
relationships between team heterogeneity, group efficacy, and outcomes. Paper 
presented at the 15th annual meeting of the Society of Industrial and 
Organizational Psychology, New Orleans, Louisiana.
Lindeman, M., & Sundvik, L. (1993). Evaluative bias and self-enhancement among 
gender groups. European Journal of Social Psychology. 25.269-280.
Lott, A., & Lott, B. (1965). Group cohesiveness as interpersonal interaction: A review of 
relationships with antecedent and consequent variables. Psychological Bulletin. 
64, 259-309.
Mabry, E. (1985). The effects of gender composition and task structure on small group 
interaction. Small Group Behavior. 16.75-96.
McCain, B. E., O’Reilly, C. A., & Pfeffer, J. (1983). The effects of departmental
demography on turnover: The case of a university. Academy of Management 
Journal. 26.626-641.
McGuire, W„ McGuire, C., Child, P., & Fuji oka, T. (1978). Salience of ethnicity in the 
spontaneous self-concept as a function of one's ethnic distinctiveness in the social 
environment. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 36. 511-520.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
112
McLeod, P.L., Lobel, S.A., & Cox, T.H. (1996). Ethnic diversity and creativity in small 
groups. Small Group Research. 27. 248-264.
Mehra, A., Kilduff, M., Brass, D. (1998). At the margins: A distinctiveness approach to 
social identity and social networks of underrepresented groups. Academy of 
Management Journal. 41.441-452.
Miles, R., & Snow, C. (1986). Network organizations: New concepts and new forms. 
California Management Review. 28.62-73.
Millikin, F. J., & Martins, L. L. (1996). Searching for common threads: Understanding 
the multiple effects of diversity in organizational groups. Academy of 
Management Review. 21.402-433.
Mittman, B. (1992). Theoretical problems and methodological issues in the study of 
organizational demography and demographic change. In P. Tolbert & S. 
Bacharach (Eds.), Research in the sociology of organizations (Vol. 10, pp. 3-54). 
Greenwich CT: JAI Press.
Morrison , A. M., & Von Glinov, M. A. (1990). Women and minorities in management. 
American Psychologist. 45. 200-208.
Nkomo, S. (1992). The emperor has no clothes: Rewriting "race in organizations." 
Academy of Management Review. 17.487-513.
Northcraft, G., Polzer, J., Neale, M., & Kramer, R. (1996). Diversity, social identity, and 
performance: Emergent social dynamics in cross-functional teams. In S.E.
Jackson & M. Ruderman (Eds.) Diversity in work teams: Research paradigms for 
a changing workplace (pp. 69-96). Washington D.C: American Psychological 
Association.
Ohlott, P. J., Ruderman, M. N., & McCauley, C. D. (1994). Gender differences in
managers’ developmental job experiences. Academy of Management Journal. 37. 
46-67.
O’Reilly, C. A., Caldwell, D. F., & Barnett, W. P. (1989). Work group demography, 
social integration, and turnover. Administrative Science Quarterly. 34,21-37.
Pelled, L. H., Eisenhardt, K. M., & Xin, K. R. (1999). Exploring the black box: An 
analysis of work group diversity, conflict, and performance. Administrative 
Science Quarterly. 44.1-28.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
113
Pfeffer, J. (1983). Organizational demography. In B. Staw & L. Cummings (Eds.),
Research in organizational behavior (Vol. 5, pp. 299-357). Greenwich, CT: JAI 
Press.
Piliavin, J.A., & Martin, R.R. (1978). The effects of sex composition of groups on the 
style of social interaction. Sex Roles. 4. 281-296.
Powell, G.N., & Butterfield, D.A. (1997). Effect of race on promotions to top
management in a federal department. Academy of Management Journal. 4 0 .112- 
128.
Ragins, B., & Sandstorm, E. (1990). Gender and power organizations: A longitudinal 
perspective. Psychological Bulletin. 105. 51-88.
Randel, A. (2000). How do members of groups diverse on multiple dimensions
conceptualize one another? Social contextual triggers and work group conflict 
implications of identity salience. Paper presented at the Academy of Management 
Meetings, Toronto, Canada.
Reed, J. (1972). Percent black and lynching: A test of Blalock’s theory. Social Forces. 
50,356-365.
Richard, O. (2000). Racial diversity, business strategy, and Arm performance: A 
resource-based view. Academy of Management Journal. 43.164-177.
Sanchez-Mazas, M., Roux, P., & Mugny, G. (1994). When the outgroup becomes the 
ingroup and when the ingroup becomes the outgroup: Xenophobia and social 
categorization in a resource allocation task. European Journal of Social 
Psychology. 24,417-423.
Smith, K. G., Smith, K. A., Olian, J. D., Sims, H. P., Jr., O’Bannon, D. P., & Scully, J. A. 
(1994). Top management team demography and process: The role of social 
integration and communication. Administrative Science Quarterly. 39.412-438.
Smith, R., & Elliott, J. (in press). Does ethnic concentration influence access to
authority? An examination of contemporary urban labor markets. Social Forces.
Smith, R., (1997). Race, job authority, and income: A cross-temporal study of changes in 
the socioeconomic status of Black and White men, 1972-1994. Social Problems. 
44,701-719.
South, S. J., Bonjean, C. M., Markham, W. T., & Corder, J. (1982). Social structure and 
intergroup interaction: Men and women of the federal bureaucracy. American 
Sociological Review. 47. 587-599.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
114
Sundstorm, E., De Meuse, K., & Futrell, D. (1990). Work teams: Applications and 
effectiveness. American Psychologist. 45. 120-233.
Tajfel H., & Turner, J. (1985). The social identity of intergroup behavior. In S. Worchel 
& W. Austin (Eds.), Psychology of intergroup relations (pp. 7-24). Chicago: 
Nelson-Hall.
Tajfel, H. (1978). Differentiation between social groups: Studies in the social 
psychology of inter-group relations. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Tajfel, H. (1982). Social psychology of inter-group relations. Annual Review of 
Psychology. 33, 1-39.
Tajfel, H., Flament, C., Billig, M., & Bundy, R. (1971). Social categorization in inter­
group behavior. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology. 10.149-177.
Thatcher, S., & Jehn, K. (1998). A model of group diversity profiles and categorization 
processes in bicultural organizational teams. In M. A Neale & E. A. Mannix 
(Eds.), Research on managing groups and teams (Vol. 1, pp. 1-20). Stamford, CT: 
JAI Press.
Thomas-Hunt, M., & Gruenfeld, D. (1998). A foot in two worlds: The participation of 
demographic boundary spanners in work groups. In M. A Neale & E. A. Mannix 
(Eds.), Research on managing groups and teams (Vol. 1, pp. 39-57). Stamford,
CT: JAI Press.
Tolbert, P., Andrews, A., & Simons, T. (1996). The effects of group proportions on 
group dynamics. In S.E. Jackson & M. Ruderman (Eds.), Diversity in work 
teams: Research paradigms for a changing workplace (pp. 131-159). Washington, 
D.C: American Psychological Association.
Triandis, H., Bass, A. R., Ewen, R. B., & Mikesell, E. H. (1963). Team creativity as a 
function of the creativity of the members. Journal of Applied Psychology. 
17,104-110.
Tsui, A., & Gutek, B. (2000). Demographic differences in organizations. New York: 
Lexington Books.
Tsui, A. S. & O’Reilly, C. A. (1989). Beyond simple demographic effects: The
importance of relational demography in supervisor-subordinate dyads. Academy 
of Management Journal. 32,402-423.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
115
Tsui, A. S., Egan, T. D., & O’Reilly, C. A. (1992). Being different: Relational
demography and organizational attachment. Administrative Science Quarterly. 37. 
549-579.
Wagner, W. G., Pfeffer, J., & O’Reilly, C. A. (1984). Organizational demography and 
turnover in top-management groups. Administrative Science Quarterly. 29.74-
92.
Waldinger, R. (1996). Still the promised city? African-Americans and new immigrants 
in postindustrial New York. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Watson, W. E., Kumar, K., & Michaelsen, L. K. (1993). Cultural diversity’s impact on 
interaction process and performance: Comparing homogeneous and diverse task 
groups. Academy of Management Journal. 36. 590-602.
Webber, S. S., & Donahue, L. M. (1999). Examining the "double-edged sword” of 
diversity in work groups: A meta-analvsis. Unpublished manuscript.
Wharton, A. (1992). The social construction of gender and race in organizations: A social 
identity and group mobilization perspective. In P. Tolbert & S. Bacharach (Eds.), 
Research in the sociology of organizations (Vol. 10, pp. 55-84). Greenwich, CT: 
JAI Press.
Wharton, A., & Baron, J. (1987). So happy together? The impact of gender segregation 
on men at work. American Sociological Review. 52.574-587.
Wiersema, M. F. & Bird, A. (1993). Organizational demography in Japanese firms:
Group heterogeneity, industry dissimilarity, and top management team turnover. 
Academy of Management Journal. 36,996-1025.
Williams, K. (1999). Working with the double edged sword of diversity: The effects of 
maintaining inter-categorv perspective differences in small groups. Unpublished 
doctoral dissertation, Stanford University.
Williams, K., & O’Reilly, C. A. (1998). Demography and diversity in
organizations: A review of 40 years of research. In B. Staw & L. Cummings 
(Eds.), Research in organizational behavior (Vol.20, pp. 77-140). Greenwich, CT: 
JAI Press.
Zenger, T. R., & Lawrence, B. S. (1989). Organizational demography: The differential 
effects of age and tenure distribution on technical communications. Academy of 
Management Journal. 32.353-376.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
APPENDIX 1
Table 1
Team-level Descriptive Statistics and Inter-Correlations
MEAN
S.D.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
1.
Team Size
5.75
2.03
2.
Average Team Age
45.00
4.43
0.05
3.
Percent Females in Team
6.08
11.39 •0.08*
•0.14**
4.
Percent Blacks In Team
10.29 16.32
0.10
-0.08*
0.02
5.
Percent Hispanics in Team
7.95
15.30
0.07*
-0.13
•0.06
-0.03
6.
Percent Asians in Team
3.95
11.25
•0.03
0.02
•0.08*
-0.03
o.or
7.
Percent Native Americans in 
Team
0.78
4.07
•0.03
-0.07
0.01
■0.07
•0.04
0.00
8.
Average Team Organizational 
Tenure
19.01
4.51
0.04
0.80**
•0.20
•0.10”
•0.13"
-0.03
-0.09”
9.
Average Team Education- 
level
2.33
0.77
0.01
0.14**
•0.03
0.05
•0.06
0.13”
-0.05
0.09”
10.
Team Age Heterogeneity
0.16
0.06 0.09“
•0.24”
0.03
-0.03
0.03
0.02
0.03
-0.27“
-0.06
11.
Team Gender Heterogeneity
0.09
0.15
•0.04
-0.14"
0.97”
0.03
-0.06
•0.09”
-0.01
-0.21”
-0.03
12.
Team Ethnic Heterogeneity
0.26
0.24 0.19**
-0.07*
•0.05
0.56”
0.49”
0.33”
0.18"
-0.10”
0.05
13.
Team Tenure Heterogeneity
0.35
0.18
0.05
-0.13”
0.08*
•0.03
•0.06
0.06
0.03
-0.31”
0.03
14.
Team Education-level 
Heterogeneity
0.27
0.22
0.07*
0.02
0.03
0.02
0.04
0.08*
0.00
-0.05
0.54”
15.
Team Education Major 
heterogeneity
0.18
0.24 0.10**
0.12”
0.00
0.02
0.02
0.12”
0.03
0.00
0.17”
16.
Intra-Team Cooperation
4.09
0.43
-0.02
0.10"
0.00
-0.04
0.00
-0.01
•0.02
0.10”
0.01
17.
Inter-team Cooperation
4.10
0.49
0.00
0.07*
0.00
•0.06
-0.01
•0.04
-0.04
0.09“
0.00
18.
Goal Achievement Service 
Hours
101.80 16.57
0.05
•0.13”
0.01
•0.05
0.00
-0.01
0.00
-0.10”
-0.09”
19.
Goal Achievement 
Maintenance
110.11
34.32
0.00
•0.16”
0.05
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.02
•0.14"
-0.12”
20.
Speed of Response in terms 
of Target
91.37 28.47
0.03
0.04
-0.05
•0.11”
0.00
0.06
•0.05
0.09”
-0.01
21.
Speed of Response in terms 
of Specification limit
16.06 14.52
0.08*
0.06
-0.07*
-0.07*
•0.01
0.02
0.01
0.13”
0.02
116

--- PAGE BREAK ---
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
1.
Team Size
2.
Average Team Age
3.
Percent Females in Team
4.
Percent Blacks in Team
5.
Percent Hispanics in Team
6.
Percent Asians in Team
7.
Percent Native Americans 
In Team
8.
Average Team 
Organizational Tenure
9.
Average Team Education- 
level
10.
Team Age Heterogeneity
11.
Team Gender 
Heterogeneity
0.03
12.
Team Ethnic Heterogeneity
•0.03
•0.04
13.
Team Tenure 
Heterogeneity
0.56**
0.08’
•0.06
14.
Team Education-level 
Heterogeneity
0.05
0.03
0.06
0.05
15.
Team Education Major 
Heterogeneity
0.00
0.00
0.08* 0.10" 0.25"
16.
Intra-Team Cooperation
•0.04
•0.02
•0.04
0.00
0.02
0.10"
17.
Inter-team Cooperation
-0.01
-0.02
•0.05
0.01
•0.04
0.08*
0.81"
18.
Goal Achievement Service 
Hours
0.02
0.01
-0.06
•0.01
0.02
-0.05
•0.01
•0.03
19.
Goal Achievement 
Maintenance
-0.01
0.04
0.00
•0.06
0.03
•0.04
0.02
0.01
0.71"
20.
Speed of Response in 
terms of Target
-0.01
-0.06
•0.05
-0.04
0.02
-0.02
0.06
0.06
0.23”
0.28"
21.
Speed of Response in 
terms of Specification limit
•0.04 -0.08’
-0.03 -0.08’
0.04
-0.03
0.06
0.04
0.21**
0.23”
0.85”
** = jk.01, *=p<.05, Lislwisc N=767

--- PAGE BREAK ---
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
Table 2
Service Region level Descriptive Statistics and Inter-Correlations
MEAN S.D.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1.
Regional size
133.34 99.77
2.
Regional age
45.11
1.87
•0.01
3,
Percent Females in region
7.00
0.04
•0.19
0.19
4.
Percent Blacks in region
8.00
0.08 0.52**
-0.15
-0.17
S.
Percent Hlspanics In region
10.00
0.14
-0.11
-0.27*
0.08
-0.05
6.
Percent Asians in region
6.00
0.13
-0.18
-0.26*
-0.08
•0.15
-0.01
7.
Percent Native Americans in 
region
1.00
0.01
0.07
0.18
0.17
-0.08
•0.08
•0.13
8.
Regional Tenure
18.89
2.39
0.12
0.80”
0.09
0.08
•0.24
-0.48"
0.08
9.
Regional Education level (Post 
HS)
2.45
0.41 -0.26*
0.03
0.44"
-0.09
-0.03
0.13
-0.17
-0.06
10.
Regional age heterogeneity
0.18
0.02
-0.05
•0.37**
-0.22*
-0.05
•0.04
0.35"
-0.23*
-0.25*
0.02
11.
Regional ethnic heterogeneity
0.33
0.18
0.21*
-0.30*
-0.12
0.49”
0.46"
0.27*
0.01
-0.24*
-0.10
12.
Regional gender heterogeneity
0.13
0.07
-0.17
0.19
0.99"
•0.15
•0.03
•0.09
0.19
0.09
0.38“
13.
Regional tenure heterogeneity
0.42
0.13 •0.26*
•0.26*
-0.19
•0.40
•0.16
0.60
-0.05
-0.56"
0.01
14.
Regional education level 
heterooeneitv
0.41
0.06
0.08
-0.15
•0.42"
•0.03
-0.02
0.39**
0.04
-0.32"
-0.10
15.
Regional education major 
heterogeneity
0.48
0.15
0.04
0.00
-0.26*
0.07
0.15
0.31*
0.04
•0.11
-0.12
16.
Regional Intra-Team 
Cooperation
4.11
0.23
-0.14
•0.18
0.26*
-0.20*
•0.05
0.24*
0.08
•0.26*
0.48”
17.
Regional Inter Team 
Cooperation
4.17
0.29
•0.18
•0.36**
0.15
•0.12
0.04
0.14
0.09
•0.32”
0.45"
18.
Regional goal ach. mainl
112.47 42.27
•0.04
-0.01
0.04
0.17
-0.01
•0.11
-0.11
0.09
0.01
19.
Regional goal ach. service
151.36 163.68
0.04
0.05
0.09
-0.05
0.08
•0.07
-0.12
0.11
0.17
20.
Regional speed of response - 
target
105.01
70.96
0.03
-0.01
0.01
•0.09
0.03
0.01
0.09
-0.05
•0.10
21.
Regional speed of response- 
upper spec. limit
16.48
6.60
0.16
•0.18
-0.29*
0.13
0.09
0.06
•0.06
-0.15
-0.56"
00

--- PAGE BREAK ---
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
10
11
12
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
1.
Regional size
2.
Regional age
3.
Percent Females in region
4.
Percent Blacks In region
S.
Percent Hispanics in region
6.
Percent Asians in region
7.
Percent Native Americans in 
region
8.
Regional Tenure
9.
Regional Education level
10.
Regional age heterogeneity
11.
Regional ethnic 
heterogeneity
0.04
12.
Regional gender 
heterogeneity
-0.25*
•0.11
13.
Regional tenure 
heterogeneity
0.58**
•0.13
-0.21’
14.
Regional education level 
heterogeneity
0.20’
0.25*
•0.42"
0.42"
15.
Regional education major 
heterogeneity
0.07
0.41"
-0.23*
0.21*
0.57"
16.
Regional Intra-Team 
Cooperation
0.17
-0.10
0.22"
0.20
0.08
-0.16
17.
Regional Inter Team 
Coooeratlon
0.17
-0.02
0.12
0.13
0.02
-0.20*
0.88"
18.
Regional goal ach. maint.
0.15
0.03
0.03
•0.03
•0.24*
•0.14
0.08
0.16
19.
Regional goal ach. service
•0.01
0.04
0.07
-0.18
-0.06
•0.18
0.2r
0.29'
0.40"
20.
Regional speed of response 
-target
-0.02
0.05
0.03
0.10
0.07
0.16
0.08
0.09
0.03
0.08
21.
Regional speed of 
response- upper spec, limit
-0.11
0.15
-0.24*
0.01
0.18
0.28*
•0.18
-0.25*
-0.13
-0.28’
0.24’
** = jk .OI, *=p<.05, N=66
119

--- PAGE BREAK ---
120
Table 3
Intra-class Coefficients for Outcome Variables
Outcome Variables
Individual to 
Team 
Aggregation
Team to 
Service 
Region 
Aggregation
1.
Intra-team Cooperation
.10
.12
2.
Inter-team Cooperation
.07
.08
3.
Goal Achievement (Service 
Hours)
--
.12
4.
Goal Achievement 
(Maintenance)
--
.06
5.
Speed of Response (Target)
--
.11
6.
Speed of Response (Upper 
Spec. Limit)
.10
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
121
Table 4
Results of HLM Analyses3
Table 4 (D a: Results of Level 2 Analysis for Intra-team Cooperation- Relations Oriented 
Heterogeneity
Fixed Effects
Gamma
Coefficients
(Y)
Standard
Error
t-ratio
Service Region level Results
(Yoj)
Service Region Size 
Service Region Average Age 
Service Region Age Heterogeneity 
Service Region Ethnic Heterogeneity 
Service Region Gender Heterogeneity
-0.000 
-0.027 
0.450 
0.004 
0.68 lf
0.000
0.020
0.610
0.140
0.390
-0.579
-0.850
0.282
0.030
l.730f
Cross-level Results
(Yij)
•
Team Age Heterogeneity (0t=-.O3) 
-Service Region Age Heterogeneity
-12.450
14.090
-0.889
Team Ethnic Heterogeneity (32=-.02) 
-Service Region Ethnic Heterogeneity
3.320
0.364
0.913
Team Gender Heterogeneity (03=-.O9) 
-Service Region Gender Heterogeneity
0.590
1.540
-1.750
(n= 60 Service Region units; n= 1374 teams; = p <. 1. * = p<.05, ** -  p<.01)
3 Model represented by the top panel- Service Region level Results:
Po= Yo + Yoi Service Region size +■ Yos Average Service Region Age/Tenure + Yoj Service Region 
Age /Tenure HeL + Yo* Service Region Ethnic/ Education level HeL + Yas Service Region Gender/ 
Education Major HeL 
Model represented by the bottom panel- Cross-level Results:
—* Po= Yo + Yoi Service Region size + Yea Average Service Region Age/Tenure + Ym Service Region
Age /Tenure HeL + Yo* Service Region Ethnic/ Education level HeL + Yas Service Region Gender/ 
Education Major HeL
hBBopiH, = Yto + Yu Service Region Age HeL
Similar equations for other slope parameters generated at the team level.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
122
Table 4 (0 b: Results of Level 2 Analysis for Intra-team Cooperation-Task-related
Heterogeneity
Fixed Effects
Gamma
Coefficients
(Y)
Standard
Error
t-ratio
Service Region level Results
(Yoj)
Service Region Size 
Average Service Region Tenure 
Average Service Region Education level 
Service Region Tenure Heterogeneity 
Service Region Education-level Heterogeneity 
Service Region Major Heterogeneity
0.000
0.020
0.126
1.124
0.699
-0.358
0.000
0.020
0.109
0.569
0.504
0.198
0.020
0.390
0.120
1.974'
1.387
-1.811'
Cross-level Results
(Yij)
Team Tenure Heterogeneity (Pi=.07) 
-Service Region Tenure Heterogeneity
-0.943
1.199
-0.786
Team Education-level Heterogeneity (P2=.00) 
-Service Region Education-level 
Heterogeneity
2.886
1.112
2.595*
Team Education Major Heterogeneity(P3=.15) 
-Service Region Major Heterogeneity
0.116
0.526
0.221
(n= 59 organizational units; = p <-1. * = p<.05, ** = p<.01)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
123
Table 4 (ii) a: Results of Level 2 Analysis for Inter-team Cooperation- Relations Oriented
Heterogeneity
Fixed Effects
Gamma
Coefficients
(Y)
Standard
Error
t-ratio
Service Region level Results
(Yoj)
Service Region Size 
Service Region Average Age 
Service Region Age Heterogeneity 
Service Region Ethnic Heterogeneity 
Service Region Gender Heterogeneity
0.000
-0.019
-1.590
0.000
0.487
0.000
0.020
1.679
0.141
0.435
0.826
-0.937
-0.095
0.004
1.110
Cross-level Results
(Yij)
Team Age Heterogeneity (Pi=. 16) 
-Service Region Age Heterogeneity
-15.850
17.710
-0.895
Team Ethnic Heterogeneity (^=-.03) 
-Service Region Ethnic Heterogeneity
0.559
0.423
1.322
Team Gender Heterogeneity (P3=-.09) 
-Service Region Gender Heterogeneity
-0.440
1.780
-0.249
(n= 60 Service Region units; n= 1374 teams; = p <. 1. * = p<.05, ** = p<.01)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
124
Table 4 fiD b: Results of Level 2 Analysis for Inter-team Cooperation- Task-related
Heterogeneity
Fixed Effects
Gamma
Coefficients
(Y)
Standard
Error
t-ratio
Service Region level Results 
Service Region Size
(Yoj)
-0.000
0.000
-0.722
Average Service Region Tenure
0.006
0.018
0.325
Average Service Region Education level
0.198
0.127
0.125
Service Region Tenure Heterogeneity
0.258
0.608
0.424
Service Region Education-level Heterogeneity
0.680
0.541
1.257
Service Region Major Heterogeneity
-0.281
0.222
-1.265
Cross-level Results
(Yij)
Team Tenure Heterogeneity (0i=.lO)
-Service Region Tenure Heterogeneity
-0.121
1.149
-0.106
Team Education-level Heterogeneity
(M -14)
1.908
1.774
1.076
-Service Region Education-level 
Heterogeneity
-0.492
0.575
-0.855
Team Major Heterogeneity (03=.17) 
-Service Region Major Heterogeneity
(n= 56 organizational units; = p <. 1. * = p<.05, ** = p<.01)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
125
Table 4 (in) a: Results of Level 2 Analysis for Goal Achievement (Service Hours')- Relations
Oriented Heterogeneity
Fixed Effects
G am m a
Coefficients
(Y)
Standard
Error
t-ratio
Service Region level Results
Service Region Size 
Service Region Average Age 
Service Region Age Heterogeneity 
Service Region Ethnic Heterogeneity 
Service Region Gender Heterogeneity
(Yoj)
0.008
-0.056
75.290
-0.071
29.370r
0.059
0.006
62.060
5.410
16.060
1.340
-0.090
1.210
-0.490
l.820f
Cross-level Results
Team Age Heterogeneity (3i=3.04) 
-Service Region Age Heterogeneity
Team Ethnic Heterogeneity (^=-5-88*) 
-Service Region Ethnic Heterogeneity
Team Gender Heterogeneity (P3=-2.01) 
-Service Region Gender Heterogeneity
(Yij)
-37.400
10.830
-29.780
624.380
16.020
64.140
-0.060
0.681
-0.462
(n= 60 Service Region units; n= 1374 teams; = p <.1. * = p<.05, ** = p<.01)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
126
Table 4 (nil b: Results of Level 2 Analysis for Goal Achievement (Service Hours')- Task-
related Heterogeneity
Fixed Effects
Gamma
Coefficients
(Y)
Standard
Error
t-rado
Service Region level Results
(Yoj)
Service Region Size 
Average Service Region Tenure 
Average Service Region Education level 
Service Region Tenure Heterogeneity 
Service Region Education-level 
Heterogeneity
Service Region Major Heterogeneity
0.012
0.879
-7.115
20.319
-7.902
0.148
0.006
0.704
4.683
18.985
18.474
8.424
1.929
1.248
-1.519
1.070
-0.428
0.018
Cross-level Results
CYij)
Team Tenure Heterogeneity (0t=-3.99) 
-Service Region Tenure Heterogeneity
29.404
58.515
0.502
Team Education-level Heterogeneity
(02=1.81)
-Service Region Education-level 
Heterogeneity
49.599
48.897
1.014
Team Education Major Heterogeneity 
(03=-3.52)
-Service Region Major Heterogeneity
1.620
18.604
0.087
(n= 56 organizational units; = p <. 1. * = p<-05, ** = p<-01)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
127
Table 4 (iv) a: Results of Level 2 Analysis for Goal Achievement (Maintenance)-Relations
Oriented Heterogeneity
Fixed Effects
G am m a
Coefficients
(Y)
Standard
Error
t-ratio
Service Region level Results
(Yoj)
Service Region Size 
Average Service Region Age 
Service Region Age Heterogeneity 
Service Region Ethnic Heterogeneity 
Service Region Gender Heterogeneity
-0.011
-6.470f
-383.481
12.452
55.333f
0.012
4.043
293.561
8.810
30.320
-0.792
-1.602f
-1.310
1.410
1.820f
Cross-level Results
(Yij)
Team Age Heterogeneity (0i=11.40) 
-Service Region Age Heterogeneity
-1485.281
970.170
-1.531
Team Ethnic Heterogeneity (02=3.44) 
-Service Region Ethnic Heterogeneity
34.070
23.020
1.482
Team Gender Heterogeneity (03=2.67) 
-Service Region Gender Heterogeneity
-40.670
71.301
-0.573
(n= 60 organizational units; = p <.1. * = p<.05, ** = p<.01)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
128
Table 4 (iv') b: Results of Level 2 Analysis for Goal Achievement ("Maintenance)-Task-relat^d
Heterogeneity
Fixed Effects
Gamma
Coefficients
(Y)
Standard
Error
t-ratio
Service Region level Results 
Service Region Size
(Yoj)
0.007
0.009
0.839
Average Service Region Tenure
0.567
1.051
0.539
Average Service Region Education level
-9.786
7.550
-1.296
Service Region Tenure Heterogeneity
-0.276
29.086
-0.009
Service Region Education-level
20.937
28.557
0.733
Heterogeneity
Service Region Major Heterogeneity
10.760
12.734
0.845
Cross-level Results
(Yij)
Team Tenure Heterogeneity (Pi=-17.13*)
-Service Region Tenure Heterogeneity
38.117
100.045
0.381
Team Education-level Heterogeneity
(($2=4.07)
82.619
63.082
1.310
-Service Region Education-level 
Heterogeneity
-1.268
29.959
-0.042
Team Major Heterogeneity (p3=-3.74) 
-Service Region Major Heterogeneity
(n= 56 organizational units; = p <.1. * = p<.05, ** = pc.Ol)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
129
Table 4 (v) a: Results of Level 2 Analysis for Speed of Response (Target)- Relations Oriented
Heterogeneity
Fixed Effects
Gamma
Coefficients
(Y)
Standard
Error
t-ratio
Service Region level Results
Service Region Size 
Average Service Region Age 
Service Region Age Heterogeneity 
Service Region Ethnic Heterogeneity 
Service Region Gender Heterogeneity
(Yoj)
0.003
-2.770
-41.890
5.350
43.761f
0.009
1.001
92.261
8.810
23.410
0.691
-2.763
-0.452
0.610
1.870f
Cross-level Results
Team Age Heterogeneity (3i=-25.69*) 
-Service Region Age Heterogeneity
Team Ethnic Heterogeneity (32=1-45) 
-Service Region Ethnic Heterogeneity
Team Gender Heterogeneity (33=-12.40**) 
-Service Region Gender Heterogeneity
(Yij)
-I457.502t
-28.811
-38.131
783.861
28.842
78.813
-1.903f
-0.992
-0.481
(n= 60 organizational units; = p <. 1. * = p<.05, ** = px.01)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
130
Table 4 (v~) b: Results of Level 2 Analysis for Speed of Response (TargetVTask-related
Heterogeneity
Fixed Effects
Gamma
Coefficients
(Y)
Standard
Error
t-ratio
Service Region level Results
(Yoj)
Service Region Size 
Average Service Region Tenure 
Average Service Region Education level 
Service Region Tenure Heterogeneity 
Service Region Education-level 
Heterogeneity
Service Region Major Heterogeneity
0.003
-0.898
-1.641
20.121
8.953
-9.688
0.010
1.306
9.172
37.807
30.364
13.540
0.273
-0.688
-0.179
0.532
0.295
-0.716
Cross-level Results
(Yu)
Team Tenure Heterogeneity 
(Pi=-2.16)
-Service Region Tenure Heterogeneity
139.139
86.389
1.611
Team Education-level Heterogeneity 
(p2=4.32)
-Service Region Education-level 
Heterogeneity
-12.261
91.330
-0.134
Team Education Major Heterogeneity 
(p3=-3.69)
-Service Region Major Heterogeneity
9.563
29.909
0.320
(n= 56 organizational units; = p <. 1. * = p<.05, ** = p<.01)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
131
Table 4 Cvi) a: Results of Level 2 Analysis for Speed of Response (Upper Spec. LimitY
Relations Oriented Heterogeneity
Fixed Effects
Gamma
Coefficients
(Y)
Standard
Error
t-ratio
Service Region level Results
(Yoj)
Service Region Size 
Average Service Region Age 
Service Region Age Heterogeneity 
Service Region Ethnic Heterogeneity 
Service Region Gender Heterogeneity
0.003 
-0.991 
-50.812 
-0.043 
13.47 lf
0.400
0.002
32.221
2.892
7.893
1.231
-2.382*
-1.571
-0.021
1.710r
Cross-level Results
(Y«j)
Team Age Heterogeneity (Pi=-I6.21**) 
-Service Region Age Heterogeneity
-610.312*
353.121
-1.73 if
Team Ethnic Heterogeneity ({^=.45) 
-Service Region Ethnic Heterogeneity
-10.721
9.231
-0.252
Team Gender Heterogeneity (P3=-4.07*) 
-Service Region Gender Heterogeneity
25.421
39.942
0.523
(n= 60 organizational units; = p <. 1. * = p<.05, ** = p<.01)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
132
Table 4 (vi) b: Results of Level 2 Analysis for Speed of Response (Upper Spec. Limit)- Task-
related Heterogeneity
Fixed Effects
Gamma
Coefficients
(Y)
Standard
Error
t-ratio
Service Region level Results
(Yoj)
Service Region Size 
Average Service Region Tenure 
Average Service Region Education level 
Service Region Tenure Heterogeneity 
Service Region Education-level 
Heterogeneity
Service Region Major Heterogeneity
-0.003
0.347
-0.439
3.406
-4.399
4.470
0.004
0.522
4.048
14.872
12.763
5.615
-0.744
0.665
-0.108
0.229
-0.345
0.796
Cross-level Results
Team Tenure Heterogeneity (3i=-2.93) 
-Service Region Tenure Heterogeneity
-38.585
28.690
-1.345
Team Education-level Heterogeneity 
(32=2.50)
-Service Region Education-level 
Heterogeneity
9.695
33.981
0.285
Team Education Major Heterogeneity
(33=-1-62)
-Service Region Major Heterogeneity
10.687
11.792
0.906
(n= 56 organizational units; = p <.1. * = p<.05, ** = p<.01)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
133
Table 5
Correlations: Configurational Measures and Team Process and Performance
Average
Relational
Similarity
Relational
Dissimilarity
Average
Task-related
Similarity
Task-related
Dissimilarity
Intra-team
Cooperation
0.031
-0.020
-0.051
0.041
Inter-team
Cooperation
0.022
-0.021
-0.012
0.042
Goal
Achievement 
Service Hours
0.083*
-0.072*
0.033
0.011
Goal
Achievement
Maintenance
-0.020
-0.013
0.034
0.053
Speed of
Response in terms 
of Target
0.031
-0.031
-0.111*
-0.042
Speed of
Response in terms 
of Specification 
Limit
-0.032
0.021
0.041
0.001
(n= 1401 teams, * = p<.05, ** = p<.01)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
134
Table 6
Regression Analyses for Configurational Measures as Predictors of Team Outcomes4
Table 6 fat: Results of Hierarchical Regression Analyses for Relational Configurations and Team 
Process Measures
Independent
Variable
Intra-team Cooperation
Inter- team Cooperation
ARZ
0
ARZ
0
Step 1
Average Team 
Age
.022
.011
Team Size
.171**
.010
.129
.012
Step 2
Average
Relational
Similarity
.026
.010
Relational
Dissimilarity
.001
-.010
.001
-.022
Cumulative Rz
.172**
.130**
Adjusted Rz
.129**
.085**
Df
1356
1355
Model F
3.991**
2.812**
se
.401
.462
(’= p <.1. * = {X.05, ** = p<.01)
4 For the regression analyses presented in the subsequent tables 67 dummy variables, representing 
service regions (n=68), were included as control variables.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
135
Table 6 flfi: Results of Hierarchical Regression Analyses for Relational Configurations and Team
Performance Measures
Independent
Variable
Goal Achievement 
Service Hours
Goal Achievement 
Maintenance
Speed of 
Response Target
Speed of 
Response 
Specification 
Limit
AR2
P
AR2
P
AR2
P
AR2
P
Step 1
Average Team 
Age
-.123**
-.118**
-.012
.032
Team Size
.163**
.019
.154**
-.026
.105**
.031
.099**
.042
Step 2
Average
Relational
Similarity
.076**
.045
.036
.037
Relational
Dissimilarity
.010**
-.049
.003
-.018
.002
-.016
.002
-.014
Cumulative Ri
.173**
.157**
.107**
.101**
Adjusted R2
.130**
.113**
.061**
.054**
Df
1376
1387
1378
1400
Model F
4.061**
3.612**
2.342**
2.181**
se
15.452
32.321
27.582
14.122
(r= p <.1. * = px.05, ** = pc.Ol)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
136
Table 6 (c): Results of Hierarchical Regression Analyses for Task-related Configurations and Team
Process Measures
Independent
Variable
Intra-team Cooperation
Inter- team Cooperation
ARZ
P
AR2
e
Step 1
Average Team 
Tenure
.148*
.126*
Team Size
.213
-.066
.188
-.054
Step 2
Average Task- 
related Similarity
.023
.067
Task-related
Dissimilarity
.002
.039
.004
.033
Cumulative R2
.215*
.192
Adjusted Ri
.075
.049
Df
430
430
Model F
1.531*
1.372T
se
.379
.441
C= p <.1. * = p<.05, ** = px.Ol)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
137
Table 6 fdt: Results of Hierarchical Regression Analyses for Task- related Configurations and Team
Performance Measures
Independent
Variable
Goal 
Achievement 
Service Hours
Goal
Achievement
Maintenance
Speed of 
Response Target
Speed of 
Response 
Specification 
Limit
AR2
P
AR2
P
AR2
P
AR2
P
Step 1
Average Team 
Tenure
-.142
-.177**
.087
.059
Team Size
.254
-.009
.192
-.071
.256**
.001
.219
-.002
Step 2
Average Task- 
related Similarity
-.032
-.010
-.106
-.053
Task-related
Dissimilarity
.002
-.043
.000
.010
.010
-.034
.003
.028
Cumulative R2
.256
.192
.266
.222
Adjusted Rz
.125
.050
.136
.086
Df
433
434
434
437
Model F
1.951**
1.352*
2.051**
1.631**
se
14.751
26.032
25.182
12.212
(T= p <.1. * = pc.05, ** = pc.01)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
138
Table 7
Hierarchical Regression Analyses for Relational Configurations
Table 7 (a): Results of Hierarchical Regression Analyses for Relational Configurations and Team 
Process Measures
Independent
Variable
Intra-team Cooperation
Inter- team Cooperation
AR2
0
AR2
P
Step 1
Average Team 
Age
.022
.011
Team Size
.171**
.010
.129**
.012
Step 2
Team Age Het.
.025
.046
Team Ethnic Het.
-.029
-.032
Team Gender Het.
.003
-.043
.004
-.045
Step 3
Average
Relational
Similarity
-.010
-.050
Relational
Dissimilarity
.000
.013
.000
.011
Cumulative Rz
.174
.133
Adjusted Rz
.129
.087
Df
1356
1355
Model F
3.861**
2.831**
se
.392
.472
(T=p <.!.* = p<.05, ** = pc.Ol)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
139
Table 7 (bf: Results of Hierarchical Regression Analyses for Relational Configurations and Team
Performance Measures
Independent
Variable
Goal 
Achievement 
Service Hours
Goal
Achievement
Maintenance
Speed of 
Response Target
Speed of 
Response 
Specification 
Limit
AR2
3
AR2
3
AR2
3
AR2
3
Step 1
Average Team 
Age
.123**
-118*
.012
-.032
Team Size
.163**
.019
.154**
-.026
.105**
.031
.099**
.042*
Step 2
Team Age Het.
.011
.011
-.035
-.049*
Team Ethnic Het.
-.093
-.054
-.019
.005
Team Gender 
Het.
.008**
-.055
.002
-.016
.006
-.070*
.009**
-.088
Step 3
Average
Relational
Similarity
.102*
.096
-.096
-.092
Relational
Dissimilarity
.003**
-.042
.002
-.020
.001
-.005
.001
.006
Cumulative Rz
.174**
.158**
.112**
.109**
Adjusted Rz
.129**
.113*
.065
.061**
Df
1376
1387
1378
1400
Model F
3.912**
3.481**
2.362
2.922**
se
15.461
32.331
27.531
14.061
(*= p <.1. * = fX.05, ** = jx.01)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
140
Table 8
Hierarchical Repression Analyses for Task-related Configurations
Table 8 fa): Results of Hierarchical Regression Analyses for Task -related Configurations and Team 
Process Measures
Independent
Variable
Intra-team Cooperation
Inter- team Cooperation
ARZ
3
ARZ
3
Step 1
Average Team 
Tenure
.148
.126*
Team Size
.213
-.066
.188
-.054
Step 2
Team Tenure Het.
-.031
.010
Team Education- 
level Het
.005
-.013
.007
-.070
Team Education 
Major Het.
.075
.075
Step 3
Average Task- 
related Similarity
.029
.052
Task-related
Dissimilarity
.002
.041
.003
.071
Cumulative Rz
.220
.198
Adjusted Rz
.073
.047
Df
430
430
Model F
1.491*
1.312T
Se
.382
.442
C= p <-1. * = fx.05, ** = pc.01)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
141
Table 8 (1)): Results of Hierarchical Regression Analyses for Task- related Configurations and Team
Performance Measures
Independent
Variable
Goal 
Achievement 
Service Hours
Goal
Achievement
Maintenance
Speed of 
Response Target
Speed of 
Response 
Specification 
Limit
AR2
3
AR2
3
AR2
3
AR2
3
Step 1
Average Team 
Tenure
-.142*
-.177**
.087
-.059
Team Size
.254
-.009
.192
-.072
.256
.001
.219
.002
Step 2
Team Tenure 
Het.
-.026
-.071
-.035
-.042
Team Education- 
level Het.
.013
.059
.096
.037
Team Education 
Major Het.
.003
.049
.007
-.044
.010
-.073
.004
.035
Step 3
Average Task- 
related Similarity
-.028
.015
-.098
.057
Task-related
Dissimilarity
.002
-.043
.000
-.001
.006
-.042
.002
-.029
Cumulative Rz
.259
.199
.272
.225
Adjusted Rz
.120
.050
.137
.082
Df
433
434
434
437
Model F
1.871**
1.332T
2.021**
1.572**
se
14.792
26.032
25.172
12.232
(f=p <.!.* = pc.05, ** = p<.01)
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
142
Curriculum Vita 
Apama Anand Joshi
EDUCATION
Ph D. 
Rutgers- The State University of New Jersey (May, 2002)
M.S. 
Rutgers- The State University of New Jersey (October, 1999)
M.Phil. 
Indian Institute of Technology (ITT) (May, 1996)
M.A. 
Jawaharlal Nehru University (August, 1993)
B.A. 
Elphinstone College (August, 1991)
PUBLICATIONS
1. Joshi, A., Labianca, G., & Caligiuri P. in press. Getting along long distance: 
Understanding conflict in a multinational team through social network 
analysis. Journal of World Business.
2. Joshi, A. & Jackson S. E. in press. Understanding work team diversity: 
Challenges and opportunities. A chapter to appear in M. West, D. Tjosvold, & 
K. Smith, (Eds.) Handbook o f Organizational Teamwork and Cooperative 
Working.
3. Gully, S., Incalcaterra, K., Joshi, A., & Beaubin, J. in press. A meta-analysis of 
team-efficacy, potency, and performance: The impact of task interdependence 
and level of analysis. Journal o f Applied Psychology.
4. Jackson, S.E., & Joshi A. 2001. Research on domestic and international 
diversity in organizations: A merger that works? In N. Anderson, D. Ones, H. 
Sinangil, & C. Visweswaran, (Eds.) Handbook o f Work and Organizational 
Psychology (pp. 206-231). London: Sage Publications.
5. Joshi, A. 1999. Networking employees for success in global teams: A case 
study. International Journal o f Human Resource Information Management, 
December, 1999: 34-39.
6. Caligiuri, P.M., Joshi, A., & Lazarova M. 1999. Factors affecting the success 
of women on global assignments. International Journal o f Human Resource 
Management, 10: 163-179.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
143
7. Caligiuri, P., Hyland, M., Joshi A., & Bross, A. 1998. Testing a theoretical 
model for examining the relationship between family adjustment and 
expatriates’ work adjustment. Journal o f Applied Psychology, 83: 598-614.
8. Caligiuri, P., Hyland, M., & Joshi A. 1998. Families on global assignments: 
Applying work family theories abroad. In A. Rahim (Ed.) Current Topics in 
Management (Vol.3): 313-328. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
9. Sastry N., & Joshi, A. 1996. Union commitment among male and female 
employees. Indian Journal of Industrial Relations, 35: 27-36.
10. Joshi, A., & Sastry, N. 1995. Work and family: Conflict and its resolution. 
Indian Journal o f Gender Studies, 2: 14-28.
RESEARCH EXPERIENCE
Research Assistant: Professor Susan E. Jackson, August 1999 -  Present, Rutgers
University.
Research Assistant: Professor Paula M. Caligiuri, August 1996 -  August 1998,
Rutgers University.
Research Assistant: Professor Nalini Sastry, August 1993 - December 1995, Indian
Institute of Technology, Bombay.
TEACHING EXPERIENCE
Instructor: Masters Program in Human Resource Management, Summer 1999,
Rutgers University.
Instructor: Undergraduate Program in Management and Labor Relations, Fall 1998,
Rutgers University.
Teaching Assistant: Professor Debra Myerson, Winter 2001, Stanford University.
Teaching Assistant: Professor Susan E. Jackson, Spring 1999, Rutgers University.
Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.
