Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Industrial Marketing Management
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/indmarman
Explicating the relationship of entrepreneurial orientation and ﬁrm
performance: Underlying mechanisms in the context of an emerging market
Lin Cuia, Di Fanb,⁎, Feng Guoa,c, Yi Fana
aResearch School of Management, College of Business and Economics, Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
bSchool of Management, Curtin Business School, Curtin University, 408.4031, Kent St. Bentley, Perth, WA 6102, Australia
cSchool of Management, Harbin Institute of Technology, 92 West Dazhi Street, Nan Gang District, Harbin 150001, China
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Entrepreneurial orientationAbsorptive capacityBoundary-spanningInstitutional voids
Market-supporting institutions
Emerging marketABSTRACT
This research examines the mechanisms through which entrepreneurial orientation (EO) a ﬀectsﬁrm perfor-
mance in an emerging market context. We argue that EO drives ﬁrms to develop the dynamic capabilities of
absorptive capacity (ACAP) and boundary-spanning (BS), and that these capabilities enhance ﬁrm performance.
Moreover, the eﬀ ectiveness of these knowledge- and network-based dynamic capabilities in mediating the EO-
performance relationship is contingent on the institutional conditions ﬁrms are exposed to. We test our hy-
potheses using multi-sourced data on Chinese high-tech ﬁrms in business-to-business (B2B) markets. Our results
show that ACAP and BS mediate the positive eﬀ ect of EO on ﬁrm performance, and that as the development of
market-supporting institutions improves, the mediating eﬀ ect of ACAP becomes stronger while that of BS
weakens.
1. Introduction
Entrepreneurial orientation (EO) re ﬂects the strategic posture of a
ﬁrm to continuously engage in risk-taking, innovative, and proactive
behaviours which will ultimately in ﬂuence ﬁrm performance ( Covin &
Slevin, 1989; Hoskisson, Covin, Volberda, & Johnson, 2011 ). While the
antecedents, outcomes, and performance contingencies of EO have been
extensively researched, theoretical development and empirical in-
vestigation regarding the generative mechanisms underlying the EO-
performance relationship are currently lacking ( Wales, Gupta, & Mousa,
2013 ). It remains unclear what capabilities ﬁrms generate from their
EO which in turn enable them to attain positive market performance.
Understanding these generative mechanisms requires the examination
of the mediators that play a pivotal role in delivering the performance
eﬀect of EO ( Lumpkin & Dess, 1996; Wales, Gupta, & Mousa, 2013 ).
These mechanisms and their contingencies carry signi ﬁcant business
implications for prioritizing resources to the capability developments
that deliver performance outcomes for entrepreneurial ﬁrms. In this
study, we address this knowledge gap by asking: What are the capability
development mechanisms that allow ﬁrms to convert their EO into perfor-
mance outcomes? What environmental contingencies promote/hinder suchmechanisms for entrepreneurial ﬁrms?
Recent studies have attempted to identify the missing link between
EO and ﬁrm performance. For instance, Kollmann and Stöckmann(2014) examined exploratory innovation and exploitative innovation as
mediating variables within the EO-performance relationship. Similarly,other studies have also investigated learning related constructs, such as
information acquisition and utilization, to reveal the mechanisms
mediating the EO-performance relationship ( Keh, Nguyen, & Ng, 2007;
Wang, 2008 ). These studies o ﬀer insight into the knowledge-based cap-
ability through which entrepreneurial ﬁrms create value. They suggest
thatﬁrms with risk-taking, innovative, and proactive behavioural ten-
dencies are likely to seek novel knowledge from their dynamic en-vironments to improve their processes and product o ﬀerings, which in
turn enhances and sustains their competitiveness.
Another stream of EO research focuses on the institutional context
within which entrepreneurial ﬁrms operate ( Covin & Miller, 2014; Dess,
Pinkham, & Yang, 2011 ). This stream of research highlights that when
information and market transactions are not su ﬃciently facilitated by
market-supporting institutions, ﬁrms with non-market channels to ac-
cess critical information and resources will have a competitive ad-vantage over those that do not ( Peng & Luo, 2000 ). Such business en-
vironments are commonly found in, but not limited to, emergingmarkets, where the underdevelopment of market-supporting institu-
tions presents “institutional voids ”(Khanna & Palepu, 1997 ), leaving
proﬁt
opportunities for those entrepreneurial ﬁrms who can e ﬀectively
integrate and leverage network resources, such as social capital ( Covin
& Miller, 2014), to bridge these voids. This network-based capability of
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2017.11.003
Received 2 August 2015; Received in revised form 7 September 2017; Accepted 6 November 2017⁎Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: lin.cui@anu.edu.au (L. Cui), david.fan@curtin.edu.au (D. Fan), guofeng229@hit.edu.cn (F. Guo), u4713133@anu.edu.au (Y. Fan).Industrial Marketing Management 71 (2018) 27–40
Available online 21 November 2017
0019-8501/ © 2017 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
T
