Antecedents and Consequences of Customer–Company Identification:
Expanding the Role of Relationship Marketing
Michael Ahearne
University of Houston
C. B. Bhattacharya
Boston University
Thomas Gruen
University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
This article presents an empirical test of organizational identification in the context of customer–
company (C-C) relationships. It investigates whether customers identify with companies and what the
antecedents and consequences of such identification are. The model posits that perceived company
characteristics, construed external image, and the perception of the company’s boundary-spanning agent
lead to C-C identification. In turn, such identification is expected to impact both in-role behavior (i.e.,
product utilization) as well as extra-role behavior (i.e., citizenship). The model was tested in a
consultative selling context of pharmaceutical sales reps calling on physicians. Results from the empirical
test indicated that customers do indeed identify with organizations and that C-C identification positively
impacts both product utilization behavior and extra-role behavior even when the effect of brand
perception is accounted for. Second, the study found that the organization’s characteristics as well as the
salesperson’s characteristics contributed to the development of C-C identification.
Keywords: identification, social identity theory, extra-role behavior, branding, buying behavior
The concept of organizational identification, viewed as the
sense of connection between an individual and an organization
(Dutton, Dukerich, & Harquail, 1994), has often been discussed as
the primary psychological substrate that mediates corporate ac-
tions on the one hand and stakeholder responses on the other (see,
e.g., Scott & Lane, 2000). Formally, identification has been de-
fined as the degree to which organizational members perceive
themselves and the focal organization as sharing the same defining
attributes (Dutton et al., 1994). Originally developed in the areas of
social psychology and organizational behavior, identification sat-
isfies the need for social identity and self-definition and, in turn,
has been demonstrated to positively impact organizational member
loyalty (Mael & Ashforth, 1992) as well as organizational mem-
bers’ cooperative and citizenship behaviors (Bergami & Bagozzi,
2000; Dukerich, Golden, & Shortell, 2002).
Findings such as these have attracted marketing scholars to
research this construct because the natural analogues of these
outcomes in customer contexts are customer and/or brand loyalty
and customer advocacy (such as positive word-of-mouth). There
are many purchase situations in which customers interact exten-
sively with the selling company and form judgments not only on
economic factors but also on various corporate dimensions. Sim-
ilar to the findings in the employer–employee context, such cor-
porate evaluations, if positive, could also result in positive evalu-
ation of the company’s products. Recently, Bhattacharya and Sen
(2003) extended the concept of identification to develop a concep-
tual framework of customer–company (C-C) identification. The
authors suggested that customers may have their self-definitional
needs partly filled by the companies they patronize, and thus
customers can identify with a company (Pratt, 1998; Scott & Lane,
2000). Despite this potentially useful route to building stronger
customer relationships and thereby expanding the domain of rela-
tionship marketing, there is virtually no empirical research on the
antecedents and consequences of identification in a for-profit,
customer context.
In this study, we present a conceptual framework and empirical
test of C-C identification, examining the roles of both the selling
company and the selling company’s boundary-spanning agent on
the buyer’s identification with the company. The model proposes
that given a set of conditions when identification is likely to occur,
the customer’s identification with a given company leads to be-
haviors—both in-role and extra-role—that are much desired by
companies. To develop the model, we drew on theories of social
identity (Brewer, 1991; Tajfel & Turner, 1985), employee identi-
fication (Bergami & Bagozzi, 2000; Dutton et al., 1994), and
customer identification (Bhattacharya, Rao, & Glynn, 1995; Bhat-
tacharya & Sen, 2003). We tested the model in the context of
pharmaceutical companies, their salespeople, and the physicians
who prescribe their products. The pharmaceutical industry, in
Michael Ahearne, Department of Marketing and Entrepreneurship,
Bauer School of Business, University of Houston; C. B. Bhattacharya,
Department of Marketing, Boston University; Thomas Gruen, Department
of Marketing, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs.
We thank the Institute for the Study of Business Markets at Pennsylva-
nia State University University Park Campus for their financial support of
this research. We also thank Prabakar Kothandaraman and John Mathieu
for their continued support and assistance on this article.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Michael
Ahearne, Department of Marketing and Entrepreneurship, Bauer School of
Business, University of Houston, 334 Melcher Hall, Houston, TX 77204.
E-mail: mahearne@uh.edu
Journal of Applied Psychology
Copyright 2005 by the American Psychological Association
2005, Vol. 90, No. 3, 574–585
0021-9010/05/$12.00
DOI: 10.1037/0021-9010.90.3.574
574
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
which the physician is the “decider” but not the final consumer of
the product, is similar to many consultative purchasing situations,
such as with travel agents, independent insurance agents, stock
brokers, and so forth. As we elaborate later, this context matches
well with the proposed conditions under which C-C identification
is likely to be manifested. Our study contributes to the marketing
and business literatures by demonstrating the existence of identi-
fication in the customer realm and also providing insight into how
such identification can be fostered and the subsequent benefits
companies are likely to reap. From an applied psychology stand-
point, we show that in their quest for social identity enhancement,
individuals can also turn to companies of which they are
customers.
Conceptual Framework of C-C Identification
Turner (1982) noted that people often socially identify with
groups, even when they have no contact with specific members.
What is paramount is that impersonal bonds can exist and be
derived from a common identification with some symbolic group
or social category (Brewer & Gardner, 1996). Because identity is
not deterministic (Schlenker, 1986; Turner, 1982) and is often
negotiated and chosen by individuals on their own will (Swann,
1987), it is conceivable that customers who are not formal mem-
bers of an organization could identify with the organization if they
find it to be attractive and capable of enriching their social identity.
Not surprisingly, researchers have alluded to the idea that other
stakeholders—including customers—of an organization may also
identify with the organization (Bhattacharya & Sen, 2003; Elsbach
& Bhattacharya, 2001; Scott & Lane, 2000).
Drawing on the extant literature, our model proposes that C-C
identification is determined by three general factors. The first
factor relates to the customer’s perceptions about what the com-
pany represents, based on personal experiences as well as his or
her perceptions of its culture and climate: Identification is likely
only if the customer finds the company to be attractive. The second
factor deals with the customer’s perception of what relevant others
think about the organization (i.e., construed external image of the
company), in which identification is likely to be stronger when
referent others hold the company in high esteem. Finally, under-
standing the impact of boundary spanning and those involved in
these activities is becoming increasingly important to organiza-
tions as more and more organizational members participate in
boundary-spanning roles. Boundary-spanning agents reveal a lot
about the quality and character of the company they represent;
thus, we posit that identification is likely to be stronger when
customers have favorable perceptions of the boundary-spanning
agent with whom they interact (e.g., the company’s salesperson,
customer service, technical representatives, etc.). The model (see
Figure 1) proposes that these three perceptions influence the cog-
nitive connection that customers have with the company, which, in
turn, influences the kinds of behaviors that follow. We examine the
influence of each of the three antecedent factors individually, but
it is important to note that these will often correlate with each
other, as shown in Figure 1.
In contrast to the employee context, our model also recognizes
that C-C identification may not occur in all situations but is more
likely to be manifest under a set of contingent conditions. First, the
product or service must be important enough to the customer to
make the company salient to the customer (Bhattacharya & Sen,
2003) and to make it a valid target for social identity fulfillment.
Second, identification is more likely to occur when the customer
perceives there to be a distinct comparison set and when compa-
Figure 1.
Organizational identification: Conceptual model—across contexts.
575
RESEARCH REPORTS
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
nies in that set are themselves distinctive: The focal organization’s
identifying characteristics become more salient and accessible
when a distinct set of relevant comparisons are present (Bartel,
2001). Third, customers are more likely to identify when they are
embedded in the folds of the organization through frequent inter-
action with the offering and frequent contact with the company and
its agents. Research on embeddedness (e.g., Granovetter, 1985;
Rao, Davis, & Ward, 2000) suggests that customers’ embedded
relationships with companies make them feel more like insiders
than outsiders, thereby increasing the likelihood that the company
is going to be designated as a viable social category, capable of
shaping their social identity. As a result of creating psychological
attachment to the organization, identification motivates people to
commit to the achievement of the organization’s goals. Building
on the strong, positive consequences of identification observed in
membership contexts (e.g., Bergami & Bagozzi, 2000; Mael &
Ashforth, 1992), we assert that customers become strong support-
ers of the company they identify with. They demonstrate such
support through both favorable in-role (e.g., purchase) as well as
extra-role (e.g., citizenship) behaviors.
Empirical Model and Hypotheses
As the first empirical test of C-C identification, we selected a
context in which customers were likely to identify with the focal
company. In other words, we do not explicitly test for the moder-
ating role of the context characteristics but rather examine the
hypotheses in a setting where these contingent conditions are
likely to be fulfilled. In the case of the physician (the customer in
our empirical context), the product they prescribe is central to the
accomplishment of their task. Moreover, both doctors and drug
companies are health providers and members of the medical es-
tablishment. In partnership relationships such as these, the pres-
ence of organizational identification may be more prevalent than in
other C-C contexts.1 Also, given the potential for harmful conse-
quences of product misuse, the relationship between a physician
and the boundary-spanning agent for the company (the sales rep in
our case, who is also referred to as a detailer in the industry) may
be as important as any mission-critical sales relationship (Ahearne,
Gruen, & Jarvis, 1999). In terms of the other context-specific
factors, distinctiveness of the comparison set is clear, as competi-
tion in this industry involves a specific and well-known set of
firms in each therapeutic category. Finally, prescribing physicians
are highly familiar with the sales reps from the pharmaceutical
companies. Figure 2 presents the specific model we used to test our
hypotheses; these are proposed below. Note that we use the oper-
ational definitions of the variables depicted in Figure 2 in the rest
of the tables and figures.
Antecedents to C-C Identification
One of the components leading to a customer’s identification
with a company is the perceived favorability of that company’s
central, distinctive, and enduring characteristics (Albert & Whet-
ten, 1985). Three basic principles of self-definition—the need for
self-continuity, self-distinctiveness, and self-enhancement—ac-
count for the favorability of a company’s perceived characteristics
and help explain why it strengthens customer identification (Dut-
ton et al., 1994). The need for self-continuity suggests that in an
attempt to understand themselves and their social worlds, people
are motivated to maintain a consistent sense of self (Kunda, 1999).
Moreover, when a person’s self-concept is enhanced by the char-
acteristics that define the organization, the individual is drawn to
the organization because it provides easy opportunities for self-
expression (Shamir, 1991). Similarly, social identity theorists con-
tend that people need to distinguish themselves from others in
social contexts (Tajfel & Turner, 1985) and thus are likely to seek
out groups for affiliation that are distinctive on dimensions they
value. Thus, customers who believe that a company has a config-
uration of distinctive characteristics (e.g., culture, strategy, struc-
ture) valued by them will find that company to be an attractive
target for identification. Overall, therefore, favorable perceptions
1 Thanks to an anonymous reviewer for pointing this out.
Figure 2.
Organizational identification: Hypothesized model. H  Hypothesis; MS  market share.
576
AN EXAMINATION OF CUSTOMER–COMPANY IDENTIFICATION
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
of a company’s characteristics are likely to lead to stronger iden-
tification with that company.
Hypothesis 1: The more favorable the customers’ perception
of the company’s characteristics, the stronger their C-C
identification.
The objective of boundary spanning is to link and coordinate an
organization with key constituents in its external environment
(Bartel, 2001). Boundary-spanning agents can signal the quality
and character of their company through a variety of means, in-
cluding personality, dress and other tangibles, responsiveness,
empathy, knowledge, assurance, and reliability. Thus, any individ-
ual in the company with whom the customer has regular contact
(such as a sales rep, customer service rep, or technician) can
impact the sense of identification that the customer might have
with the selling organization.2 In other words, interactions with a
boundary-spanning agent who is viewed favorably makes it more
likely that the customer is going to consider the organization as a
target for social identity fulfillment (Bhattacharya & Sen, 2003;
Scott & Lane, 2000). This is because such interactions make it
easier for the customer to retrieve favorable, self-relevant infor-
mation from memory, which scholars (Hogg & Terry, 2000; Pratt,
2000; Scott & Lane, 2000) have suggested is an important driver
of organizational identification.
Hypothesis 2: The more favorable the customers’ perception
of the boundary-spanning agent (i.e., the sales rep in our
case), the stronger their C-C identification.
In addition to the two previous factors in which C-C identifica-
tion is influenced through their personal experiences, customer
identification is also affected by how customers think relevant
outsiders view the organization. Construed external image (also
referred to as organizational prestige; see, e.g., Bergami & Ba-
gozzi, 2000; Smidts, Pruyn, & Van Riel, 2001) refers to a custom-
er’s beliefs about outsiders’ perceptions of the company. When a
customer sees the construed external image of a company as
attractive (i.e., customers believe that the attributes that distinguish
the company are positive and socially valued by relevant others),
the customer’s identification with that company is strengthened.
People try to maintain a positive social identity by affiliating with
a prestigious company because such affiliation provides social
opportunities (S. G. Brown, 1969) and heightens social prestige
(Ashforth & Mael, 1989; Cheney, 1983; Perrow, 1961). Notably,
the general link between the attractiveness of an organization’s
external image and identification has been shown in a number of
contexts, including employees (Smidts et al., 2001), alumni (Mael
& Ashforth, 1992), and sports fans (Fisher & Wakefield, 1998).
Thus, we propose the following hypothesis.
Hypothesis 3: The more attractive the customers’ construed
external image of the company, the stronger their C-C
identification.
Outcomes of C-C Identification
Once individuals identify with an organization, they are likely to
support it in a variety of ways. In the employer–employee context,
researchers have demonstrated that members’ identification with
an organization results in lower turnover (Bergami & Bagozzi,
2000; Dutton et al., 1994) and even increased rivalry with and
derogation of competitors. In the context of members of educa-
tional and cultural institutions, identification has been linked to
greater financial and membership-related support (Bhattacharya et
al., 1995; Wan-Huggins, Riordan, & Griffeth, 1998). In the cus-
tomer context, one of the key outcomes that marketers try to
influence is brand choice.
A steady stream of research has demonstrated that corporate
image affects consumer product judgments and responses in a
positive manner (Aaker & Keller, 1993; Belch & Belch, 1987;
Wansink & Kent, 1998). Overall, a positive image of the organi-
zation leads to positive product evaluations (T. J. Brown & Dacin,
1997), and on the basis of these studies, we suggest that identifi-
cation may be the key underlying psychological variable that
drives these outcomes. From a social identity standpoint, once a
customer identifies with a company, purchasing that company’s
products becomes an act of self-expression.
Hypothesis 4: The stronger the C-C identification, the stron-
ger the customer’s exhibition of in-role behaviors supportive
of the company (i.e., the greater the customer’s product
utilization).
People who strongly identify with the organization are likely to
focus on tasks that benefit the whole organization rather than on
purely self-interested ones, often referred to as extra-role behav-
iors. Some of the types of extra-role behaviors are organizational
citizenship behaviors (Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Paine, & Bachrach,
2000; Smith, Organ, & Near, 1983), prosocial behaviors (George
& Bettenhausen, 1990; Puffer, 1987), spontaneous behaviors
(George & Brief, 1992), and contextual behaviors (Borman &
Motowidlo, 1993). In a customer context, a number of extra-role
behaviors have been studied, such as word-of-mouth, product
improvement suggestions, recruiting other customers, and proac-
tive communication of anticipated problems (Bettencourt, 1997;
Gruen, Summers, & Acito, 2000). In linking extra-role behaviors
to identification, we build on research (e.g., Dukerich et al., 2002;
Dutton et al., 1994; Scott & Lane, 2000) that suggests that effort
directed toward preserving, supporting, and improving the organi-
zation proceeds naturally from identification. Performing such
extra-role behaviors is a way to express one’s identification.
Hypothesis 5: The greater the level of C-C identification, the
more willing the customer will be to perform extra-role
behaviors on behalf of the company.
Perceived Product Performance
Regardless of the level of C-C identification, both product
utilization and customer extra-role behaviors may be affected by
the perceived performance of the company’s offerings. This will
particularly be the case in buying situations that are typically
2 A customer’s perception of organizational characteristics and the char-
acteristics of the boundary-spanning agent of the company are distinct.
This view parallels the customer satisfaction literature that has demon-
strated that satisfaction with retail service personnel is distinct from the
satisfaction with the store (Reynolds & Beatty, 1999).
577
RESEARCH REPORTS
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
characterized by high levels of objective decision making criteria
as well as experience with products through ongoing repeat pur-
chasing (e.g., pharmaceuticals and/or financial services). There-
fore, a control for product performance is necessary to understand
the true effects of C-C identification on product utilization (as
illustrated in Figure 2).
Method
As previously discussed, the pharmaceutical industry provides a setting
where the contingent context characteristics (shown in Figure 1) are
present. An added advantage of this context is the availability of objective
information for one of the dependent variables, because the pharmaceutical
industry reliably tracks product prescription information for the individual
physician. Objective prescription data can be obtained for a specific phy-
sician, because each physician has a unique United States Drug Enforce-
ment Agency number linked to each patient prescription. Finally, in this
context, physicians have ongoing opportunity to engage in a variety of
extra-role behaviors such as participating in seminars and sharing product-
related information with colleagues.
A sample of 2,000 high-prescribing physicians was randomly drawn
from a population of over 30,000 high-prescribing physicians in the focal
drug category. We considered only high-prescribing physicians for this
research to ensure that each physician wrote a sufficient number of pre-
scriptions in the category and that the sales representatives would have had
regular contact with the physicians (e.g., industry records indicate that the
representative calls on the high-prescribing physician on average 26 times
per year). A professional market research company contacted these 2,000
physician offices by telephone and invited physicians to participate in a
survey that was being conducted and independently funded by a major U.S.
university. Questionnaires were distributed to this sample of physicians via
fax. Participants were assured that their individual responses would be
confidential and received a $30 industry-standard honorarium for their
participation. Completed surveys were faxed directly back to the research-
ers, yielding a final sample of 178 physicians.
A key indicator demonstrating the lack of bias toward the focal company
is the fact that the average market share for the focal product among
surveyed physicians (both self-reported, 41.15%, and objective, 39.28%)
was actually less than the product’s market share in the sampling frame
(41.8%). If there was a bias, we would have expected the market share to
be higher than that of the sampling frame (all responders and nonre-
sponders). Approximately three fourths of the respondents (77%) were
primary care physicians and the rest (23%) were specialists, which is
consistent with the general market composition. The age of respondents
ranged from 27 to 78 years (average  47 years). The respondents’ practice
tenure ranged from 3 to 43 years (average  16 years).
The focal company in the survey was a major pharmaceutical manufac-
turer that was the market leader in the focal drug category. The drug
category of interest in this study is one of the five most-prescribed cate-
gories of drugs, with three major competitors representing the vast majority
of prescriptions, along with several minor competitors. Prescription drugs
are classified in categories on the basis of their ability to treat similar
medical conditions; for example, antidepressants include all drugs that can
be used to treat depression.
The data were collected via self-reports (see the Appendix for items),
except for customer product utilization data that were collected via self-
report as well as by a directly observed measure. Customer product
utilization was operationalized as the market share of prescriptions for the
branded product represented by the salesperson that were written by the
physician. We obtained the data for the 1-month period corresponding to
the administration of the questionnaire. The directly observed prescription
behavior data were obtained from one of two major syndicated data houses
that compile individual-level physician prescription tracking data from
federal government records. Because the survey was conducted among
experienced or high-prescribing physicians in this particular drug category,
conceivably none of the utilization involved “trial”—it is better character-
ized as “repeat purchase”—which is consistent with the notion of loyalty
discussed in the identification literature.
Bergami and Bagozzi (2000) proposed a simple scale based on a cog-
nitive representation process to measure identification and demonstrated
that their measure was better reflection of identification than scales previ-
ously used (e.g., Bhattacharya et al., 1995; Mael, 1988; Mael & Ashforth,
1992). Since its advent, the Bergami and Bagozzi (2000) scale has been
used by several other researchers (e.g., Bartel, 2001; Dukerich et al., 2002;
Sen & Bhattacharya, 2001; Tropp & Wright, 1999). We used this scale to
measure a customer’s identification with the company. As shown in the
Appendix, a series of Venn diagrams indicating a lesser to a greater degree
of overlap between the physician and the focal company was provided, and
respondents chose the level of overlap that best represented their relation-
ship with the focal company.
The other variables were measured using multiple-item scales. We
measured construed external image of the company using a scale from an
earlier study (Bergami & Bagozzi, 2000), adapting the wording to fit our
context. We measured perceived company characteristics and perceived
salesperson characteristics using scales similar to those previously used by
Bagozzi and Bergami (2002), Bartel (2001), and Sen and Bhattacharya
(2001). We asked the physicians to indicate how well each of the charac-
teristics (e.g., compassionate, innovative, progressive, socially responsible,
sensitive) in the scale described the focal company and, separately, the
salesperson from the focal company. The scale to measure extra-role
behaviors was based in part on the empirical work of Podsakoff, Ahearne,
and MacKenzie (1997). Given that the previous studies were conducted in
an employee context (thus focusing on voluntary behaviors on the part of
an employee directed toward another employee in the same organization),
we modified the items to focus on the extra-role behaviors of the physician
(customer) that are directed at the salesperson or his or her company that
go above and beyond the job of the physician. The internal consistency
reliabilities of these measures were respectable, with all scales attaining
Nunnaly’s (1978) suggested Cronbach’s alpha level of .70 or higher (see
Table 1).
The measures used in this study were analyzed with confirmatory factor
analyses, and the hypothesized structural model was tested with structural
equation modeling (LISREL 8.52; Jo¨reskog & So¨rbom, 1993). Because the
total number of measured variables was large (55), a single-factor item
parceling approach was used when estimating all models (Hall, Snell, &
Foust, 1999; Landis, Beal, & Tesluk, 2000). To control for the effects of
perceived product performance, we used the same procedures as a number
of previous researchers (Draper & Smith, 1980; Green, 1978; Smidts et al.,
2001). A stepwise linear regression was run with all dimensions of per-
ceived product performance (see Appendix for measures) as the indepen-
dent variables and the objective product utilization measure as the depen-
dent variable.3 We stored the unstandardized residuals from this regression
and used them as a surrogate for product utilization in all models. Thus, we
were able to partial out the effects of the perceived product performance
from product utilization.
Results
Taken together, the results of the confirmatory factor analysis
demonstrate that the hypothesized six-factor model (construed
external image, perceived company characteristics, perceived
salesperson characteristics, C-C identification, customer product
3 For space considerations, objective product utilization is used through-
out the remainder of the article. Using self-report and objective product
utilization yields similar model results and provides further support for our
findings.
578
AN EXAMINATION OF CUSTOMER–COMPANY IDENTIFICATION
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
utilization, and extra-role behavior) fits the data well. First, the
solution was proper in that there were no negative variance esti-
mates or other improprieties. Second, the overall goodness-of-fit
indices showed that the model adequately accounted for the sam-
ple variances and covariance. Bentler’s (1990) comparative fit
index was .96, the Jo¨reskog and So¨rbom (1993) goodness-of-fit
index was .90, the nonnormed fit index was .95, the standardized
root-mean-square residual was .043, and the chi-square statistic
was 145.78 with 77 degrees of freedom. Third, the hypothesized
measurement factor loadings were all statistically significant (p 
.01) and substantial in size, and the construct reliabilities were
large, providing evidence for the convergent validity of the con-
structs. Finally, there was evidence of an adequate level of dis-
criminant validity. All the construct intercorrelations (provided in
Table 1) were significantly less than 1 (p  .05). The average
variance extracted (proportion of the total variance in all indicators
of a construct accounted for by the construct; Fornell & Larcker,
1981) exceeded the squared correlations between the factors, in-
dicating strong discriminant validity.
As the proposed measurement relationships were consistent
with the data, the next step in the analysis was to estimate the
hypothesized model shown in Figure 2. Table 2 reports the com-
pletely standardized parameter estimates for the hypothesized
model and the overall goodness-of-fit indices. Table 2 shows that
the hypotheses received a considerable amount of support, as all
but one of the expected relationships were statistically significant.
More favorable perceptions of both company and salesperson
characteristics led to higher levels of identification (p  .01),
showing support for Hypothesis 1 and Hypothesis 2. Higher levels
of identification led to both higher levels of product utilization
(p  .01) as well as higher levels of extra-role behavior (p  .01),
indicating support for Hypothesis 4 and Hypothesis 5. The only
nonsignificant relationship was between construed external image
of the company and customer identification with the company (z 
.81, p  .50).
We fit three additional models (beyond the hypothesized model)
to test the mediating role of C-C identification (R. L. Brown, 1997;
MacKinnon, Lockwood, West, & Sheets, 2002; Sobel, 1982). The
Table 1
Means, Standard Deviations, Reliabilities, and Correlations
Construct
M
SD
Construed
external
image
Perceived
company
characteristics
Perceived
salesperson
characteristics
Customer–
company
identification
Customer
product
utilization
objective
Customer
product
utilization
self-report
Customer
extra-role
behavior
Construed external image
of the company
6.01
0.96
.91**
Perceived company
characteristics
3.81
0.55
.48**
.92**
Perceived salesperson
characteristics
4.04
0.62
.34**
.55**
.93**
Customer–company
identification
3.88
1.77
.31**
.56**
.42**
Customer product
utilization objective
(after control)
0
.157
.19
.14
.20
.21*
Customer product
utilization self-report
(after control)
0
.159
.08
.11
.21*
.19
.47**
Customer extra-role
behavior
3.98
0.66
.46**
.58**
.62**
.48**
.21*
.26*
.81**
Note.
Cronbach’s alpha for each of the measures are shown on the main diagonal.
* p  .05.
** p  .01.
Table 2
Goodness-of-Fit Statistics for All Models Tested
Model
2 (df)
p
CFI
NNFI
SRMR
Saturated model (CFA)
145.78 (77)
.01
0.96
0.95
0.04
Null latent model
419.12 (92)
.01
0.91
0.88
0.31
Hypothesized model
189.32 (83)
.01
0.94
0.92
0.14
Hypothesized model with additional direct paths to customer
product utilization
186.77 (80)
.01
0.94
0.92
0.13
Hypothesized model with additional direct paths to customer
extra-role behavior (best model)
153.98 (80)
.01
0.96
0.95
0.05
Note.
CFI  comparative fit index; NNFI  nonnormed fit index; SRMR  standardized root-mean-square
residual; CFA  confirmatory factor analysis.
579
RESEARCH REPORTS
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
first model included all paths in the hypothesized model as well as
direct paths from the three independent variables to both depen-
dent variables (product utilization and extra-role behaviors). The
second model included all paths in the hypothesized model as well
as direct paths from the independent variables to product utiliza-
tion. The third model included all paths in the hypothesized model
as well as direct paths from the independent variables to extra-role
behaviors. These models were then compared with the (baseline)
hypothesized model to test for mediation.
These model comparisons showed that no significant improve-
ment in chi-square was found by including direct paths from the
independent variables to product utilization (nor were any paths
found to be significant). However, a significant chi-square im-
provement was found by including direct paths from the indepen-
dent variables to extra-role behaviors (all three additional paths
were found to be significant). This “best” model fit significantly
better than both the hypothesized model and the saturated model
(model with both indirect and direct paths to both dependent
variables). The fit statistics for all four models are reported in
Table 2, and the results of the “best” model are depicted in Fig-
ure 3. Further information relating to mediation, including detailed
effects decompositions, is reported in Table 3.
Discussion
This study extends the concept of organizational identification
beyond the realm of formal memberships (e.g., employees, alumni,
museum members) into the C-C relationship realm. We provide
empirical validation that customers do indeed identify with com-
panies and that such identification has strong, positive conse-
quences both in terms of in-role (e.g., product utilization) and
extra-role (e.g., word-of-mouth) behaviors. Specifically, we dem-
onstrate that customers who identify more strongly with a com-
pany tend to purchase more and recommend both the company and
its products more often. The study also shows how identification
itself is influenced by customers’ perceptions of both the company
as well as the boundary-spanning agent. It is important to note that
the study provides evidence that suggests that the effect of com-
pany identification on customer behavior is above and beyond the
effect of product evaluation.
Our findings show that C-C identification has differential effects
on the outcome variables for each of its hypothesized antecedent
variables. First, C-C identification fully mediates the effect of
perceived company characteristics on both product utilization and
extra-role behaviors. This finding is in line with the theory ex-
pressed by Dutton et al. (1994) that suggests that one’s view of the
organizational “picture” influences their identification with the
organization. Second (and alternatively), our findings show that
construed external image—in the presence of perceived salesper-
son characteristics and perceived organizational characteristics—
does not significantly influence C-C identification but has a direct
effect on customer extra-role behaviors. Thus, extra-role behavior
is positively affected on the basis of how referent others view an
organization but not on the basis of product utilization. A possible
explanation for this finding is that extra-role behaviors are not only
intrinsically motivated (i.e., driven by identification) but also,
perhaps in light of the visible social settings in which they are
performed, extrinsically motivated (i.e., the need to conform to
expectations of referent others).
We also find that C-C identification only partially mediates the
impact of perceived salesperson characteristics on both utilization
and extra-role behaviors. Thus, the boundary-spanner’s character-
istics have direct influence over the exchange relationship as well
as extra-role behaviors. Although the sales literature has consid-
ered the extra-role behaviors of the sales reps themselves (Mac-
Kenzie, Ahearne, & Podsakoff, 1998), it has not considered the
ways in which sales reps, as the company’s boundary-spanning
agents, can generate extra-role behaviors by their customers. Our
study provides strong evidence that customers are willing to take
the extra step to support the company if they are attracted to the
characteristics of the boundary-spanning agent.
In the area of identification research in marketing, our study
extends the findings of Bhattacharya et al. (1995) by empirically
Figure 3.
Organizational identification: Best model. H  Hypothesis; MS  market share.
580
AN EXAMINATION OF CUSTOMER–COMPANY IDENTIFICATION
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
establishing the antecedents and consequences of identification
even when the customer is not a member. Second, this study
contributes to the emerging research stream (e.g., T. J. Brown &
Dacin, 1997; Drumwright, 1996; Sen & Bhattacharya, 2001) that
expands the scope of marketing beyond management of the brand.
Generally, we would expect that both consumers’ and business
customers’ relationships with a company would be influenced by
their relationships with its brands in general and product perfor-
mance in particular. However, a key theoretical contribution of our
study is in establishing the important role that nonproduct aspects
of a company (T. J. Brown & Dacin, 1997) play in influencing
customer behavior. This is a particularly interesting finding given
the professional nature of the customer in our context (i.e., phy-
sicians prescribing drugs). The object of identification is the com-
pany rather than the brand, and thus companies with a focused
product mix targeted to a focused segment (e.g., pharmaceutical
firms marketing to physicians) are likely to see the benefit of C-C
identification across its various brands. Overall, given the positive
consequences of identification we showed in the buyer–seller
context, marketers should factor the level of resources required to
manage the elements that drive C-C identification into their mar-
keting strategy decisions.
Finally, this study contributes to the applied psychology litera-
ture in at least two ways. First, this study establishes that in certain
contexts, affiliating with companies is also a possible avenue to
social identity fulfillment. To date, social identity theorists have
focused on the roles played by religious or cultural organizations
and clubs; our results suggest that companies can be added to this
list of organizations that help satisfy individuals’ self-definitional
needs even in the absence of formal membership. Second, al-
though the role of the organizational characteristics and the views
held by referent others in social identity construction are well
understood, our results surrounding the salesperson inform applied
psychologists of the critical role played by boundary-spanning
personnel. It appears that such boundary-spanners make it easier
for individuals to define themselves as part of the in-group and
hence socially categorize themselves in terms of the organization.
A key limitation of this study relates to generalizability. The
context tested here provides a view of a single industry in which
the product adoption decision is important to the customer’s self-
definition, customers interact extensively both with the company
and the salesperson, and customers have considerable discretion in
their purchases. Although the nature of the C-C interaction in the
pharmaceutical industry is similar to that of a number of other
industries such as financial services and insurance sales, which
make up a large percentage of the sales jobs worldwide, our
context and indeed the C-C identification phenomenon are not
necessarily generalizable to many other business-to-business sell-
ing situations. Testing the more general model of identification (in
Figure 1) that would be applicable across a wider spectrum of
buyer–seller contexts—both business-to-business and business-to-
consumer—is a very worthwhile future research endeavor. More-
over, testing in additional organizational settings is necessary to
fully understand whether and how the role of identification
changes across contexts. For example, how will identification
function when there is a buying center with various individuals
involved in the purchase decision? Another worthwhile extension
is an examination of C-C identification when the offering is (rather
than product based as was the context in this study) service or
Table 3
Standardized Effects Decomposition
Independent variable
(IV)
Mediating
variable
Dependent variable
(DV)
Effect of IV
on mediator
Effect of mediator
on DV
Direct effect of
IV on DV
Indirect effect
of IV on DV
Total effect of
IV on DV
Degree of
mediation
Construed external
image of company
Customer–company
identification
Customer extra-
role behaviors
.03
.15*
.20*
.01
.18*
None
Perceived salesperson
characteristics
Customer–company
identification
Customer extra-
role behaviors
.17*
.15*
.41*
.02
.40*
None
Perceived company
characteristics
Customer–company
identification
Customer extra-
role behaviors
.45*
.15*
.27*
.07*
.27*
Partial
Construed external
image of company
Customer–company
identification
Customer product
utilization
.03
.21*
.01
.01
.14
None
Perceived salesperson
characteristics
Customer–company
identification
Customer product
utilization
.17*
.21*
.15*
.04*
.04*
Full
Perceived company
characteristics
Customer–company
identification
Customer product
utilization
.45*
.21*
.14*
.10*
.27*
Full
Note.
Standardized beta coefficients are used.
* p  .05.
581
RESEARCH REPORTS
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
knowledge based. It is possible that C-C identification may have a
greater impact when the offering is intangible as in the case of
services. Similarly, knowledge-based service offerings (which
would include most professional services) could potentially be
influenced by C-C identification.
As with all survey research, our study likely suffers from com-
mon method bias; however, we believe that this is not serious in
our case, given that one of our key outcome variables (product
utilization) was measured through an independent, objective
source. One additional limitation (and a need for further research)
concerns the causality suggested in the findings. Because the data
used in this research are cross-sectional in nature as are data used
in previous studies found in the literature, evidence of causality
through longitudinal and/or experimental studies is needed.
References
Aaker, D., & Keller, K. L. (1993). Interpreting cross-cultural replications
of brand extension research. International Journal of Research in Mar-
keting, 10, 55–59.
Ahearne, M., Gruen, T. W., & Jarvis, C. (1999). If looks could sell:
Moderation and mediation of the attractiveness effect on salesperson
performance. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 16, 269–
284.
Albert, S., & Whetten, D. A. (1985). Organizational identity. Research in
Organizational Behavior, 7, 263–295.
Ashforth, B., & Mael, F. (1989). Social identity theory and the organiza-
tion. Academy of Management Review, 14(1), 20–40.
Bagozzi, R. P., & Bergami, M. (2002). Antecedents and consequences of
organizational identification and the nomological validity of the Ber-
gami and Bagozzi scale. Manuscript in preparation, Rice University.
Bartel, C. A. (2001). Social comparisons in boundary-spanning work:
Effects of community outreach on members’ organizational identity and
identification. Administrative Science Quarterly, 46, 379–413.
Belch, G. E., & Belch, M. E. (1987). The application of an expectancy
value operationalization of function theory to examine attitudes of
boycotters and nonboycotters of a consumer product. Advances in Con-
sumer Research, 14, 232–237.
Bentler, P. M. (1990). Fit indexes, Lagrange multipliers, constraint changes
and incomplete data in structural models. Multivariate Behavioral Re-
search, 25, 163–172.
Bergami, M., & Bagozzi, R. P. (2000). Self-categorization, affective com-
mitment, and group self-esteem as distinct aspects of social identity in
the organization. British Journal of Social Psychology, 39, 555–577.
Bettencourt, L. A. (1997). Customer voluntary performance: Customers as
partners in service delivery. Journal of Retailing, 73, 383–406.
Bhattacharya, C. B., Rao, H., & Glynn, M. A. (1995). Understanding the
bond of identification: An investigation of its correlates among art
museum members. Journal of Marketing, 59(4), 46–57.
Bhattacharya, C. B., & Sen, S. (2003). Consumer-company identification:
A framework for understanding consumers’ relationships with compa-
nies. Journal of Marketing, 67(2), 76–88.
Borman, W. C., & Motowidlo, S. J. (1993). Expanding the criterion
domain to include elements of contextual performance. In N. Schmitt &
W. C. Borman (Eds.), Personnel selection in organizations (pp. 71–78).
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Brewer, M. B. (1991). The social self: On being the same and different at
the same time. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 17, 475–
482.
Brewer, M. B., & Gardner, W. (1996). Who is this “we”? Levels of
collective identity and self-representations. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 71, 83–93.
Brown, R. L. (1997). Assessing specific mediational effects in complex
theoretical models. Structural Equation Modeling, 4, 142–156.
Brown, S. G. (1969). Laws of form. London: Allen and Unwin.
Brown, T. J., & Dacin, P. A. (1997). The company and the products:
Corporate associations and consumer product responses. Journal of
Marketing, 61, 68–84.
Cheney, G. C. (1983). On the various and changing meanings of organi-
zational membership: A field study of organizational identification.
Communication Monographs, 50, 342–362.
Draper, N. R., & Smith, H. (1980). Applied regression analysis. New York:
Wiley.
Drumwright, M. E. (1996). Company advertising with a social dimension:
The role of noneconomic criteria. Journal of Marketing, 60(4), 71–88.
Dukerich, J. M., Golden, B. R., & Shortell, S. M. (2002). Beauty in the eye
of the beholder: The impact of organizational identification, identity, and
image on the cooperative behaviors of physicians. Administrative Sci-
ence Quarterly, 47, 507–533.
Dutton, J. E., Dukerich, J. M., & Harquail, C. V. (1994). Organizational
images and member identification. Administrative Science Quarterly,
39, 239–263.
Elsbach, K. D., & Bhattacharya, C. B. (2001). Defining who you are by
what you are not: A study of organizational disidentification and the
NRA. Organization Science, 12, 393–413.
Fisher, R. J., & Wakefield, K. (1998). Factors leading to group identifica-
tion: A field study of winners and losers. Psychology & Marketing, 15,
23–40.
Fornell, C., & Larcker, D. F. (1981). Evaluating structural equation models
with unobservable variables and measurement error. Journal of Market-
ing Research, 18, 39–50.
George, J. M., & Bettenhausen, K. (1990). Understanding prosocial be-
havior, sales performance, and turnover: A group level analysis in a
service context. Journal of Applied Psychology, 75, 698–709.
George, J. M., & Brief, A. P. (1992). Feeling good–doing good: A
conceptual analysis of the mood at work-organizational spontaneity
relationship. Psychological Bulletin, 112, 310–329.
Granovetter, M. (1985). Economic action and social structure: The problem
of embeddedness. American Journal of Sociology, 91, 481–510.
Green, P. E. (1978). Analyzing multivariate data. Hinsdale, IL: Dryden
Press.
Gruen, T. W., Summers, J., & Acito, F. (2000). Relationship marketing
activities, commitment, and membership behaviors in professional as-
sociations. Journal of Marketing, 64(3), 34–49.
Hall, R. J., Snell, A. F., & Foust, M. S. (1999). Item parceling strategies in
SEM: Investigating the subtle effects of secondary constructs. Organi-
zational Research Methods, 2, 233–256.
Hogg, M. A., & Terry, D. J. (2000). Social identity and self-categorization
processes in organizational contexts. Academy of Management Review,
25, 121–140.
Jo¨reskog, K. G., & So¨rbom, D. (1993). LISREL 8: Structural equation
modeling with the SIMPLIS command language. Chicago: Scientific
Software International.
Kunda, Z. (1999). Social cognition: Making sense of people. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Landis, R. S., Beal, D., & Tesluk, P. E. (2000). A comparison of ap-
proaches to forming composite measures in structural equation models.
Organizational Research Methods, 3, 186–207.
MacKenzie, S., Ahearne, M., & Podsakoff, P. (1998). Some possible
antecedents and consequences of in-role and extra-role salesperson
performance. Journal of Marketing, 62(3), 87–98.
MacKinnon, D. P., Lockwood, C. M., West, S. G., & Sheets, V. (2002). A
comparison of methods to test mediation and other intervening variable
effects. Psychological Methods, 7, 83–104.
Mael, F. A. (1988). Organizational identification: Construct redefinition
and a field application with organizational alumni. Unpublished doc-
toral dissertation, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan.
Mael, F. A., & Ashforth, B. E. (1992). Alumni and their alma mater: A
582
AN EXAMINATION OF CUSTOMER–COMPANY IDENTIFICATION
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
partial test of the reformulated model of organizational identification.
Journal of Organizational Behavior, 13, 103–123.
Nunnaly, J. (1978). Psychometric theory. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Perrow, C. (1961). The analysis of goals in complex organizations. Amer-
ican Sociological Review, 26, 854–866.
Podsakoff, P. M., Ahearne, M., & MacKenzie, S. B. (1997). Organizational
citizenship behavior and the quantity and quality of work group perfor-
mance, Journal of Applied Psychology, 82, 262–270.
Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Paine, J. B., & Bachrach, D. G.
(2000). Organizational citizenship behaviors: A critical review of the
theoretical and empirical literature and suggestions for future research.
Journal of Management, 26, 513–563.
Pratt, M. G. (1998). To be or not to be: Central questions in organizational
identification. In D. A. Whetten & P. C. Godfrey (Eds.), Identity in
organizations: Building theory through conversations (pp. 171–207).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Pratt, M. G. (2000). The good, the bad, and the ambivalent: Managing
identification among Amway distributors. Administrative Science Quar-
terly, 45, 456–493.
Puffer, S. M. (1987). Prosocial behavior, noncompliant behavior, and work
performance among commission salespeople. Journal of Applied Psy-
chology, 72, 615–621.
Rao, H., Davis, G. F., & Ward, A. (2000, June). Embeddedness, social
identity and mobility: Why firms leave the NASDAQ and join the New
York Stock Exchange. Administrative Science Quarterly, 45, 268–292.
Reynolds, K. E., & Beatty, S. E. (1999). Customer benefits and company
consequences of customer-salesperson relationships in retailing. Journal
of Retailing, 75, 11–32.
Schlenker, B. R. (1986). Self-identification: Toward an integration of the
private and public self. In R. Baumeister (Ed.), Public self and private
self (pp. 21–62). New York: Springer-Verlag.
Scott, S. G., & Lane, V. R. (2000). A stakeholder approach to organiza-
tional identity. Academy of Management Review, 25, 43–62.
Sen, S., & Bhattacharya, C. B. (2001). Does doing good always lead to
doing better: Consumer reactions to corporate social responsibility.
Journal of Marketing Research, 38, 225–244.
Shamir, B. (1991). Meaning, self and motivation in organizations. Orga-
nizational Studies, 12, 405–424.
Smidts, A., Pruyn, A. H., & Van Riel, C. B. M. (2001). The impact of
employee communication and perceived external prestige on organiza-
tional identification. Academy of Management Journal, 49, 1051–1062.
Smith, A. C., Organ, D. W., & Near, J. P. (1983). Organizational citizen-
ship behavior: Its nature and antecedents. Journal of Applied Psychol-
ogy, 68, 653–663.
Sobel, M. E. (1982). Asymptotic confidence intervals for indirect effects in
structural equations models. In S. Leinhart (Ed.), Sociological method-
ology (pp. 290–312). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Swann, W. B., Jr. (1987). Identity negotiation: Where two roads meet.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53, 1038–1051.
Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. C. (1985). Psychology of intergroup relations.
Chicago: Nelson-Hall.
Tropp, L. R., & Wright, S. C. (1999). Ingroup identification as the inclu-
sion of ingroup in the self. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
5, 585–600.
Turner, J. C. (1982). Toward a cognitive redefinition of the social group.
In H. Tajfel (Ed.), Social identity and intergroup behavior (pp. 15–40).
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Wan-Huggins, V. N., Riordan, C. M., & Griffeth, R. W. (1998). The
development and longitudinal test of a model of organizational identi-
fication. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 28, 724–749.
Wansink, B., & Kent, R. (1998). An anchoring and adjustment model of
purchase quantity decisions. Journal of Marketing Research, 25, 71–81.
(Appendix follows)
583
RESEARCH REPORTS
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
Appendix
Scale Items
Perceived product performance (control)
Taking into consideration your knowledge and experience with [category name], rate [brand name] on each
of the following areas on a scale from 1–5, where 1  poor, 2  fair, 3  good, 4  very good, and 5 
excellent.
a. Effective in [Disorder A]
e. Patients respond quickly
b. Effective in [Disorder B]
f. Low incidence of side effects
c. Effective in [Disorder C]
g. Good value for the money
d. Effective in [Disorder D]
h. Ease of use
Construed external image of the company
(Four items, 7-point Likert scale)
a. People in my profession think that [target company] is a well-known company.
b. People in my profession think that [target company] is a respected company.
c. People in my profession think that [target company] is an admirable company.
d. People in my profession think that [target company] is a prestigious company.
Perceived company characteristics
Please indicate how well each of the characteristics listed describes [target company] (5-point scale)
Industry Leader
Exploitive (r)
Responsive
Caring
Friendly
Secure
Compassionate
Honest
Selfish (r)
Cooperative
Innovative
Sensitive
Dynamic
Progressive
Sincere
Efficient
Reliable
Socially Responsible
Perceived salesperson characteristics
Please indicate how well each of the characteristics listed describes [salesperson of target company] (5-point
scale)
Industry Leader
Friendly
Responsive
Boring
Honest
Secure
Caring
Humorous
Selfish (r)
Compassionate
Innovative
Sensitive
Cooperative
Knowledgeable
Sincere
Courteous
Likeable
Socially Responsible
Dynamic
Manipulative (r)
Trustworthy
Efficient
Progressive
Exploitive (r)
Reliable
Customer extra role behaviors
(Six items, 7-point Likert scale)
a. I would recommend [target company] products to other physicians.
b. I would recommend that a close friend or relative accept a position at [target company].
c. I would volunteer to participate in seminars sponsored by [target company].
d. I would pass on literature to fellow physicians in my practice given to me by a [target company] sales
representative.
e. I would fill in my [target company] sales representative on competitive initiatives.
f. I would let my [target company] sales representative know if a competitor was badmouthing his/her
company.
Product utilization (self-report measure)
Please indicate approximately how many prescriptions you write for each of the following products in a
typical month (8 brands listed in alphabetical order).
584
AN EXAMINATION OF CUSTOMER–COMPANY IDENTIFICATION
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
Received January 15, 2003
Revision received December 22, 2003
Accepted January 5, 2004 
Appendix (continued)
Customer company identification
We sometimes strongly identify with a company. This occurs when we perceive a great amount of overlap
between our ideas about who we are as a person and what we stand for (i.e., our self image) and of who
this company is and what it stands for (i.e., the company’s image).
Imagine that the circle at the left in each row represents your own personal identity and the other circle, at
the right, represents the company’s identity. Please indicate which case (A, B, C, D, E, F, G, or H) best
describes the level of overlap between your and the company’s identities. (Circle Appropriate Letter)
Note.
An r in parentheses indicates that the item was reverse coded.
585
RESEARCH REPORTS
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
