A cross-national comparison of the adoption of
business process reengineering: fashion-setting
networks?
Sue Newella,*, Jacky Swanb, Maxine Robertsonc
aNottingham Business School, Nottingham Trent University, Nottingham NG1 4BU, UK
bUniversity of Warwick, Warwick Business School, Coventry, UK
cUniversity of Coventry, Business School, Coventry, UK
Revised paper accepted for publication by Professor R.D. Galliers 22 July 1998
Abstract
Business Process Reengineering (BPR) was developed as a new idea which, it was suggested,
could revolutionise the corporation and give it a major competitive advantage by simplifying key
business processes and utilising information technology to secure cross-functional communication
and focus on customer requirements. Rather than continue the debate about whether BPR is ‘good’
or ‘bad’, ‘old’ or ‘new’ (e.g. Earl, M.J., 1994. The new and the old of business process redesign.
Journal of Strategic Information Systems 3 (1), 5–22; Mumford, E., 1994. New treatments or old
remedies: is business process reengineering really socio-technical design. Journal of Strategic Infor-
mation Systems 3 (4), 313–326), the focus here is on understanding how the concept ‘BPR’, however
deﬁned, has been diffused across European ﬁrms. The results from a survey of ﬁrms in four countries
support previous research on the diffusion process with the rate of adoption of BPR related to micro-
organisational level variables—characteristics of the ﬁrm and the boundary spanning activities of
individual members. In addition there were differences across industry sectors and across countries in
the extent of adoption of BPR. It is argued that attention to these meso-industry level and macro-national
level factors, as well as the micro-organisational level dynamics, will improve our understanding of the
relationship between networking and innovation processes. In particular, the paper focuses on how
networking activity can be restrictive and lead to the creation of fashions which limit the extent of
organisational learning during BPR adoption. q 1999 Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Business process reengineering; Networking; Innovation diffusion; Professional associations;
Fashion-setting
0963-8687/99/$ - see front matter q 1999, Elsevier Science B.V. All rights reserved.
PII: S0963-8687(98)00033-X
Journal of Strategic Information Systems 7 (1998) 299–317
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: sue.newell@ntu.ac.uk (S. Newell)
