A COGNITIVE LOAD VIEW AND EMPIRICAL TEST
OF COLLABORATION NETWORK STRUCTURE VERSUS
LEARNING RATES IN NEW SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT
JORGE COLAZO
Trinity University San Antonio, Texas, USA
jcolazo@trinity.edu
Published 22 June 2015
This study explores whether characteristics of the collaboration structure in software de-
velopment teams affect development learning rates, with a secondary goal of testing
product complexity as a moderator. We develop suitable hypotheses under the theoretical
lens of cognitive load theory. The empirical study uses archival data on an ordinary least
squares model to ﬁnd signiﬁcant associations between collaboration structure, product
complexity and the learning rates exhibited by 230 development teams producing open
source software. Results show two distinct subgroups of projects: The ﬁrst subgroup
exhibits an average 78% learning rate, and the other subgroup “unlearned”, i.e., produc-
tivity deteriorated over time instead of improved. In the learning subgroup, collaboration
network density negatively impacted learning, while product complexity interacted with
collaboration network centralisation and boundary spanning activity. In the unlearning
subgroup, only network density impacted learning rates and no moderating effects were
found. Practical implications and future opportunities for research are discussed.
Keywords: Collaboration; open source software; software development; cognitive load;
learning rates.
Introduction
With the obvious and growing importance of software for business and almost every
other aspect of modern life, academia and practitioners endeavour to ﬁnd better
tools and techniques to make the new software project development process more
efﬁcient. Though software development project success and failure rates have been
hotly argued (Glass, 2005), there is consensus in indicating that much remains to be
improved and the development of new systems is far from efﬁcient, with economic
and societal consequences that are hugely important (Dwivedi et al., 2014).
International Journal of Innovation Management
Vol. 20, No. 1 (January 2016) 1650014 (28 pages)
© Imperial College Press
DOI: 10.1142/S1363919616500146
1650014-1
by Kyubin Yun on 05/31/26. Re use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
In facing programmer delays, cost overruns and programmer attrition (Stepanek,
2011), promoting a rapid increasing of the productivity (i.e., learning) among
development teams appears as a critical priority. Disappointingly, learning in
software development presents a high variability, with some development teams
exhibiting a high rate of learning, and a steady productivity increase in time (Boh
et al., 2007), whilst other software development teams “not only fail to learn but
learn to fail” (Lyytinen and Robey, 1999).
Factors impacting the learning rates of software development teams relate to the
product being developed, contextual factors, and also to the structure of the team,
the latter being the focus of this paper.
Extant literature has looked at the impact of team structure on development
performance mostly from a reductionist approach that described such structure, for
instance as being either hierarchical or bureaucratic, or possessing either a strong
or weak leadership. This reductionist approach cannot capture key aspects of
collaboration such as how many team members collaborate with others, whether
one or few members concentrate collaboration while others work in isolation, and
in general anything that has to do with relational aspects of collaboration. Such
reductionist approach belongs to the tradition of “factor research” (Mohr, 1982)
which, while useful, does not allow a standardised and straightforward comparison
between teams and is difﬁcult to translate into clear normative prescriptions
(Dwivedi et al., 2014). For instance, describing a team as “hierarchical” does not
shed light on whether one or more team members centralise the collaboration
effort, or to what degree the tasks are shared by team members.
Given that “IS success (or failure) is a direct consequence of the effectiveness of
collaboration” (Dwivedi et al., 2014: 8), a look at the inside structure of collab-
oration networks and their relationships with learning, including collaboration
relationships among different teams, is warranted, which brings about the paper’s
ﬁrst research question: What kind of collaboration structure associates with higher
learning rates in software development?
Building on the rich tradition from educational psychology of looking at
learning as a cognitive phenomenon, and responding to a call to link networks with
cognition (Davern et al., 2012), we are going to rely on Social Network Analysis
(SNA) (Wasserman and Faust, 1994) to describe collaboration structures and on
cognitive load theory (Sweller, 1988; Chandler and Sweller, 1991; Sweller, 1994;
Kalyuga et al., 1998; Sweller et al., 1998; Kalyuga et al., 2003; Sweller et al.,
2007) to hypothesise links between collaboration network structure and devel-
opment learning rates.
Cognitive load theory indicates that product complexity should inﬂuence the
intrinsic cognitive load of individuals and teams, potentially impacting learning
rates. Consistently, product complexity is, in this paper, treated as a moderating
J. Colazo
1650014-2
Int. J. Innov. Mgt. 2016.20. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Kyubin Yun on 05/31/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
factor, and is the object of the second main research question for this study: How
does product complexity inﬂuence the relationship between collaboration struc-
ture and learning rates?
With the main goal of understanding of how the structuring of new software
development teams can affect their learning rates, after deriving a set of hypoth-
eses, we then test those using archival data from a large sample of open source
software (OSS) project teams. The analysis is performed applying ordinary least
squares regression to network parameters including collaboration network density,
centralisation, and boundary spanning activity (BSA).
Section “Literature Review and Hypotheses” presents the literature review and
hypotheses development. Section “Methods” includes the analytical methods and
section “Analysis and Results” presents the results of ordinary least squares
models. The results are discussed in section “Discussion” while the study’s lim-
itations and implications for future research are laid out in section Limitations and
Future Research”, followed by references to previous research.
Literature Review and Hypotheses
First, we review how collaboration structure has been deﬁned and speciﬁed in the
literature and the evidence of an association between structure and performance in
general, and learning in particular. Second, we look back on research on learning
rates and what appears to inﬂuence them. Third, we review the main works that lay
the theoretical foundation for the hypotheses to be tested: cognitive load theory.
Last, drawing from the mentioned streams of literature we develop hypotheses to
be empirically tested.
Collaboration structure
Collaboration refers, in this paper, to the joint work by team members on the same
task. Collaboration structure, as any other kind of social structure, can be repre-
sented using concepts of SNA (Wasserman and Faust, 1994). Adherents to SNA
see traits of social actors and their collectives as a result of the actors’ embedd-
edness into different types of networks. A network is a set of relationships among
social actors where the actors are nodes of a network-like structure and there is a
relationship, or link, between two actors when a certain condition is met, such as,
when they cooperate in the same task.
Teams or work groups can thus be characterised by looking at the properties of
the networked structures to which they belong (Wasserman and Faust, 1994). The
mathematics of graphs help us identify unique traits of those networks that deﬁne
any given group and allow comparison with other groups.
A Cognitive Load View and Empirical Test
1650014-3
by Kyubin Yun on 05/31/26. Re use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
Of the several network characteristics that can be calculated to identify a group
of actors, network density is perhaps the best known. Density is deﬁned as the
ratio between the number of actually observed links between actors to the maxi-
mum possible number of links for the group size. Density ranges between zero and
one, with zero meaning that all actors are isolates, and one meaning that all actors
are linked (collaborate) with all other actors in the network. Density measures the
interconnectedness or cohesiveness of a social structure. In valued networks
(where each tie has a value or “strength”), density is the average value of tie
strength standardised by the size of the network (Wasserman and Faust, 1994).
Some researchers have found a positive association between network density
and team performance in new product development (Reagans and Zuckerman,
2001). Others argue that the relationship is inverse or U-shaped (Oh et al., 2004;
Chidambaran and Tung, 2005). For large teams and relatively complex tasks a
negative association between density and performance was found (Balkundi and
Harrison, 2006). Although there are few empirical studies speciﬁc to software
development, the complexity of developing modern software suggests that we
should observe a negative relationship, at least for relatively larger teams (Levina,
2005).
Centralisation is another parameter used to characterise the relative impor-
tance of different actors in a network. It describes the extent to which the various
actors in a network are equally important (i.e., central). It is a measure of
individual importance (centrality) dispersion and takes the value of zero when all
actors are equally important and a higher value when few or even only one
actor dominates the other actors in the network (Wasserman and Faust, 1994).
Centralised structures hinder cooperation (Molm, 1994) because actors need to
use indirect paths, mostly through a few central actors who perform as infor-
mation brokers.
SNA allows the study of networked groups as actors of higher order networks,
as in a network of teams. Usually, new product development not only involves
intra-team collaboration, but also collaboration with external entities, and in
particular, with other project teams (Allen and Cohen, 1969; Allen, 1970; Mallick
and Schroeder, 2005). The act of crossing team boundaries to seek information
for the focal project has been called BSA (Allen, 1970). Previous research pro-
vides some empirical support for the argument that BSA improves overall per-
formance and creativity yet largely hinders productivity (Allen, 1970; Dollinger,
1984; Brass et al., 2004) in that it requires additional effort to seek external
knowledge, and this acquired knowledge often must be reciprocated to external
teams, thereby consuming resources that could otherwise be used for adding value
to the focal task.
J. Colazo
1650014-4
Int. J. Innov. Mgt. 2016.20. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Kyubin Yun on 05/31/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
Learning rates
In the operations and information systems literature, learning refers to a sustained
decrease in the effort required to produce a unit of output. Historically, the ﬁrst
series of academic articles concerning learning in industrial contexts was due to
Wright (1936) who observed that the number of man-hours required to complete
the assembly of aircraft decreased steadily, following an exponential function. In
general, the learning curve, a function representing the effort per unit of output as a
function of the produced volume, can be described as a negative exponential
function of the form
Y(x) ¼ axb,
where
Y(x) is the effort (or unit cost) to produce the xth unit,
a is the cost to produce the ﬁrst unit,
b is a parameter related to the learning rate L by:
b ¼  log (L)=log(2)
or
L ¼ 2b
where L is the percentage to which the unit cost decreases after every doubling up
of the cumulative production volume. For instance, L ¼ 0:8 means that every time
the production volume doubles up, the unit cost decreases to 80% of the original.
Note that, perhaps counter intuitively, under this deﬁnition for the learning rate,
more intensive learning corresponds to a smaller L, e.g., a project with L ¼ 0:7 or
70% learns faster than a project with L ¼ 0:8 or 80%. Note also that when log
[Y(x)] is regressed on log(x) the learning curve is a negative sloped straight line
with slope equal to b.
The practical uses of learning curves and their associated learning rates are
capacity estimation, forecasting, budgeting, supplier quote evaluation, and gen-
erally any issues that require the estimation of the effort (or manpower) to produce
a given number of units of output and/or unit costs (Yelle, 1979). Although
learning rates by industry are more or less typical of the product being made,
variance among organisations producing the same kind of product is notable and
very relevant to production costs (Argote et al., 1990).
Learning curves have been used extensively to forecast resources and predict
production costs (Sallenave, 1985), but mostly in a context of mass goods pro-
duction, and in particular assembly lines. A famous case of adherence to the
exponential learning curve is that of Ford’s model T automobile, where the
A Cognitive Load View and Empirical Test
1650014-5
by Kyubin Yun on 05/31/26. Re use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
repetitiveness of the tasks involved and the high production volumes originated an
almost perfect exponential curve until General Motors disrupted the market and
new models had to be introduced (Hirschmann, 1964).
Other more complicated mathematical models than a negative exponential
formula have been introduced to describe data from speciﬁc industries, but the
basic exponential model holds acceptably well in most situations, avoiding the
problem of estimating several additional curve parameters (Yelle, 1979).
Although software development is less repetitive than mass production, the
theory of learning curves can indeed be applied to it (Reagans et al., 2005). There is
some empirical support for the exponential form of the learning curve holding true
when applied to individual developers or to teams producing software using modern
development tools (Pendharkar and Subramanian, 2007), and the learning curve
effect has been observed in the software testing stage as well (Abu et al., 2005).
Learning can be observed in organisations at the individual or aggregate levels,
the former called labour learning and the latter, organisational learning (Argote,
2012). Factors that inﬂuence learning rates have been framed into three categories
(Argote et al., 2003): those related to the properties of the knowledge itself, of the
organisations learning, and of the relationships between such organisations.
The ﬁrst group includes task complexity (Argote et al., 1995), whether the
knowledge is explicit or tacit (Nadler et al., 2003), the relative difﬁculty to code/
decode knowledge (Zander and Kogut, 1995), and whether the knowledge is
perceived as internal or external to the organisation (Menon and Pfeffer, 2003), or
public versus private (Uzzi and Lancaster, 2003).
The second group includes expertise or “expert status” (Reagans et al., 2005),
worker turnover (Argote et al., 1990), and previous experience in similar tasks or
in different but related tasks (Reagans et al., 2005).
The third group of factors refers to the team’s organisation and is perhaps the
most relevant for this paper. We are interested in describing structure as pertaining
not only to connections among team members, but also to connections with other
teams. It is interesting to note that several studies’ conclusions refer, perhaps
inadvertently, to aspects that are standard fare in SNA empirical studies, indicating
that the subject matter is conducive to performing a large scale, hard-metrics-based
empirical study that would be squarely framed in the SNA tradition rather than
deriving network-related conclusions from a reductionist view.
For instance, similarity among connected learners seems to boost learning
(Song et al., 2003), which in SNA, would be called the homophily or “philos”
effect (Krackhardt, 1992). In a study using MBA students, those teams that had a
more homogeneous knowledge distribution outperformed the teams whose
knowledge was concentrated in few members (Rulke and Galaskiewicz, 2000). To
a researcher adept at SNA imagery, this result appears to suggest a relationship
J. Colazo
1650014-6
Int. J. Innov. Mgt. 2016.20. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Kyubin Yun on 05/31/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
between learning rates and network density (a dense network has ties between
most pairs of actors and information is homogeneously distributed). A mathe-
matical model predicted that centralised ﬁrms would have an advantage when
competition is intense (Chang and Harrington, Jr., 2003), which in SNA terms
would indicate an association between network centralisation and performance,
subject to the inﬂuence of competition as a moderator. Bureaucratic teams have
been found to be better learners (Bunderson and Boumgarden, 2009), which has
been justiﬁed as possibly associated with communication patterns within the team.
Other studies point to, and even suggest that, a relational aspect of learning has yet
to be studied beyond the dyadic relationship, and the structural impacts on learning
rates have been suggested as an emergent theme in organisational learning (Argote
et al., 2003) but to our knowledge, not yet empirically explored. All in all, the
extant literature seems to indicate that network characteristics could be linked to
learning rates, though no study has tested this proposition directly.
The previously mentioned papers encompassed a range of products and in-
dustries, among which software was in the minority. What are the factors that
impact learning in the speciﬁc context of software development? One study,
limited to one proprietary software product (Boh et al., 2007) showed that pre-
vious experience is an important learning factor. Among self managed teams
(Crowston et al., 2007), the more specialised and hierarchical teams were found to
be better learners (Bunderson and Boumgarden, 2009), and learning was improved
when engaged in transferring technology from other projects (Singh et al., 2011),
which suggests that not only intra-team, but also inter-team links are relevant.
Software development learning rates have been shown to depend on how infor-
mation is processed between implicit and explicit (Zorgios et al., 2009) yet still
conform to a learning curve.
Although learning rates have not been explicitly linked to social structure, there
is strong, yet sometimes contradictory evidence relating other potential perfor-
mance metrics with some aspects of social structure such as self-assessed team
performance or viability (Ahuja and Carley, 1999; Ahuja et al., 2003; Balkundi
and Harrison, 2006). For instance, network centralisation and density were asso-
ciated with quality, and time between releases in software products (Colazo,
2010), though learning rates were not investigated. The presence of “emergent
people” (more central actors in SNA parlance) was associated with software build
success (Kwan et al., 2012). In a similar stream of research, several studies have
explored empirically “Conway’s Law”, that suggests a relationship between
organisational structure with the organisation of the product itself or its modularity
(Conway, 1968; Burton et al., 2011; Kwan et al., 2012; Bailey et al., 2013;
Santana et al., 2013), but no study we are aware of studied the association between
intra- and inter-team structure with learning rates.
A Cognitive Load View and Empirical Test
1650014-7
by Kyubin Yun on 05/31/26. Re use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
From the reviewed research, the concept of learning curve and their learning
rates applies to the speciﬁc realm of software development, and a network view of
factors that inﬂuence learning rates seems to be fertile ground to explore.
Cognitive load theory
The theoretical lens through which we are attempting to link team structure with
learning rates is Cognitive load theory (Sweller, 1988; Chandler and Sweller,
1991; Sweller, 1994; Kalyuga et al., 1998; Sweller et al., 1998; Kalyuga et al.,
2003; Sweller et al., 2007), which has roots in work from the 1950s in Miller’s
cognitive science (Miller and Selfridge, 1950; Miller, 1953, 1956a,1956b).
As per cognitive science, the act of learning involves two mechanisms: schema
acquisition and the automation of learned procedures (Cooper and Sweller, 1987).
A schema is a cognitive construct that organises the elements of information
according to the manner with which they will be processed. Newly presented
information is altered so that it is congruent with schemas that condense the
knowledge of the subject matter. When schemas are acquired, new information is
automatically matched with these schemas, thereby, speeding up the learning.
Schemas are continuously being adapted and modiﬁed with the input of new
information.
Schema acquisition is limited by “working memory”, which is short term,
transient, and limited, as opposed to long term memory — which can be con-
sidered to be basically unlimited. Working memory is able to hold on to about
seven plus/minus two “chunks” of information (Miller, 1956) that would be used
for schema formation in problem solving and learning. Once schemas are ac-
quired, they are moved into long term memory for later use.
Sweller contributed the key works on cognitive load theory (Sweller, 1988,
1994; Sweller et al., 1998). He and his collaborators made some important
observations: First, novice problem solvers use, in general, a technique called
means-ends analysis. This technique involves a backwards working phase where
the problem solver works backwards from the ultimate goal, ﬁnding sub-goals in
succession until they arrive to a state where a sub-goal can be solved for, given the
available information. Then, they proceed in forward fashion solving all higher
level sub-goals until they solve the main, highest level goal.
Expert problem solvers do not use the means-ends technique, but rather they
use previously acquired schemas which are accommodated and assimilated to the
problem at hand, permitting the problem solver to conceptualise a whole set of
logical equations that has, as the only unknown, the ultimate goal of the problem
being solved. The experts’ domain-speciﬁc knowledge resides in the form of
schemas, which they readily apply to new problems by accommodation and
J. Colazo
1650014-8
Int. J. Innov. Mgt. 2016.20. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Kyubin Yun on 05/31/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
assimilation in a much more efﬁcient process than means-ends analysis in which
there is no learning, but only structured goal seeking.
As such, the key to expert problem solving is the acquisition of schemas. The
limited cognitive capacity has to be used principally for schema acquisition and
any cognitive load that is not used for that purpose should be minimised (Sweller
et al., 2007). The part of the total cognitive burden used to create or process
schemas is called germane cognitive load, or germane load. In addition to this,
there are the intrinsic cognitive load, which is exclusively associated with the
difﬁculty of the task, and extraneous load, associated with how the information is
presented to the problem solver, or with how much effort the learner has to exert to
decode the information into usable form, for instance translating from a foreign
language, identifying and weeding out irrelevant information, or spotting typos.
Because the intrinsic load depends on the difﬁculty of the task, it cannot be
easily modiﬁed, and the extraneous load is what should be minimised instead.
Extraneous cognitive load is related to the occurrence of negative effects that
impair learning (Chandler and Sweller, 1991). One of those is the redundancy
effect; for instance, presenting the same information twice in the same or different
media or codiﬁcations (e.g., a diagram and a textual explanation at the same time).
Another one is the split attention effect, which occurs when information is pre-
sented in two or more split pieces that require switching to and from all pieces to
complete the processing of the information (e.g., part of the information is pre-
sented visually and another part in text, or from two teammates that have partial
information, or who are available at different times).
Hypotheses
Density
In a dense structure, all actors have multiple collaborators and as such they keep
multiple links with others. We contend that a denser structure exacerbates both the
redundancy effect and the split attention effect, which should hinder learning.
When a team member collaborates on a task with more teammates, there is an
increased chance of receiving redundant information since in established teams
there is a signiﬁcant amount of overlapping experience and skills transference
(Leonard-Barton, 1992). In fact, the long known phenomenon of groupthink where
all members of a team share the same or similar solutions to new problems (Janis,
1972) can be thought of in terms of shared schemas. Since expertise resides in the
schemas committed to long term memory, collaborating with more teammates will
increase the proportion of information that relates to already established schemas,
and hence conforms redundant knowledge that will increase the extraneous
A Cognitive Load View and Empirical Test
1650014-9
by Kyubin Yun on 05/31/26. Re use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
cognitive load and decrease the amount of working memory available for new
schema formation, making learning less efﬁcient.
Also, putting together the non-redundant portion of information received from
several other teammates will require switching between collaborators to acquire
complete information for schema formation. This split attention effect will also
increase extraneous cognitive load in detriment of germane load, which is used to
generate or establish new, or modify existing schemas.
The split attention effect is also related to the asynchronous nature of collab-
oration in software development, where different collaborators may contribute at
different times, often in different time zones or different shifts (Espinosa and
Carmel, 2003). Having to shift times has been shown to negatively affect com-
munication effectiveness (Olson and Olson, 2000), and from the point of view of
schema formation it constitutes an instance of split attention effect which will then
hinder learning. This brings about the ﬁrst hypothesis of this paper:
H1: Collaboration structure density is negatively associated with learning.
Centralisation
Centralised structures possess one or relatively few “central” actors that tend to
channel information and act as brokers between other dyads of actors, connecting
with most other team members, while the remaining actors will have few links to
other teammates. Central actors tend to be experts (Balkundi and Kilduff, 2006)
who are more skilful than the others, and hold a disproportionately high number of
links to other actors.
Expert actors often suffer the expertise reversal effect (Kalyuga et al., 2003).
This effect is somewhat the opposite of the combined split attention and redun-
dancy effects. For novices, the integration of information originally present in
different media reduces the split attention effect and liberates part of the working
memory for schema acquisition. Experts have already assimilated parts of the
necessary information in the form of schemas stored in long term memory, and
integrated information hinders rather than helps, because some of the integrated
information is redundant for them. For instance, a study found that experienced
electricians do better with graphical circuit information only, rather than with text
explanations integrated in the diagrams, while novices react in the opposite
manner (Kalyuga et al., 1998).
A cognitive load that is germane to a novice can be extraneous to an expert
(Paas et al., 2004). Central actors will be bombarded with information from less
skilled actors, and on the one hand, if the information is redundant, they will suffer
the redundancy effect, but even if it is not redundant, they will suffer the expertise
J. Colazo
1650014-10
Int. J. Innov. Mgt. 2016.20. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Kyubin Yun on 05/31/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
reversal effect, hindering their learning. Also, central developers tend to be experts
at more than one kind of task (i.e., software module), and need to be adept at
managing the interfaces between modules (Balkundi and Harrison, 2006; Balkundi
and Kilduff, 2006). Managing interfaces between modules, in addition to the
contents of the modules themselves, increases the degree of information interac-
tivity (Kalyuga et al., 2003) and requires the acquisition of more complex schemas
that include the schematisation of the interfaces of interacting information, cre-
ating a bigger load for working memory and potentially exacerbating the negative
effects of extraneous load, causing a learning failure.
Given the arguments above, it follows that at any given density, a more cen-
tralised network will exhibit a higher degree of these deleterious effects and we can
posit:
H2: Collaboration structure centralisation is negatively associated with learning.
Boundary spanning activity
In new product development the aggregate knowledge of the team may not be
much different than what any one member knows (Leonard-Barton, 1992), which
often times requires seeking information from sources external to the team, per-
haps other project teams or other external actors. Further, innovation often occurs
under conditions of environmental uncertainty. The knowledge required to per-
form development tasks can change rapidly and may not be available from existing
team members. In such situations, knowledge must be sought from outside of the
team, since a lack of external information may then translate into a knowledge gap
between what is known and what the team needs to know in order to effectively
cope with design features and changes in the competitive environment (Levitt and
March, 1988; Leonard-Barton, 1992; Teigland and Wasko, 2003).
Moreover, teams that are isolated from their context exacerbate groupthink,
developing a homogeneous set of beliefs that hinders creativity and penalises
critical thinking (Janis, 1972). From the cognitive load perspective, groupthinkers
can be thought of as having an increased cognitive bias that stems from trying to ﬁt
new problems into their already established schemas, even when these schemas are
not conducive to solving the new problem.
The cognitive bias effect hinders the formation and adaptation of useful sche-
mas and conversely, groups that access new ideas and technologies can transfer
them to their tasks in the focal team, thereby forming new schemas and improving
learning. Communicating with other teams can help team members gather indi-
rectly useful information about competitive products, and stay ahead of technical
developments implemented elsewhere, etc.
A Cognitive Load View and Empirical Test
1650014-11
by Kyubin Yun on 05/31/26. Re use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
There is a potential negative for BSA as well: A high level of BSA can place an
additional overhead on the individuals who perform boundary spanning roles,
particularly in terms of time spent on sense-making and decoding of information
from external to internal meaning frameworks when they are different. Here we are
assuming that the possible individual productivity hindrance to the developers that
sustain BSA is overwhelmed by BSA’s positive effect for the team in helping
create and adapt schemas, and the third hypothesis is:
H3: BSA is positively associated with learning.
Complexity
Product complexity is deﬁned as the number of parts and modules necessary to
produce a product (Clark and Fujimoto, 1991) and to understand it, it is necessary
not only to know which parts make a complete product but also how those parts
interact with each other (Ruthen, 1993). In general, empirical studies on new
product development performance attempt to control for product complexity
(Hobday, 1998; McDermott, 1999).
From the cognitive load theory point of view, task complexity is directly related
to the intrinsic portion of cognitive load (Van Merrienboer and Sweller, 2005)
since the latter deals with the difﬁculty in understanding how the product operates,
which is related to its complexity (Robinson, 2001).
Learning tasks with a small intrinsic cognitive load may not reach the operative
limit of the working memory. Only when working memory is crowded by ex-
traneous load, there will be a limiting effect on learning. The more complex the
task, the more likely it is to present both the redundancy effect and the split
attention effect typical of the formation of extraneous cognitive load. Different
parts of the product may operate using the same or similar mechanisms (for
instance an IF-THEN loop in software presents a feedback mechanism similar to
the one in a WHILE loop) presenting redundancy to the learning and generating
extraneous cognitive load. Also the more different parts in a product the more
exacerbated the split attention effect.
In other words, the more complex the task, the more pronounced the effects of
extraneous load will be, and the impact of structural parameters on learning is
going to be affected more strongly. This argues for a moderating effect of task
complexity on the precedent hypotheses:
H4(a, b, c): Task complexity moderates the association between learning and
(a) density, (b) centralisation and (c) BSA.
The overall research model can be seen in Fig. 1.
J. Colazo
1650014-12
Int. J. Innov. Mgt. 2016.20. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Kyubin Yun on 05/31/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
Methods
Research framework
In order to empirically test the hypotheses, the selected research framework should
offer rich, hard data on collaboration structure, productivity, and task complexity
in a new software development scenario. OSS development teams ﬁt these
requirements nicely.
OSS not only relies on making public the source code for the product under
development, but also normally produces other artefacts that can be mined for
data, such as mailing lists, change logs, and so on, providing great opportunities
for collecting the data needed for this study.
OSS project team information is hosted in web-based repositories that have
been used repeatedly as sources of archival data for empirical studies. In accor-
dance with the majority of previous OSS empirical studies (e.g., Hahn et al., 2008;
Colazo and Fang, 2009), this research uses data collected from OSS projects
hosted in Source Forge (SF) (www.sourceforge.net).
Sampling
The OSS project data were collected initially in early 2008, with updates to the
database throughout mid 2013. Among all OSS projects hosted in SF, the projects
analysed were restricted to those using “C” as their programming language.
Constraining the sample to a single programming language is strongly preferred
when using code-based metrics (Jones, 1986) such as productivity and “C” is a
procedural language for which there are well-established metrics that are relatively
easier to collect and crosscheck than if an object-oriented language had been used,
in which case, other aspects such as the need to consider coupling and cohesion
would make data collection and analysis much more resource intensive and dif-
ﬁcult to compare among languages. A program was considered written in “C”
when at least 90% of their source code ﬁles were exclusively in that language.
In SF, an overwhelming majority of registered projects do not have any
meaningful activity, with no source code at all, or are single developer projects
(Krishnamurthy, 2002). Following previous empirical research on OSS teams,
projects with six or more core team members were selected (Crowston and
Howison, 2003; Colazo and Fang, 2010). Core team members are deﬁned here as
project members who have administrative rights to write source code in the re-
pository (Mockus et al., 2002).
In the SF repository, there were 587 software projects being developed by six or
more core team members and using “C”. These projects constituted the sampling
frame. The ﬁnal sample was reduced to 230 projects (39% of the sampling frame)
A Cognitive Load View and Empirical Test
1650014-13
by Kyubin Yun on 05/31/26. Re use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
because only that number had archived full data on all development activities. In
spite of the non-probabilistic nature of the sample (see limitations), it contained
projects with varied types of applications, sizes, and degrees of complexity. The
unit of analysis was the OSS project.
Measurement
Collaboration structure
Collaboration structure was measured following metrics common in SNA
(Wasserman and Faust, 1994). Two developers collaborate when they work on the
same ﬁle. In the resulting network, developers are the actors and there is a link, or
arc, when two developers collaborate. As mentioned before, the collaboration
structure within the team is characterised by two main parameters: density and
centralisation. Collaboration with other teams is captured by BSA, in a second-
order network where OSS projects are the actors and there is a link between two
projects if two developers from each of the projects collaborate.
The network data were obtained from the activity logs of each project’s Sub-
version, a standard tool that registers each modiﬁcation made by a team member to
any ﬁle belonging to the project; it is used to prevent programming conﬂicts in
multi-member projects. The log ﬁles contain, among other information, the name
of the ﬁle modiﬁed, the name of the team member making the modiﬁcation, the
kind of modiﬁcation made, the number of lines added, lines deleted, and lines
modiﬁed.
A custom-made script downloaded these logs and extracted the detail of who
worked on each ﬁle. The number of team members was calculated from the logs as
the number of different individuals who made changes to the project’s ﬁles.
Another script translated the Subversion log information into associative data
relating each possible team member dyad to the ﬁles they worked on in common,
if any. These network data were fed to the SNA module of “R” (R Development
Team, 2014) to obtain the structural parameters (network density, network cen-
tralisation and BSA).
Density
A graph is deﬁned as a collection of nodes and arcs linking them. In a graph,
density is deﬁned as the ratio of the number of arcs to the maximum possible
number of arcs. In a valued graph (one in which arcs have a value or “strength”),
this concept is extended by assigning to each arc its value and to each missing arc
the value of 0, density’s value coincides with the arithmetic average strength of
the arcs.
J. Colazo
1650014-14
Int. J. Innov. Mgt. 2016.20. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Kyubin Yun on 05/31/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
Centralisation
There are several measures of the centralisation of a social structure, such as,
degree centralisation, betweenness centralisation, information centralisation, etc.
(Wasserman and Faust, 1994). All centralisation measures capture the variance of
the individual actor’s centralities or the ratio between the network’s average
centrality and the maximum possible theoretical average centrality given the
speciﬁc topology of the network (Freeman, 1977). Here we use Freeman’s version
of centralisation, where degree centrality is the number of links per actor
(Wasserman and Faust, 1994).
Boundary spanning activity
BSA was measured as the developer-based, inter-team degree centrality, nor-
malised by team size (Wasserman and Faust, 1994). For instance, if the focal team
has 10 members, and ﬁve of them have at least one link each to developers in other
project teams, the BSA will be 5=10 ¼ 0:5. The more individuals link to other
teams’ developers, the higher the BSA.
Learning rate
First, productivity was measured as the number of lines of code written per
developer per month, a popular and established measure for development
productivity (cf. Jones, 1986).
Then, the learning rate was calculated as the slope of the log–log linear
regression approximation where the dependent variable was productivity and the
independent variable was elapsed time since the ﬁrst line of code was committed
to the repository.
Complexity
Basili and Hutchens (1983) deﬁne software complexity as a measure of the
resources expended while interacting with software code. This complexity arises
from the organisation of programming elements within the software code.
When software is more complex, more information needs to be processed
during coding by developers. When they collaborate on more complex software,
developers must not only comprehend each of the individual modules, but also
spend additional cognitive effort to understand how different modules and paths
are interrelated, making collaboration more demanding. A software artefact is
more complex when it contains more interrelated modules or paths (Darcy et al.,
2005). A widely accepted measure for software complexity is McCabe’s cyclo-
matic complexity, which measures the intricacy of the logic ﬂow in the program
(McCabe, 1976). That is the measure used in this paper.
A Cognitive Load View and Empirical Test
1650014-15
by Kyubin Yun on 05/31/26. Re use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
Other variables/controls
The sampling design controlled for programming language to eliminate potential
inconsistencies in the metrics based on source code. Project tenure was measured
by counting the number of days between the ﬁrst known date of activity in the
source code repository and the date the measurements were taken. Project size was
measured in total lines of source code. The number of developers was taken from
the Subversion logs.
Analysis and Results
Unexpectedly, we found that overall there was little learning happening. The
overall sample learning rate was 0.989; i.e., when the elapsed time doubled up it
took only 1.1% less effort to commit one additional KSLOC. This result is far from
the reported 80% learning rate estimated for software development (Raccoon,
1996). However, on further inspection, we observed that while teams on some
projects learned (productivity increased over time), some others “unlearned”, i.e.,
their productivity became progressively worse. About 20% of the projects’ teams
fell into the ﬁrst category and the remaining, in the second (Table 1).
Looking at the teams that learned, however, the average positive learning rate
was 78%, which is well in line with the cited estimate (Raccoon, 1996). While the
teams that worsened over time had an average of 79% decrease of productivity
every time the code base doubled up (a “negative” 21% learning rate).
Given the observations above, we split the sample into two subgroups: the ﬁrst,
with positive learning, and the second with negative learning, or “unlearning”, to
run the regression models. Bivariate correlations of the transformed variables for
the OLS regressions are shown in Table 2, while the regression results are shown
in Tables 3 and 4.
For the subgroup with positive learning, collaboration network density was
positively associated with learning but the cross product of density  complexity
was not statistically signiﬁcant, yielding support to H1 but not to H4a. While the
learning rate L increases with density (the project learns less with increased
Table 1. Learning rates.
% Sample
Mean (L)
Overall
100
0.011
Positive
20
0.78
Negative
80
1.21
J. Colazo
1650014-16
Int. J. Innov. Mgt. 2016.20. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Kyubin Yun on 05/31/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
Table 2. Bivariate correlations.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
1
Learning rate, slope
1
0.045
0.009
0.034
0.291**
1.780*
0.155*
0.331**
0.053
0.049
0.147*
2
Team size, core developers
1
0.094
0.294**
0.120*
0.425***
0.055
0.065
0.067
0.176
0.005
3
Project tenure
1
0.306**
0.141*
0.154
0.291*
0.237*
0.173
0.079
0.307**
4
Product size, KSLOC
1
0.051
0.118
0.079
0.116
0.030
0.012
0.088
5
Density
1
0.414**
0.079
0.084
0.894***
0.47**
0.008
6
Centralisation
1
0.053
0.052
0.354**
0.741***
0.020
7
BSA
1
0.062
0.066
0.105
0.795***
8
Complexity
1
1
0.427***
0.159*
0.426***
9
Complexity  Density
1
0.488**
0.183
10
Complexity  Centralisation
1
0.001
11
Complexity  BSA
1
Mean
1.95
0.90
0.10
2.25
0.65
1.02
1.00
0.96
0.63
4.57
10.35
SD
20.67
0.10
0.09
0.53
0.47
1.40
0.28
0.31
0.54
10.91
7.29
Note: N ¼ 230, *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.
A Cognitive Load View and Empirical Test
1650014-17
by Kyubin Yun on 05/31/26. Re use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
density), product complexity does not moderate such relationship. In the subgroup
with negative learning, similar results were obtained.
Looking at centralisation in the subgroup with positive learning, both the main
effect of centralisation and the cross product between centralisation and com-
plexity were signiﬁcantly associated to the learning rate, supporting H2 and H4b.
The positive coefﬁcient of the interaction term indicates that when complexity
increases, there is a positive addition to the inﬂuence of centralisation in learning
rate, i.e., teams for projects with more complex products learn less when they
Table 3. Regression, positive learning rates.
Coeff.
Sig.
(Constant)
0.424
***
Team size
1.878
Tenure
11.345
Product size
1.255
*
Density
2.007
***
Centralisation
1.655
*
BSA
2.009
Complexity
6.472
***
Complexity  Density
3.320
Complexity  Centralisation
0.140
**
Complexity  BSA
0.689
***
Note: Dependent variable: (L) Learning rate, N ¼ 47,
R2 ¼ 0:11, *p < 0:05, **p < 0:01, ***p < 0:001.
Table 4. Regression, no (negative) learning.
Coeff.
Sig.
(Constant)
0.005
Team size
0.952
Tenure
1.441
Product size
1.114
*
Density
1.980
***
Centralisation
0.885
BSA
3.08
*
Complexity
4.877
***
Complexity  Density
0.333
Complexity  Centralisation
0.008
Complexity  BSA
0.001
Note: Dependent variable: (L), N ¼ 183, R2 ¼ 0:36,
*p < 0:05, **p < 0:01, ***p < 0:001.
J. Colazo
1650014-18
Int. J. Innov. Mgt. 2016.20. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Kyubin Yun on 05/31/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
become more centralised. The average main effect of centralisation cannot be
meaningfully explained in the presence of an interaction term, and we can only say
that our sample exhibited, on average, a beneﬁcial inﬂuence (negative coefﬁcient)
of centralisation that deteriorates with increasing complexity. In the “unlearning”
subgroup, neither the interaction nor the main effect was signiﬁcant for cen-
tralisation.
In the matter of BSA, the positive learning group exhibited both a signiﬁcant main
effect and interactioneffect betweencomplexity and BSA,supporting H3and H4c on
learning rates. On average, the effect of BSA is beneﬁcial (negative coefﬁcient), and
this effect signiﬁcantly increases when the product becomes more complex. The
unlearning group showed contrasting results: there was no signiﬁcant interaction
effect with complexity, but the coefﬁcient of the main effect is signiﬁcantly positive
in sign, i.e., the more BSA, the more the focal project team unlearns, independently
of complexity. Table 5 shows a summary of empirical results.
Discussion
Based on previous research we were expecting to see an overall positive learning
rate of about 80% (Raccoon, 1996), but overall, in our sample there was practically
no learning. Only when we split the sample into subgroups, 20% of the projects
displayed the expected average 78% positive learning, while the remainder of the
sample showed negative learning rates, or “unlearning”. The existence of software
development teams that “unlearn” has been previously documented (Lyytinen and
Robey, 1999), but based on few, albeit resounding cases of business applications
and not on a broader sample of varied products. We do not know if the proportions
observed in this study are generalisable to proprietary software development, but
these results raise increased awareness of the problem of unlearning in software
development and should spur further inquiry, especially because the consequences
Table 5. Summary of hypotheses.
Subgroup
Hyp.
Description
Learning
Unlearning
H1
Higher density –> less learning
Signiﬁcant
Signiﬁcant
H2
Higher centralisation –> less learning
Signiﬁcant
Not signiﬁcant
H3
Higher BSA –> more learning
Signiﬁcant
Signiﬁcant in opposite
direction
H4a
Complexity interacts with density
Not signiﬁcant
Not signiﬁcant
H4b
Complexity interacts with centralisation
Signiﬁcant
Not signiﬁcant
H4c
Complexity interacts with BSA
Signiﬁcant
Not signiﬁcant
A Cognitive Load View and Empirical Test
1650014-19
by Kyubin Yun on 05/31/26. Re use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
of unlearning in new product development in general are still not well understood
(Akgün et al., 2006). Perhaps as important as ﬁnding how software development
teams learn, is ﬁnding how many project teams embark in a trajectory of constant
performance deterioration. Given that the hypotheses derived in this paper seemed
to apply nicely to the positive learning subgroup, but not to the unlearning sub-
group, there is a possibility for different theoretical mechanisms that could explain
learning vis-a-vis unlearning in software development. Given that unlearning,
though detrimental to productivity, may present some beneﬁcial side effects such
as stimulating the capacity for improvisation (Akgün et al., 2007), future studies
should attempt to measure not only productivity but also other performance
metrics simultaneously.
In all cases, whether there is positive or negative learning, increased collabo-
ration density reduces learning rates, and the effect of density is independent of
product complexity. Cognitive load theory explains this observation in terms of
two main effects, redundancy of knowledge and split attention.
Practically, project managers would do well in limiting the number of team
members that work in any given ﬁle or module, as well as trying to pre-select those
collaborating team members in such a way that their expertise do not overlap
much. Another interesting practical application could be the ﬂagging of developers
who want to collaborate in a given ﬁle or module. Some projects ﬂag defects
(Colazo, 2014), classifying them into categories to allow developers to self-select
in accordance to the expertise needed to solve that particular kind of problem
(Dalle and den Besten, 2007).
Something similar could be done by, instead of ﬂagging bugs, projects could
publicly ﬂag developers’ skills, to warn project managers when several developers
with overlapping skills are already collaborating in a given module and prevent
additional knowledge redundancy. This would be particularly applicable in OSS,
where developers in principle, assign themselves to programming tasks rather than
being assigned by managers. Another technique to decrease the split attention
effect could be trying to minimise time dispersion of the development team
(Carmel and Espinosa, 2010).
For the learning subgroup, centralisation interacts with complexity, i.e., teams
of projects with more complex products learn less when they become more cen-
tralised. Cognitive load theory explains this impact as a result of: (1) the expertise
reversal effect, and (2) the additional extraneous load associated with not only
managing contents but also interfaces between different kinds of schemas
(Kalyuga et al., 2003). Furthermore, both effects logically become more important
when the product is more complex.
The coefﬁcient for the main effect of centralisation was negative while the one
for the interaction term was positive; indicating that at the average product
J. Colazo
1650014-20
Int. J. Innov. Mgt. 2016.20. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Kyubin Yun on 05/31/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
complexity found in the sample, an increase in centralisation makes the team learn
at a slower rate. The implication of this result is, project managers should try to
keep centralisation in check in relatively more complex products, or try to
decentralise the collaboration structure when products are very complex. For the
unlearning subgroup, neither interaction nor the main effect of centralisation was
signiﬁcant and this characteristic of the collaboration structure does not seem to be
related to their learning rates.
Complexity interacted with BSA only in the positive learning group, and the main
effect’s sign is consistent with a positive inﬂuence of BSA on learning rate. That is, at
least, on average and in the sample explored. The effect of BSA seems to be more
beneﬁcial when the product becomes more complex, supporting that outside
knowledge searching should be especially encouraged when developing complex
software. In the unlearning group, the interaction was not signiﬁcant but there is a
main effect of the opposite sign, and BSA seems to hinder learning. A possible
explanation could be that developers who work in focal projects that exhibit positive
learning, bring in information that promotes schema formation and in the end is
useful for speeding up productivity, while in projects that typically “unlearn”, the
boundary spanning developers may be directing their focus towards the external
projects and neglecting the focal one, which we cannot ascertain with the data at hand
but should be explored in more detail in future research using data related to
developers who work on a portfolio of projects simultaneously (Cooper et al., 2001).
While cognitive load theory seems to acceptably explain how collaboration
structure is related to learning rates in teams that indeed have positive learning
rates, it seems to have shortcomings in explaining why other teams unlearn.
Several of the structural associations described above, that are signiﬁcant in
learning teams, do not apply to unlearning teams, suggesting that mechanisms that
do not directly involve a structural inﬂuence are at play, warranting further re-
search into these teams, where performance deteriorates steadily over time.
Limitations and Future Research
Empirical work is never absent of limitations. First it should be noted that this
study relied solely on archival data and that the sample was non-probabilistic, and
refers only to relatively larger software development teams with six or more
developers. Although this limitation prevents generalising results to smaller teams,
in practice, bigger teams are associated with products that are likely to become
popular and have bigger user bases and be more relevant for business. Another
limitation is that the sample included only OSS projects, and results should be
replicated in a proprietary environment before freely generalising conclusions to
A Cognitive Load View and Empirical Test
1650014-21
by Kyubin Yun on 05/31/26. Re use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
commercial software development. Third, the sample used projects developed only
in a procedural programming language and given the importance of object-
oriented languages the results should be conﬁrmed in projects dealing with lan-
guages such as Java or Cþþ.
A logical new research question stemming from these results is: What makes
development teams either learn or unlearn? While our hypotheses were based on
the assumption that all teams have positive learning, the empirical data showed
that there are two clearly different subgroups of projects, and while it is important
to understand what makes learning more effective, it is also important to under-
stand why other teams degrade their performance over time, and the factors related
to their collaboration structures.
The study should be replicated in a proprietary software development. It would
be interesting to explore how the proportions between learning teams and
unlearning teams vary depending on contextual factors.
References
Abu, G, JW Cangussu and J Turi (2005). A quantitative learning model for software test
process. In Proc. 38th Annual Hawaii Int. Conf. System Sciences, 2005, HICSS’05,
p. 786. New York: IEEE.
Fig. 1. Research Model.
J. Colazo
1650014-22
Int. J. Innov. Mgt. 2016.20. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Kyubin Yun on 05/31/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
Ahuja, MK and KM Carley (1999). Network structure in virtual organizations. Organi-
zation Science, 10(6), 741–757.
Ahuja, MK, DF Galletta and KM Carley (2003). Individual centrality and performance in
virtual R&D groups: An empirical study. Management Science, 49(1), 21–38.
Akgün, AE, JC Byrne, GS Lynn and H Keskin (2007). New product development in
turbulent environments: Impact of improvisation and unlearning on new product
performance. Journal of Engineering and Technology Management, 24(3), 203–230.
Akgün, AE, GS Lynn and JC Byrne (2006). Antecedents and consequences of unlearning
in new product development teams. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 23
(1), 73–88.
Allen, TJ (1970). Communications networks in R&D laboratories. R&D Management,
1(1), 14–21.
Allen, TJ and S Cohen (1969). Information ﬂow in R&D labs. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 14(1), 12–19.
Argote, L (2012). Organizational Learning: Creating, Retaining and Transferring
Knowledge, Berlin: Springer.
Argote, L and D Epple (1990). Learning curves in manufacturing. Science, 247(4945),
920–924.
Argote, L, B McEvily and R Reagans (2003). Managing knowledge in organizations: An
integrative framework and review of emerging themes. Management Science, 49(4),
571–582.
Argote, L, SL Beckman and D Epple (1990). The persistence and transfer of learning in
industrial settings. Management Science, 36(2), 140–154.
Argote, L, CA Insko, N Yovetich and AA Romero (1995). Group learning curves: The
effects of turnover and task complexity on group performance. Journal of Applied
Social Psychology, 25(6), 512–529.
Bailey, SE, SS Godbole, CD Knutson and JL Krein (2013). A decade of Conway’s law: A
literature review from 2003–2012. In 3rd Int. Workshop on Replication in Empirical
Software Engineering Research (RESER), 2013, New York: IEEE.
Balkundi, P and DA Harrison (2006a). Ties, leaders and time in teams: Strong inference
about network structure’s effects on team viability and performance. Academy of
Management Journal, 49(1), 49–68.
Balkundi, P and M Kilduff (2006b). The ties that lead: A social network approach to
leadership. The Leadership Quarterly, 17(4), 419–439.
Basili, V and D Hutchens (1983). An empirical study of a syntactic complexity family.
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, SE 9(6), 664–672.
Boh, WF, SA Slaughter and JA Espinosa (2007). Learning from experience in software
development: A multilevel analysis. Management Science, 53(8), 1315–1331.
Brass, DJ, J Galaskiewicz, R Greve and W Tsai (2004). Taking stock of networks and
organizations: A multilevel perspective. Academy of Management Journal, 47(6),
795–817.
A Cognitive Load View and Empirical Test
1650014-23
by Kyubin Yun on 05/31/26. Re use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
Bunderson, JS and P Boumgarden (2009). Struture and learning in self-managed teams:
Why “bureaucratic” teams can be better learners. Organization Science, 21(3),
609–624.
Burton, SH, PM Bodily, RG Morris, CD Knutson and JL Krein (2011). Design team
perception of development team composition: Implications for Conway’s law. In 2nd
Int. Workshop on Replication in Empirical Software Engineering Research (RESER),
2011, pp. 52–60. New York: IEEE.
Carmel, E and JA Espinosa (2010). I’m Working While they’re Sleep: Time Zone Sepa-
ration Challenges and Solutions. USA: Nedder Stream Press.
Chandler, P and J Sweller (1991). Cognitive load theory and the format of instruction.
Cognition and Instruction, 8(4), 293–332.
Chang, M-H and JE Harrington, Jr. (2003). Multimarket competition, consumer search,
and the organizational structure of multiunit ﬁrms. Management Science, 49(4), 541–
552.
Chidambaran, L and LL Tung (2005). Is out of sight, out of mind? An empirical study of
social loaﬁng in technology-supported groups. Information Systems Research, 16(2),
149–168.
Clark, KB and T Fujimoto (1991). Product Development Performance. Boston: Harvard
Business School Press.
Colazo, JA (2010). Collaboration structure and performance in new software development:
Findings from the study of open source projects. International Journal of Innovation
Management, 14(5), 735–758.
Colazo, J (2014). Performance implications of stage-wise lead user participation in soft-
ware development problem solving. Decision Support Systems, 67, 100–108.
Colazo, JA and Y Fang (2009). Impact of license choice of open source software devel-
opment activity. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology, 60(5), 997–1011.
Colazo, JA and Y Fang (2010). Following the sun: Temporal dispersion and performance
in open source software project teams. Journal of the Association for Information
Systems, 11(11), 684–707.
Conway, ME (1968). How do committees invent. Datamation, 14(4), 28–31.
Cooper, G and J Sweller (1987). Effects of schema acquisition and rule automation on
mathematical problem-solving transfer. Journal of Educational Psychology, 79(4),
347.
Cooper, RG, EJ Kleinschmidt and SJ Edgett (2001). Portfolio Management for New
Products. Cambridge, MA: Perseus Books.
Crowston, K and J Howison (2003). The social structure of free and open source software
development. First Monday, 10(2).
Crowston, K, Q Li, K Wei, UY Eseryei and J Howison (2007). Self-organization of teams
for free/libre opensource software development. Information and Software Tech-
nology, 49(6), 564–575.
J. Colazo
1650014-24
Int. J. Innov. Mgt. 2016.20. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Kyubin Yun on 05/31/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
Dalle, J-M and M den Besten (2007). Different bug ﬁxing regimes? A preliminary case for
superbugs. In Open Source Development, Adoption and Innovation, Berlin: Springer,
pp. 247–252.
Darcy, DP, CF Kemerer, SA Slaughter and JE Tomayko (2005). The structural complexity
of software: An experimental test. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 31,
11.
Davern, M, T Shaft and D Te’eni (2012). Cognition matters: Enduring questions in
cognitive IS research. Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 13(4),
273–314.
de Santana, AM, FQ da Silva, RC de Miranda, AA Mascaro, TB Gouveia, CV Monteiro
and AL Santos (2013). Relationships between communication structure and software
architecture: An empirical investigation of the Conway’s law at the Federal Uni-
versity of Pernambuco. In 23rd Int. Workshop on Replication in Empirical Software
Engineering Research (RESER), 2013. New York: IEEE.
Dollinger, MJ (1984). Environmental boundary spanning and information processing
effects on organizational performance. The Academy of Management Journal, 27(2),
351–368.
Dwivedi, YK, D Wastell, S Laumer, HZ Henriksen, MD Myers, D Bunker, A Elbanna, M
Ravishankar and SC Srivastava (2014). Research on information systems failures and
successes: Status update and future directions. Information Systems Frontiers, 17, 1–
15.
Espinosa, JA and E Carmel (2003). The impact of time separation on coordination in
global software teams: A conceptual foundation. Software Process Improvement and
Practice, 8, 249–266.
Freeman, LC (1977). A set of measures of centrality based on betweenness. Sociometry,
40(1), 35–41.
Glass, RL (2005). IT failure rates: 70% or 10–15%? IEEE Software, May–June 2005,
112–114.
Hahn, J, JY Moon and C Zhang (2008). Emergence of new project teams from open source
software developer networks: Impact of prior collaboration ties. Information Systems
Research, 19(3), 369–391.
Hirschmann, WB (1964). Proﬁt from the learning-curve. Harvard Business Review, 42(1),
125–139.
Hobday, M (1998). Product complexity, innovation and industrial organisation. Research
Policy, 26(6), 689–710.
Janis, IL (1972). Victims of Groupthink. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Jones, C (1986). Programming Productivity. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Kalyuga, S, P Chandler and J Sweller (1998). Levels of expertise and instructional design.
Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, 40(1),
1–17.
Kalyuga, S, P Ayres, P Chandler and J Sweller (2003). The expertise reversal effect.
Educational Psychologist, 38(1), 23–31.
A Cognitive Load View and Empirical Test
1650014-25
by Kyubin Yun on 05/31/26. Re use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
Krackhardt, D (1992). The strength of strong ties: The importance of philos in organi-
zations. Networks and organizations: Structure, Form, and Action, 216, 239.
Krishnamurthy, S (2002). Cave or community? An empirical examination of 100 mature
open source projects. First Monday, 7(16).
Kwan, I, M Cataldo and D Damian (2012). Conway’s law revisited: The evidence for a
task-based perspective. IEEE Software, 29(1), 90–93.
Leonard-Barton, D (1992). Core capabilities and core rigidities: A paradox in managing
new product development. Strategic Management Journal, 13 (Special Issue:
Strategy Process: Managing Corporate Self-Renewal), 111–125.
Levina, N (2005). Collaborating on multiparty information systems development projects:
A collective reﬂection-in-action view. Information Systems Research, 16(2), 109–
130.
Levitt, B and JG March (1988). Organizational learning. Annual Review of Sociology, 14
(8), 319–340.
Lyytinen, K and D Robey (1999). Learning failure in information systems development.
Information Systems Journal, 9(2), 85–101.
Mallick, DN and RG Schroeder (2005). An integrated framework for measuring product
development performance in high technology industries. Production and Operations
Management, 14(2), 142.
McCabe, T (1976). A software complexity measure. IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering, SE 2(4), 308–320.
McDermott, CM (1999). Managing radical product development in large manufacturing
ﬁrms: A longitudinal study. Journal of Operations Management, 17(6), 631–644.
Menon, T and J Pfeffer (2003). Valuing internal vs. external knowledge: Explaining the
preference for outsiders. Management Science, 49(4), 497–513.
Miller, GA (1953). What is information measurement? American Psychologist, 8(1), 3.
Miller, GA (1956a). Human memory and the storage of information. IRE Transactions on
Information Theory, 2(3), 129–137.
Miller, GA (1956b). The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some limits on our
capacity for processing information. Psychological review, 63(2), 81.
Miller, GA and JA Selfridge (1950). Verbal context and the recall of meaningful material.
The American Journal of Psychology, 176–185.
Mockus, A, RT Fielding and J Herbsleb (2002). Two case studies of open source software
development: Apache and Mozilla. ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and
Methodology, 11(3), 309–346.
Mohr, LB (1982). Explaining Organizational Behavior. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass
Molm, LD (1994). Dependence and risk: Transforming and structure of social research.
Social Psychology Quarterly, 57(3), 163–176.
Nadler, J, L Thompson and LV Boven (2003). Learning negotiation skills: Four models of
knowledge creation and transfer. Management Science, 49(4), 529–540.
Oh, H, MH Chung and G Labianca (2004). Group social capital and group effectiveness:
The role of informal socializing ties. Academy of Management Journal, 47(6), 860–
875.
J. Colazo
1650014-26
Int. J. Innov. Mgt. 2016.20. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Kyubin Yun on 05/31/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
Olson, GM and JS Olson (2000). Distance matters. Human-Computer Interaction, 15(2),
139–178.
Paas, F, A Renkl and J Sweller (2004). Cognitive load theory: Instructional implications of
the interaction between information structures and cognitive architecture. Instruc-
tional science, 32(1), 1–8.
Pendharkar, PC and GH Subramanian (2007). An empirical study of ICASE learning
curves and probability bounds for software development effort. European Journal of
Operational Research, 183(3), 1086–1096.
R Development Team, The R Project for Statistical Computing: R V 3.1.1.2014.
Raccoon, L (1996). A learning curve primer for software engineers. ACM SIGSOFT
Software Engineering Notes, 21(1), 77–86.
Reagans, R and EW Zuckerman (2001). Networks, diversity and productivity: The social
capital of corporate R&D teams. Organization Science, 12(4), 502–517.
Reagans, R, L Argote and D Brooks (2005). Individual experience and experience
working together: Predicting learning rates from knowing who knows what and
knowing how to work together. Management Science, 51(6), 869–891.
Robinson, P (2001). Task complexity, task difﬁculty, and task production: Exploring
interactions in a componential framework. Applied Linguistics, 22(1), 27–57.
Rulke, DL and J Galaskiewicz (2000). Distribution of knowledge, group network struc-
ture, and group performance. Management Science, 46(5), 612–625.
Ruthen, R (1993). Adapting to complexity. Scientiﬁc American, 268(1), 130–140.
Sallenave, J-P (1985). The uses and abuses of experience curves. Long Range Planning,
18(1), 64–72.
Singh, PV, Y Tan and N Young (2011). A hidden Markov model of developer learning
dynamics in open source software projects. Information Systems Research, 22(4),
790–807.
Song, J, P Almeida and G Wu (2003). Learning-by-hiring: When is mobility more likely to
facilitate interﬁrm knowledge transfer? Management Science, 49(4), 351–365.
Stepanek, G (2011). Programming Secrets: Why Software Projects Fail. New York:
Apress.
Sweller, J (1988). Cognitive load during problem solving: Effects on learning. Cognitive
Science, 12(2), 257–285.
Sweller, J (1994). Cognitive load theory, learning difﬁculty, and instructional design.
Learning and instruction, 4(4), 295–312.
Sweller, J, PA Kirschner and RE Clark (2007). Why minimally guided teaching techniques
do not work: A reply to commentaries. Educational Psychologist, 42(2), 115–121.
Sweller, J, JJ Van Merrienboer and FG Paas (1998). Cognitive architecture and instruc-
tional design. Educational Psychology Review, 10(3), 251–296.
Teigland, R and MM Wasko (2003). Integrating knowledge through information trading:
Examining the relationship between boundary spanning communication and indi-
vidual performance. Decision Sciences, 34(2), 261–286.
Uzzi, B and R Lancaster (2003). Relational embeddedness and learning: The case of bank
loan managers and their clients. Management Science, 49(4), 383–399.
A Cognitive Load View and Empirical Test
1650014-27
by Kyubin Yun on 05/31/26. Re use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

--- PAGE BREAK ---
Van Merrienboer, JJ and J Sweller (2005). Cognitive load theory and complex learning:
Recent developments and future directions. Educational Psychology Review, 17(2),
147–177.
Wasserman, S and K Faust (1994). Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Wright, TP (1936). Factors affecting the cost of airplanes. Journal of Aeronautical
Sciences, 3(4), 122–128.
Yelle, LE (1979). The learning curve: Historical review and comprehensive survey.
Decision Sciences, 10(2), 302–328.
Zander, U and B Kogut (1995). Knowledge and the speed of the transfer and imitation of
organizational capabilities: An empirical test. Organization Science, 6(1), 76–92.
Zorgios, Y, O Vlismas and G Venieris (2009). The SECI model and the learning curve
phenomenon. In European Conference on Intellectual Capital, Academic Con-
ferences & Publishing International Ltd., Haarlem, The Netherlands, 589–599.
J. Colazo
1650014-28
Int. J. Innov. Mgt. 2016.20. Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by Kyubin Yun on 05/31/26. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.
