Project Leadership and Society 3 (2022) 100066
Available online 1 November 2022
2666-7215/┬® 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/ ).Empirical Research Paper 
Practices of strategic alignment in and between innovation 
project portfolios 
Miia Martinsuo*, Roosa Anttila 
Tampere University, Department of Industrial Engineering and Management, Finland   
ARTICLE INFO  
Keywords: 
Project portfolio 
Strategy 
Strategic alignment 
Multiple portfolios 
Practices ABSTRACT  
Strategic alignment of project portfolios concerns the match between projects in the portfolio and the organi -
zation ŌĆÖs strategy. It is often considered either as a selection criterion when creating the project portfolio or as a 
performance indicator when assessing success. Organizations pursue optimal strategic alignment while retaining 
responsiveness to changes in the environment. The problem guiding this study is the need to understand how 
strategic alignment occurs in practice in the work of project portfolio management in the context of multiple 
project portfolios. We explore large firms ŌĆÖ practices of strategic alignment and cross-portfolio interplay in the 
innovation project portfolios of three industrial firms. The findings reveal social, mechanistic, and structural 
practices of portfolios ŌĆÖ strategic alignment and sharing, synergy creation, and boundary-spanning practices in 
cross-portfolio interplay. Strategic alignment is reported as a dynamic, continuous activity in the work of 
managers and personnel, with versatile practices that drive both efficiency and renewal.   
1.Introduction 
Firms want their innovation projects to produce outcomes that 
implement their strategy while at the same time promoting the renewal 
of the business. In project portfolio management (PPM), the strategic 
alignment (or fit) of the project portfolios and individual projects within 
them is considered a principle and assessment criterion guiding the se-
lection of projects (Archer and Ghasemzadeh, 1999 ; Cooper et al., 
1997a , 1997b ; Dye and Pennypacker, 1999 ; Englund and Graham, 
1999 ) as well as a project portfolio success criterion (Cooper et al., 1999 ; 
Jonas et al., 2013 ; Kock and Gem├╝nden, 2019 ; Kock et al., 2016 ; Kop-
mann et al., 2017 ). Large firms usually have multiple project portfolios 
designed for different purposes and strategies, and the organization of 
these project portfolios may follow the structural arrangements of the 
entire organization (Artto and Dietrich, 2004 ). This study concentrates 
on large firms ŌĆÖ innovation project portfolios and their strategic align -
ment and cross-portfolio interplay in multi-portfolio contexts. 
Innovation project portfolios are the collection of a firmŌĆÖs innovation 
projects included under the same management umbrella (Dye and 
Pennypacker, 1999 ). For example, a firm might decide to have separate 
innovation project portfolios for its product development, service 
development, technology development, and long-term research (Artto 
and Dietrich, 2004 ), or separate project portfolios might emerge based on different management styles (Loch, 2000 ). Alternatively, the firm 
might organize separate innovation project portfolios for each business 
unit or geographic area. In this study, strategic alignment in PPM is 
defined as ways of connecting or fitting the project portfolio and its 
projects with the firmŌĆÖs official strategy. Extant research dominantly 
treats this as the extent to which the projects (individually) or the 
portfolio (as a whole) fit with the strategy. In this study, we also 
acknowledge that project portfolios do not exist in isolation but are 
connected with other portfolios and activities in the firm as well as the 
external business environment, in line with Martinsuo and Geraldi 
(2020) . 
The previous research on project portfolios ŌĆÖ strategic alignment is 
limited in two primary ways. Firstly, its treatment is often very static; it 
is used as an episodic measure that is observed externally and momen -
tarily, but the research does not discuss how organizations develop and 
achieve it in practice. As described above, strategic alignment is 
frequently treated as an input (i.e., assessment criterion) into project 
selection or as an outcome (i.e., success criterion) of doing the right 
projects. Yet, organizations need to do some aligning in practice, too, 
when managing the project portfolio, and this dynamic, proactive aspect 
of strategic alignment is weakly understood. Consequently, we adopt the 
practice-centric view of portfolios ŌĆÖ strategic alignment following some 
previous influential portfolio studies (Blichfeldt and Eskerod, 2008 ; 
*Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: miia.martinsuo@tuni.fi (M. Martinsuo).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Project Leadership and Society 
u{’┐Į~zkw! s{yo|kr o>!├É├É├É1’┐Įmt ozmont~om’┐Į1m{ y2u{’┐Į~zk w2|~{uom’┐Į/wok no~’┐Įst|/kzn /’┐Į{mto’┐Į├×!
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plas.2022.100066 
Received 28 October 2022; Accepted 30 October 2022   Project Leadership and Society 3 (2022) 100066
2Christiansen and Varnes, 2008; Clegg et al., 2018; Jerbrant and Karrbom 
Gustavsson, 2013; Martinsuo, 2013). 
Secondly, strategic alignment is often considered merely for a specific 
project portfolio, as if it represents all portfolios in the firm and as if there 
is only one strategy with which the projects and portfolio should be 
aligned. However, medium-sized and large firms are likely to have 
multiple different project portfolios, each with their own specific strat-
egy (or multiple strategies) and related selection and success criteria. 
Previous research has rarely considered the interplay and relations be-
tween different project portfolios in the firm when pursuing strategic 
alignment, but the need for context awareness has been explicated in 
conceptual portfolio research (see Martinsuo, 2013; Martinsuo and 
Geraldi, 2020). Our research is motivated by the need for a more 
context-sensitive treatment of strategic alignment of innovation project 
portfolios, especially acknowledging cross-portfolio linkages. 
The purpose of this study is to explore firmsŌĆÖ practices of strategic 
alignment and cross-portfolio interplay in innovation project portfolios. 
The goal is to increase the knowledge on how strategic alignment hap-
pens in practice in the work of personnel involved in PPM in the multi- 
portfolio contexts of large firms. The research focuses on two main 
questions: 1) How, through what kinds of practices, do firms implement 
strategic alignment in their project portfolios? and 2) How do firms consider 
cross-portfolio linkages when implementing strategic alignment in their 
project portfolios? The study is delimited to innovation project portfolios 
of large business-to-business firms that have multiple portfolios, while 
smaller firms and other types of project portfolios are purposely 
excluded. The chosen firms are innovation-oriented in their strategies 
but represent conventional industrial manufacturing, which may limit 
the transferability of the findings. We purposely excluded the consid -
eration of formal structural arrangements of project portfolios as they 
tend to be pre-defined by top management instead of at the portfolio 
level. 
Next, we summarize previous research on how strategic alignment 
has been considered both for selecting projects for inclusion in the 
project portfolio and assessing project portfolio success. Also, we 
introduce how the multi-portfolio context of large firms has been dis-
cussed in previous research and how it portrays strategic alignment to 
highlight the potential for further research. We then introduce the 
qualitative multiple-case study conducted with three large firms that 
have multiple innovation project portfolios. Data collection was done 
primarily through key informant interviews and the consequent the-
matic data analysis approach. Social, mechanistic, and structural prac-
tices are reported as key mechanisms of strategic alignment in project 
portfolios. The interplay between multiple project portfolios is handled 
through sharing, synergy creation, and boundary-spanning practices. 
We discuss the continuity of strategic alignment practices of managers 
and personnel as key contributions, the possibilities for exploring the 
identified strategic alignment practices as topics of future research, and 
the contextuality of strategic alignment in the organizational cultures 
and subcultures of firms. 
2.Literature review 
2.1. Aligning projects with strategy 
Companies organize their innovation activities into portfolios of 
projects to ensure that the projects fulfill the strategic objectives of the 
firm. Strategic alignment, strategic fit, or strategy implementation is 
considered one of the key goals of portfolio management. Other goals 
include value maximization and portfolio balance (Cooper et al., 1997a, 
1997b), average project or product success, and exploitation of syn-
ergies (Jonas et al., 2013; Kock and Gem├╝nden, 2019; Kock et al., 2016; 
Kopmann et al., 2017). The expectation of alignment may deal with any 
aspects of strategy, ranging from its ideological standpoint and market 
positioning to resources, competences, benefits, and risks. Often, the 
general assumption is that strategic alignment should be considered early on, when projects are being proposed, assessed, prioritized, and 
consequently selected for the portfolio (Archer and Ghasemzadeh, 1999; 
Cooper et al., 1997a, 1997b; Dye and Pennypacker, 1999; Englund and 
Graham, 1999). In this way, projects are designed, prioritized, strate -
gically selected, and considered as vehicles or mechanisms of strategy 
implementation. 
For single projects to be aligned with strategy, they need to be 
planned in such a manner that the goals, benefits, and ways of operating 
are defined with the strategy in mind (Englund and Graham, 1999). In 
the context of innovations, this causes a dilemma. On the one hand, 
innovations are expected to bring renewal to the firm and potentially 
pave the way for enabling emergent strategies in PPM (Kopmann et al., 
2017; Loch, 2000). On the other hand, if renewal intentions are built 
into a strategy that guides innovations, then such a strategy may directly 
guide projectsŌĆÖ goal setting and planning (Cooper et al., 1997a; Englund 
and Graham, 1999). Thereby, innovation project portfolios may serve 
both renewal and strategy implementation simultaneously (Kopmann 
et al., 2017), and the different project portfolios in a firm may be used to 
follow strategies that emphasize incremental versus radical innovation 
pursuits differently (Loch, 2000). 
At the individual project level, the dilemma between strategy 
renewal and implementation may be resolved when each project has its 
own strategy that may or may not obey the parent organization. Project 
strategy specifies the direction of the project and ways in which its 
success is assessed (Artto et al., 2008; Artto et al., 2008); it includes the 
perspective, position, and guidelines on what is done in a project and 
how in order to achieve the best value from the project and, thereby, 
beat competitors (Patanakul and Shenhar, 2012). Project strategies vary 
depending on the complexity of the stakeholder setting and autonomy 
that the project can adopt in its environment (Artto et al., 2008). Ac-
cording to Artto et al. (2008), innovation projects within one parent 
organization can either serve the strategy of the organization obediently 
or purposely contradict such a strategy in pursuit of radical renewal. 
When a firm has multiple different project portfolios, they and their 
specific projects can be designed with different strategies in mind. 
At the level of single projects, strategic alignment is often considered 
only in terms of an assessment and selection criterion at the start of the 
project. However, a projectŌĆÖs strategic alignment is expected to continue 
through its implementation so that its outcomes eventually fulfill the 
strategic goals set for the project and the firm. Project success is 
increasingly considered from broader business and customer perspec -
tives (Atkinson, 1999; Shenhar et al., 1997, 2001) and concerning 
strategic outcomes. As many kinds of changes may occur during a 
project (Dvir and Lechler, 2004; Steffens et al., 2007), there is a need to 
consider strategy alignment and re-alignment later on in the project and 
during project termination (Unger et al., 2012). Particularly in uncertain 
environments surrounding innovations, there is a need to manage un-
certainties as part of the projects and take them into account in man-
aging project portfolios (Martinsuo et al., 2014; Petit and Hobbs, 2010). 
2.2. Strategic alignment or fit of the project portfolio 
In PPM research, strategic alignment (i.e., fit or implementation) is 
considered among the central criteria for assessing the success of the 
project portfolio (Jonas et al., 2013; Kester et al., 2014; Kock and 
Gem├╝nden, 2019; Kock et al., 2016; McNally et al., 2013) or its man-
agement (Martinsuo and Lehtonen, 2007; Spieth and Lerch, 2014). It is 
often considered in terms of projects in the portfolio fitting or imple -
menting the official strategy and serving the future pursuits of the or-
ganization. Previously, there has been a tendency to include strategic 
alignment or fit as a first-order construct as part of a more compre -
hensive second-order measure of project portfolio success or PPM suc-
cess (Jonas et al., 2013; Kock and Gem├╝nden, 2019; Kock et al., 2016; 
Spieth and Lerch, 2014). However, some authors have shown that some 
antecedents of portfolio success yield different results for different 
first-order constructs of portfolio success (Kock and Gem├╝nden, 2019; M. Martinsuo and R. Anttila                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Project Leadership and Society 3 (2022) 100066
3McNally et al., 2013 ). 
Quantitative project portfolio success studies tend to seek manage -
rial factors that would explain project portfolio success for instance in 
the criterion of strategic alignment. However, Martinsuo & Geraldi 
(2020) offered a critique for assessing strategic alignment as a measure 
of portfolio success when the nature of the strategy is not specified. They 
pointed out that organizations have different strategies, and the stra-
tegic alignment or fit of portfolios in one organization cannot be directly 
compared with that of another organization. For example, the strategic 
alignment for differentiation strategies is not the same as the strategic 
alignment for cost efficiency or customer intimacy strategies (Martinsuo 
and Geraldi, 2020 ). In a similar way, strategic alignment might differ for 
different time intervals and different project portfolios. Portfolios of 
radical innovation projects would likely differ from portfolios of incre -
mental projects in how strategic alignment is defined (Loch, 2000 ). 
Likewise, technology development project portfolios would differ from 
service development project portfolios. In many research studies, port-
folio managers ŌĆÖ or directors ŌĆÖ assessment of and satisfaction with stra-
tegic alignment is used as a proxy, likely because it is challenging to 
acknowledge exactly what strategies the portfolios are aligned with and 
make them otherwise comparable. 
In the pursuit of better portfolio success, plenty of research has 
considered the practices through which organizations attempt to pro-
mote portfolio success, but only a few studies have concentrated on 
factors that specifically explain or contribute to strategic alignment. 
Unger, Kock, et al. (2012) found that senior managers ŌĆÖ involvement and 
project termination quality were positively associated with portfolio 
strategic fit. Beringer et al. (2013) reported that the level of certain se-
nior managers ŌĆÖ involvement and role clarity had interaction effects on 
portfolio strategic fit. McNally et al. (2013) concentrated on 
decision-making effectiveness and showed that portfolio mindset, focus, 
and agility were antecedents of strategic alignment (as well as other 
portfolio success criteria). In the study by Kock and Gem├╝nden (2019) , 
proactive and reactive lineage of projects were both associated with 
strategic fit, but their effects varied for the other first-level measures of 
portfolio success. Such studies clearly draw attention to managers ŌĆÖ 
actions. 
The outcome-centric view of strategic alignment, however, does not 
offer a clear view on how such aligning occurs in practice, i.e., what 
managers actually do when they strategically align the project portfolios. 
While some conceptual studies clearly encourage exploring managers ŌĆÖ 
and personnel ŌĆÖs actions in managing project portfolios (Clegg et al., 
2018 ; Martinsuo, 2013 ), practice-centric studies tend to concentrate on 
how managers deviate from established norms, rules, and routines 
(Blichfeldt and Eskerod, 2008 ; Christiansen and Varnes, 2008 ; Jerbrant 
and Karrbom Gustavsson, 2013 ). If innovation project portfolios are 
established to implement renewal-oriented strategies, we need to un-
derstand how strategic alignment occurs in the practices of managers 
and personnel. 
2.3. Strategic alignment between project portfolios 
Particularly in large firms, it is likely that innovation projects are 
organized into not just one but several different project portfolios. In 
organizations, this multi-portfolio issue is commonly treated as a 
structural solution whereby portfolios are defined by business areas or 
organizational units, geographic areas, or innovation types (Artto and 
Dietrich, 2004 ; Loch, 2000 ), or they could be considered ŌĆ£project 
buckets ŌĆØ to which resources and money are allocated based on strategic 
priorities (Cooper et al., 1997b ). However, PPM studies are often carried 
out concerning a specific project portfolio only, neglecting the possible 
multi-portfolio circumstances in the organization. 
The existence of and relations between different project portfolios 
are rarely discussed in the literature, but multi-portfolio interplay could 
be very challenging and influential with regard to strategic alignment. 
The context connections of project portfolios may be influential and require attention in PPM (Engwall, 2003 ; Martinsuo, 2013 ; Martinsuo 
and Geraldi, 2020 ). Multiple portfolios in an organization may compete 
for and share some of the same resources as projects do (Engwall and 
Jerbrant, 2003 ; Elonen and Artto, 2003 ; Fricke and Shenhar, 2000 ). 
They might share the same project management office as a source of 
support coordination, tools, and guidelines as well as the guidance and 
engagement of senior management (Beringer et al., 2013 ; Unger et al., 
2012 ). Organizations may occasionally observe that the same or over-
lapping tasks are done in multiple project portfolios (Elonen and Artto, 
2003 ) or that the portfolios could benefit from each other by sharing 
information and learning from each other to reach synergy (Kock and 
Gem├╝nden, 2019 ). There is increasing understanding that portfolios are 
connected temporally, with current projects building on past projects ŌĆÖ 
lineage (Maniak and Midler, 2014 ; Midler, 2013 ), learning from each 
other, and creating a lineage for the future in the form of roadmaps 
(Kock and Gem├╝nden, 2019 ). These examples indicate that the interplay 
between project portfolios is strategic, relevant, and may have signifi -
cant consequences both at the portfolio and organizational levels, but 
research has yet to purposively tackle cross-portfolio linkages. 
In our view, strategic alignment is not only something that occurs 
between a certain project portfolio and the strategy it implements but 
also something that requires cross-portfolio interplay when multiple 
project portfolios exist in parallel. Fig. 1 summarizes three aspects of 
strategic alignment of project portfolios as covered in previous research. 
The focus of this paper is on the strategic alignment of the project 
portfolio as a whole (marked with 2 in Fig. 1) and in terms of the cross- 
portfolio interplay (marked with 3 in Fig. 1). The attention is in practice, 
i.e., what managers actually do when they align the innovation project 
portfolio strategically. 
3.Methods 
3.1. Research design and cases 
This study was carried out using a qualitative multiple-case study 
with three firms that implemented their innovations through projects. 
We purposely selected large firms that had at least two innovation 
project portfolios and prioritized innovation in their strategies. One firm 
represented the forest industry, and two firms represented the me-
chanical engineering industry. All firms operated internationally in 
business-to-business markets, and their headquarters were located in the 
same country. Table 1 summarizes the background information of the 
companies and interviewees. 
The focus is on the PPM of innovations in these firms, and the case 
(unit of analysis) is each firmŌĆÖs approach for handling strategic align -
ment as part of PPM. Firm A divided its innovation activities into two 
main innovation project portfolios according to product and service 
Fig. 1.Summary of strategic alignment in and across project portfolios.  M. Martinsuo and R. Anttila                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Project Leadership and Society 3 (2022) 100066
4offerings. Firm B organized its product and service development within 
business units, each of which had its own innovation project portfolio 
containing both incremental and radical development. Firm C had 
separate product development and process development project port-
folios for business areas and guided such activities through strategic 
themes such as sustainable development and automatization. 
3.2. Data collection 
Data were collected through semi-structured interviews with key 
informants involved in managing the innovation project portfolios. A 
contact person in charge of innovation activities in the firm helped 
identify interviewees to ensure that they were key persons involved in 
steering and managing an innovation portfolio and/or leading the 
innovation activities in a business unit. All interviewees therefore had 
first-hand knowledge of one or more innovation portfolios. Within each 
firm, three to five such persons were interviewed to gain a compre -
hensive picture and triangulate the data. Table 1 summarizes the in-
terviews. There were 12 interviewees total (one interview included two 
persons), and the interviews lasted 50ŌĆō96 min (average 60 min). 
The interview outline included questions concerning the company ŌĆÖs 
and interviewee ŌĆÖs background, the key stakeholders involved with 
innovation project portfolios, their responsibilities and tasks, how the 
project portfolios were organized, how uncertainties in the project 
portfolios were managed, connections and interfaces between the proj-
ect portfolios, and linkages between the portfolios and strategy. The 
main topics were supplemented with more detailed questions as needed. 
This paper concentrates on the strategy connections and cross-portfolio 
interfaces. The second author conducted all interviews using the inter-
view outline, but the order and coverage of the questions varied across 
the interviews depending on the interviewees ŌĆÖ spontaneous coverage of 
the relevant issues. The interviews were recorded and transcribed for the 
purposes of analysis. Company-specific public documentation such as 
websites were used as secondary data, particularly to understand the 
business contexts and industries. 
3.3. Data analysis 
The data analysis proceeded in three main phases. First, the inter-
view transcripts were read through, and a tentative analysis was con-
ducted using an open coding approach to identify possible repeating 
codes on strategic alignment at the level of the portfolio, portfolio 
connections, and stakeholder interactions with the portfolio. Case- 
specific results from these analyses were drafted and reported back to 
the companies to verify the tentative findings and potentially gain 
feedback and improvement suggestions from the company personnel. 
Second, based on the positive feedback from the companies, an 
additional reading of the interview data, and the authors ŌĆÖ creative dis-
cussion, we developed more structured and robust analysis frameworks 
to serve the recurring patterns in the interview data. One coding 
framework concerned the strategic alignment in the project portfolios (covering social, mechanistic, and structural practices; see Table 2). The 
other coding framework examined strategic alignment across multiple 
project portfolios (covering sharing, synergy creation, and boundary- 
spanning practices; see Table 3). Each case was systematically coded 
according to these themes, and cross-tabulation was used to summarize 
the extent to which the issues were discussed in the interviews. As 
background information, we explored each firmŌĆÖs strategies and 
governance of the innovation project portfolios. 
Third, we tracked the similarities and differences between the target 
companies ŌĆÖ strategic alignment of project portfolios to understand the 
cases both separately and together. We went back to detailed interview 
transcripts to discover illustrative quotes and examples for the findings. 
This final phase is reported through a thematic storyline that spans 
across the cases. Lastly, we reflected on the key findings in the literature 
to discover and discuss the novel findings. 
4.Results 
4.1. Strategies guiding innovation project portfolios 
The studied firms had established strategies to guide innovation 
activities with the intent of securing the firms ŌĆÖ future existence by 
delivering the right types of innovations at the right time. The firms 
differed in the terminology regarding their strategy ŌĆötechnology, 
product development, and business unit strategies ŌĆöbut all three had the 
same intent of specifying and directing future innovations. For example, Table 1 
Background information on the studied firms.   
Firm A Firm B Firm C 
Industry Forest industry Mechanical engineering Automation for mechanical engineering 
Offering Renewable wood-based materials Mobile work machines and related services Automation solutions and related services 
for mobile machines 
Turnover (MŌé¼) F1800 F3000 F1500 
Personnel F2000 F16,000 F10,000 
Nr. of innovation project 
portfolios 2 F3 F3 
Nr. of interviews 
(interviewees) 3 (4) 5 (5) 3 (3) 
Job profiles of 
interviewees Vice president of Research and development, 
process owner, project manager Vice president of technology, process owner, technology 
director, service manager, innovation manager Director of product management, 
portfolio manager, product manager  
Table 2 
Practices used for strategic alignment expressed in the interviews.  
Category Practices A 
(n 
┬ł
4) B 
(n 
┬ł
5) C 
(n 
┬ł
3) Sum 
(N ┬ł
12) 
Social 
practices Interacting and 
communicating strategically 3 1 2 6 
Involving and engaging 
stakeholders 3 2  5 
Cooperating in defining the 
strategy  1 1 2 
Mechanistic 
practices Using the PPM system 4 1 1 6 
Using key performance 
indicators and measures  1 1 2 
Visualizing portfolio status on 
a dashboard (linked to project 
control)   1 1 
Structural 
practices Clarifying the value chain for 
innovations  2  2 
Considering the roadmap of 
projects over time (to prepare 
for long-term future)  1  1 
Reducing or avoiding the 
hierarchical layering of 
innovation planning and 
reporting  1  1  M. Martinsuo and R. Anttila                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Project Leadership and Society 3 (2022) 100066
5in Firm C, the importance of strategy with regard to projects was 
emphasized in business units ŌĆÖ activities: ŌĆ£There is no separate innova -
tion strategy, but it is covered as part of the technology unitŌĆÖs business 
strategy ŌĆō we can clearly see that innovation is a focus area and an issue 
visible in the strategy ŌĆØ (H12). Irrespective of the terms used, the inno-
vation strategies contained priorities regarding customer needs, creation 
of added value, differentiation, technological leadership, and competi -
tive means, thereby guiding the direction of innovation activities. 
The strategies in all three firms featured goal orientation, improve -
ment orientation, and creation of functional solutions to customer 
needs. The firms differed slightly in the emphases communicated in the 
strategies: Firm A included innovations as part of its corporate strategy 
and management group decision making, Firm B developed separate 
innovation strategies for each business area, and Firm C emphasized 
corporate-level technological capabilities as part of its innovation 
strategy. In all firms, the focus was on steering innovation activities 
holistically as entire portfolios and not just single projects. 
The interviewees had somewhat different experiences concerning 
how the corporate strategy was reflected in innovation strategies and 
detailed in innovation projects and activities, even within the same firm. 
Some interviewees saw a very evident linkage between the different 
strategies and innovation projects, for example, in terms of how 
customer needs were acknowledged in the strategy and reflected in 
innovation projects. Similarly, the strategic priority of environmentally 
friendly solutions appeared as a clear continuum from strategies to 
projects. In Firm B, however, the division into multiple different busi-
ness unit strategies caused versatile interpretations of innovation in the 
strategies: ŌĆ£The product strategy is quite siloed and is not that well- 
visible in innovation activities ŌĆØ (H8). Such experiences varied, though, 
and the silo experience was not necessarily shared across the business 
units. 
Interviewees did not spontaneously express how the innovation 
project portfolios influenced the firms ŌĆÖ strategies. Because the directors 
and managers themselves were involved in strategic analysis and plan-
ning, they as individuals had an influence on the strategies. Also, some 
interviewees expressed that the strategies were to some extent vague 
and general and that they required individuals ŌĆÖ interpretation when 
converted to project portfolios. Therefore, the interpretation process 
from strategy to projects required creativity and innovativeness. For 
example, one interviewee in Firm A explained this as follows: ŌĆ£The 
mission given in the strategy is not always very accurate; of course, it never goes directly to the project level ŌĆ” so we have to translate the 
strategic task somehow into project portfolio goals and project goals to 
specify more concrete accomplishments and performances. ŌĆØ In-
terviewees in Firm C emphasized the multiple levels of the organization 
and cooperation in and between business units in designing the strate -
gies. The overarching strategies required portfolio and project-level 
interpretation among the people involved in those portfolios, and this 
collaborative interpretation process yielded both the visions of desired 
states in a few years ŌĆÖ time and the steps toward such visions. 
4.2. Practices for strategic alignment of project portfolios 
The analysis revealed three main categories of practices for strategic 
alignment of project portfolios: social, mechanistic, and structural. The 
social practices required individuals ŌĆÖ interaction at and between the 
different levels of the organization and between the firm and other 
stakeholders. The mechanistic practices dealt with systems, tools, and 
measures harnessed for enabling and enforcing strategic alignment of 
portfolios. The structural practices dealt with how the organization and 
its projects and other activities were organized to enable strategic 
alignment. The firms differed to some extent in how the practices were 
used. Strategic alignment was most visible in the practices of Firm A, 
which had systematized the strategic alignment of project portfolios 
very recently. Firm B interviewees mentioned many different practices 
for strategic alignment but also identified areas of improvement in how 
strategic alignment could be achieved. Firm C interviewees emphasized 
that innovation activities were already strategically well-aligned and 
that alignment-related routines were in regular use. Table 2 summarizes 
the practices identified and the extent to which they were discussed by 
different interviewees. 
The interviewees most frequently discussed the social practices of 
communicating the strategy, involving stakeholders, and cooperating to 
define the strategy. Firm A interviewees discussed how the management 
led a very concentrated approach to strategy communication and 
required strategy-related justifications for proposing projects. This was 
also reflected in strategy-related assessments of projects both before 
their selection and during implementation. This shift to strategy- 
oriented communication in innovation PPM was recent and had 
improved personnel ŌĆÖs awareness of aligning projects with strategy and 
the future orientation of innovation projects: ŌĆ£Earlier, our communica -
tion was on a quite different level ŌĆ” now managers constantly repeat in 
their talk which strategy we follow and what are the largest and most 
significant projects that are related to [that] strategy ŌĆØ (H3). The cen-
trality of strategy communication was also visible when cooperating 
with external stakeholders. 
Firms B and C had somewhat more versatile experiences of the social 
practices of strategic alignment and less emphasis on communicating 
innovation strategies. Interviewees in Firm B discussed regular strategy 
meetings and cooperation between project portfolio actors and with 
other stakeholders to build awareness of strategic priorities in in-
novations. Firm C interviewees discussed the use of documented product 
roadmaps and plans as a means of involving personnel and stakeholders 
in planning, communicating, and implementing innovation strategies in 
projects. This, in a way, combined the use of mechanistic and social 
practices. 
All the firms had some kind of PPM information system in place, 
which represents an example of mechanistic practices used for strategic 
alignment. Firm A had recently implemented a new management system 
for leading and steering the project portfolio, which was a major topic of 
discussion in their interviews. The system enabled steering the projects 
in the portfolio toward strategic goals systematically and effectively and 
identifying dependencies and synergies between projects. Particularly 
when the number of projects increased, the system was considered a 
useful way to help decision makers comprehend the complex portfolio 
entity. 
In Firms B and C, such systems, dashboards, and performance Table 3 
Practices for strategic alignment in cross-portfolio interplay expressed in the 
interviews.  
Category Practices A 
(n 
┬ł
4) B 
(n 
┬ł
5) C 
(n 
┬ł
3) Sum 
(N ┬ł
12) 
Practices of 
sharing Sharing of resources 4 3 3 10 
Sharing of (internal) 
information regularly 3 3 2 8 
Sharing of information and 
weak signals from external 
stakeholders 2  2 4 
Practices of 
synergy 
creation Using the same external 
partners (repeatedly) 3 3  6 
Using the same technologies 
and facilities  2 3 5 
Encouraging competition and 
openness on successful 
innovations between 
portfolios (but avoiding 
resource competition)   1 1 
Practices of 
boundary 
spanning Acknowledging the benefit of 
cross-portfolio interplay (or 
failure thereof)  2 1 3 
Using tools to depict cross- 
portfolio interfaces 1   1  M. Martinsuo and R. Anttila                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Project Leadership and Society 3 (2022) 100066
6measures were mentioned as useful in forming a complete picture of the 
portfolio status and monitoring single projects, but interviewees 
expressed them as possibilities not yet in use. For example, in Firm C, 
one interviewee felt that a more comprehensive PPM system could be 
useful in guiding and monitoring innovation activities ŌĆ£so we would not 
need man-made monthly reports, but we could just open the dashboard 
and see different scenariosŌĆØ (H12) of what the portfolio could offer and 
require in the future. Some interviewees, especially those in Firm B, felt 
that visualization, automatization of repeated functionalities, and of-
fering decision options in the tools could help not just in assessing 
strategic alignment and consequent monitoring and decision making but 
also in sharing information among stakeholders and improving the 
innovation culture. They also expressed a need for more accurate mea-
sures and a more systematic approach to handling the entity of the 
innovation project portfolio. 
Besides current practices, Firm B interviewees expressed some 
structural practices that either could be useful or that should be avoided 
to drive strategic alignment and complement the social and mechanistic 
practices. Some interviewees mentioned the need to look at the up-
coming projects over time to form a comprehensive picture of the 
project roadmap. They expressed the need to reduce hierarchies in the 
organizational structure to avoid ŌĆ£tunnel visionŌĆØ and to assist strategy 
orientation in innovation projects. One interviewee used the following 
example: ŌĆ£We have these technology platforms for multiple products. As 
long as profit and loss responsibility is here [in the business units], there 
is a risk that we are building an extra layer of hierarchy with them. 
Eventually, we may notice that the platform layer will employ itself with 
all kinds of reporting needs and does not add value to the customer 
interface in any way.ŌĆØ They pointed out the necessity of understanding 
value throughout the entire innovation value chain as well as involving 
external partners in the supply chain in order for the innovation out-
comes to fulfill strategic objectives. The structural practices were in this 
case expressed as issues requiring personnelŌĆÖs understanding and atti-
tude adjustment and as improvement needs that could potentially be 
resolved in the future to strengthen strategic alignment. 
4.3. Practices for strategic alignment across portfolios 
Each firm had at least two separate innovation project portfolios, so 
we explored strategic alignment and its practices concerning cross- 
portfolio interplay. Interviewees acknowledged the existence of 
boundaries between innovation project portfolios, and they mentioned 
various practices of cross-portfolio interplay and related strategic 
alignment, which we categorized into sharing, synergy creation, and 
boundary spanning. While resource and information sharing and syn-
ergies have been well-explored in the previous literature, they are often 
examined solely within the firm; in our study, they were also connected 
to other stakeholders and complemented with practices concerning 
purposive boundary spanning between project portfolios. Table 3 sum-
marizes practices of cross-portfolio interplay dealing with strategic 
alignment and how they were covered in the interviews. Many practices 
were covered in all organizations, but interviewees also expressed clear 
needs for improvement in these kinds of cross-portfolio strategic align -
ment practices. 
The practices of sharing concerned both resources and internal and 
external information across the project portfolios. They delt with of-
fering access to competences and information between the portfolios to 
overcome resource scarcity and benefit from learning. Interviewees in 
Firm A described how cooperation and allocation of resources between 
different project portfolios was open and transparent, which helped with 
managing the complex settings: ŌĆ£We cross-use our competences [be-
tween portfolios], and by competences we mean people, so this is the 
way in which the project portfolios are connected, I would say contin -
uouslyŌĆØ (H1). 
Firm B interviewees characterized their innovation project portfolios 
as somewhat separate entities despite their position within the same business units. They had product development teams that served the 
needs of different business areas using the same technology knowledge. 
In their view, resource sharing would require some official guidelines 
and procedures, which had yet to be developed. Such sharing requires 
deep insights and years of experience regarding personnel competences 
from the portfolio owners: ŌĆ£We need to have persons who know this 
firmŌĆÖs ways of working, the competences that we have inside the firm; 
otherwise this [sharing] does not function properlyŌĆØ (H5). 
In Firm C, innovations took place in the same geographical location, 
which implies that engineering teams inside portfolios engaged in active 
and open dialogue and flexible resource sharing. However, cooperation 
across portfolio boundaries was perceived as somewhat challenging. 
They also experienced resource scarcity and emphasized learning from 
the other business units as a way of sharing: ŌĆ£We noticed that they [the 
other business unit] have an interesting solution [to certain needs] that 
we also would like to use, instead of us reinventing the wheel. So we set 
up a team they would manage, serving only our needsŌĆØ (H10). Firm C 
utilized external cooperation particularly as a source of weak signals and 
input into innovation projects in and across the project portfolios. 
The practices of synergy creation deal with exploiting the same tech-
nologies, facilities, and external partners to create mutual benefits from 
successful innovations, which imply cost and time savings. Firm A in-
terviewees noted that the same facilities and equipment were used 
across project portfolios. They had recently created an innovation center 
specifically for promoting the efficient use of facilities shared by the 
different project portfolios. Interviewees in Firm B emphasized the 
replication and modification of the same technologies for different 
business areasŌĆÖ needs as a way to create synergies between project 
portfolios, save resources, reduce workload, and avoid redundancies. 
According to one interviewee, ŌĆ£We have a few core technologies that we 
govern and replicate in several projects, so they in a way operate in a 
matrix with the projects across business area[s]ŌĆØ (H9). Firm C in-
terviewees perceived that the co-location of innovation activities, as 
opposed to geographically dispersed locations, improved efficiency: 
ŌĆ£We can use the same testing equipment in the innovation centers for 
any projects ŌĆ” so the customer delivery and solution benefits from 
combining [development in multiple areas]ŌĆØ (H5). The practices for 
synergy creation were tightly connected to resource and information 
sharing as well. 
Innovation projects often involve external partners such as cus-
tomers, research institutes, and engineering services, and the involve -
ment of partners might increase as the new productŌĆÖs market launch 
approaches. Particularly for Firm A, this external cooperation was a 
source of synergy benefits because external partners learned from one 
project to another, making the cooperation more efficient: ŌĆ£We have a 
lot of external partners, it is a long list of different organizations and 
firms. The most of such collaborations are so repetitive that we know the 
people and the cooperation functions with easeŌĆØ (H1). Firm B in-
terviewees involved customers in the idea generation phase of innova -
tion projects in one portfolio, benefiting from their earlier knowledge, 
but this practice was not shared with another project portfolio. Firm C 
organized innovation contests between business areas, which both 
increased the level of ambition in the innovations and created synergies 
by having the areas learn from each other. Furthermore, successful 
innovation in a neighboring project portfolio sparked ideas for the other 
portfolios. 
The practices of boundary spanning were concerned with under -
standing the benefits of cross-portfolio interplay as well as the use of 
tools for boundary spanning. The existence of boundaries between 
project portfolios was acknowledged in all the firms, but the benefits of 
crossing the boundaries and ways of managers to support boundary 
crossing were less discussed. Firm A interviewees felt that the new PPM 
system was beneficial for revealing overlaps and possibilities for sharing 
and synergies between project portfolios, but as the access to the system 
was restricted to certain persons only, its usefulness for boundary 
spanning was limited. Visibility to other project portfolios through such M. Martinsuo and R. Anttila                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Project Leadership and Society 3 (2022) 100066
7tools was considered useful for the purposes of sharing and synergy 
practices and for managing risks stemming from project overload if an 
individual was allocated to too many projects. 
5.Discussion 
This study explored practices of strategic alignment and cross- 
portfolio interplay in large industrial firmsŌĆÖ innovation project portfo -
lios. We adopted a practice-centric view of portfoliosŌĆÖ strategic align -
ment following the work of previous researchers (Blichfeldt and 
Eskerod, 2008; Christiansen and Varnes, 2008; Clegg et al., 2018; Jer-
brant and Karrbom Gustavsson, 2013; Martinsuo, 2013). Following 
Martinsuo and Geraldi (2020), we acknowledge that innovation project 
portfolios are managed in their context, including their connection with 
multiple other project portfolios. We thereby wanted to complement 
such research that treats strategic alignment primarily as a project se-
lection criterion (see Archer and Ghasemzadeh, 1999; Cooper et al., 
1997a, 1997b; Dye and Pennypacker, 1999; Englund and Graham, 
1999) or as a criterion for assessing portfolio success (see Jonas et al., 
2013; Kester et al., 2014; Kock and Gem├╝nden, 2019; Kock et al., 2016; 
Martinsuo and Lehtonen, 2007; McNally et al., 2013; Spieth and Lerch, 
2014). Strategic alignment, in our view, is something that managers, as 
well as personnel more broadly, can do in practice throughout the life-
cycles of projects and portfolios. 
The first research question focused on firmsŌĆÖ practices of imple -
menting strategic alignment in their project portfolios. The findings 
confirmed our above assumption that strategic alignment of project 
portfolios occurs continuously over time in the practices of managers 
and personnel and not just during project selection or performance 
evaluation. In particular, the analysis revealed the use of various social, 
mechanistic, and structural practices of strategic alignment. The find-
ings suggest that formal PPM systems are clearly supplemented with less 
formal communicative practices, thereby lending support to improvised 
and norm-breaking behaviors in PPM (Blichfeldt and Eskerod, 2008; 
Christiansen and Varnes, 2008; Jerbrant and Karrbom Gustavsson, 
2013), and also with structure-related practices that represent the dy-
namic potential for portfolio reconfiguration (Martinsuo, 2013). The 
differences between the firms suggest that strategic alignment practices 
may be a feature of the organizational culture, which is reflected in the 
formalization of PPM systems and diversity of strategic alignment 
practices used. 
The framework developed during the analysis offers a nuanced pic-
ture of potential ways to implement strategic alignment of project 
portfolios from the viewpoint of traditional high-tech manufacturing 
firms. The framework thereby complements and adds to previous 
research on a select few antecedents of strategic alignment (Beringer 
et al., 2013; Kock and Gem├╝nden, 2019; McNally et al., 2013; Unger 
et al., 2012) by showing how the aligning actually takes place in prac-
tice. As the practices of strategic alignment vary over time, they may 
continuously renew the portfolios, and thereby, the findings contribute 
to research of emergent strategy in project portfolios (Kopmann et al., 
2017). Our empirical findings revealed a diversity of experiences con-
cerning the use of different strategic alignment practices even within the 
firms, indicating that even the job positions and business units of the 
informants offer different views of such practices and lend support to the 
context dependency of these practices (Martinsuo, 2013; Martinsuo and 
Geraldi, 2020). It is possible that the exploration of strategic alignment 
in more dynamic contexts such as information system portfolios and new 
service development portfolios would reveal additional practices. 
The second research question was: How do firms consider cross- 
portfolio linkages when implementing strategic alignment in their 
project portfolios? With this question, we wanted to draw attention to 
the fact that large firms tend to have multiple different innovation 
project portfolios, which may serve different strategies and be managed 
in different ways. Yet, the innovation project portfolios together are 
supposed to fulfill the innovation strategies in the firm and may compete for the same resources, which is why they must somehow be aligned. 
The empirical analysis revealed various sharing, synergy creation, and 
boundary-spanning practices for cross-portfolio strategic alignment. 
Here especially, the findings concerning sharing and synergy creation 
add a cross-portfolio view and related details to previous research that 
has considered resource sharing across projects (Elonen and Artto, 2003; 
Engwall and Jerbrant, 2003; Fricke and Shenhar, 2000) and learning 
and synergies between portfolios (Kock and Gem├╝nden, 2019). While 
boundary spanning practices were not discussed much, acknowledging 
and visualizing the multiple portfolios and creating possibilities for their 
interface management is a novel idea to enhance cross-portfolio stra-
tegic alignment. 
In the cross-portfolio strategic alignment practices, we identified the 
firmsŌĆÖ simultaneous pursuit of efficiency and strategic renewal. While 
resource and information sharing and synergy with partners, technolo -
gies, and innovation contests were used to create savings in a certain 
portfolio, they also drove more influential innovation outcomes, 
potentially in another portfolio and the firm more generally. This im-
plies that the same cross-portfolio strategic alignment practices serve the 
needs of efficiency and renewal. Where Kopmann et al. (2017) covered 
portfolio analyses as a key mechanism for emergent strategy recogni -
tion, our findings suggest sharing, synergy creation, and 
boundary-spanning practices are also suited for renewal and emergent 
strategies. 
Some of the strategic alignment practices dealt with external stake -
holders, including involving stakeholders (concerning portfolio strategic 
alignment), sharing information from stakeholders, and using the same 
external partners across portfolios (concerning cross-portfolio strategic 
alignment). These findings offer empirical evidence on the centrality of 
including stakeholder interests and views in innovation PPM (Martinsuo 
and Geraldi, 2020). External stakeholders may both add and reduce 
uncertainty in innovation project portfolios, support strategy imple -
mentation, and drive strategic renewal. Our findings encourage further 
investigations of stakeholdersŌĆÖ interests and related dynamics in stra-
tegic alignment of innovation project portfolios. 
6.Conclusions 
6.1. Main contributions 
This study offers three main contributions in the form of increased 
knowledge on how strategic alignment happens in practice in the work 
of personnel involved in PPM in the innovation-centric multi-portfolio 
contexts of large firms. First, strategic alignment is the continuous ac-
tivity of managers and personnel taking place over time during PPM. 
Thereby, this study contributes by offering a more dynamic view of 
strategic alignment to complement its static treatment during project 
selection or portfolio performance evaluation. Second, the study con-
tributes by revealing a variety of strategic alignment practices con-
cerning both portfolios and their interplay in connection with the parent 
organizationŌĆÖs strategy. The qualitative findings concerning social, 
mechanistic, and structural practices of aligning a portfolio with the 
strategy, sharing, synergy creation, and boundary-spanning practices of 
cross-portfolio strategic alignment will be useful in future research and 
can help managers strategically align project portfolios in organizations. 
Third, the findings revealed differences between and within firms 
regarding how the use of strategic alignment practices is experienced. 
This contributes to the research emphasizing the contextuality of PPM 
by connecting PPM practices with the organizational culture and its 
subcultures. The findings indicate that strategic alignment practices 
need to be developed to support the local organizational culture while at 
the same time enabling innovativeness (as this is the purpose of inno-
vation projects). Thereby, strategic alignment not only deals with 
strategy implementation but may simultaneously drive renewal. M. Martinsuo and R. Anttila                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Project Leadership and Society 3 (2022) 100066
86.2. Practical and policy implications 
A central practical implication in this study is the necessity of project 
portfolio managers and project managers considering strategic align -
ment in practice in their day-to-day work. In our view, strategic align -
ment cannot be treated merely as an assessment criterion at the start of 
the project and performance indicator after project completion. Stra-
tegic alignment must be practiced throughout the implementation of the 
project and the steering of the project portfolio. This study offers prac-
tical ideas on how strategic alignment could be implemented. Another 
practical implication deals with the strategic interplay of different 
project portfolios within the firm. As large firms tend to have multiple 
project portfolios, they can benefit from their interplay in strategic ways 
through knowledge and resource sharing, purposive synergy creation, 
and spanning of project portfolio boundaries as needed. While this study 
offers some tentative ideas on how industrial firms use this cross- 
portfolio interplay for strategic purposes, its broader uses and applica -
tions require future research. 
For PPM policies and frameworks, this study offers two main rec-
ommendations. Firstly, PPM policies and frameworks should acknowl -
edge strategy not just episodically during portfolio selection and success 
assessment but as part of managersŌĆÖ continuous and active process of 
strategic alignment throughout PPM. Secondly, such policies and 
frameworks should increasingly acknowledge the multi-portfolio cir-
cumstances of organizations as the contextual conditions of project 
portfolios. Strategic alignment cannot be considered merely between the 
project portfolio and the parent organizationŌĆÖs strategic aspirations; it 
must also be considered between different project portfolios. Even if the 
different project portfolios follow different strategies in their organiza -
tion, they may compete for and benefit from the same resources, infor-
mation, facilities, and top managersŌĆÖ attention. This study shows that 
project portfolios can support each other in many ways, and portfolio 
managers can collaborate to achieve cross-portfolio efficiencies through 
strategic alignment. 
6.3. Validity limitations 
This qualitative multiple-case study has some validity limitations 
that may limit the transferability of the findings. The empirical study 
was purposely delimited to industrial firms operating in business-to- 
business markets, and thus consumer businesses were not covered. 
The companies were selected based on the innovation orientation in 
their strategies, and it is likely that firms with other strategies may have 
a different approach to the strategic alignment of innovation project 
portfolios. 
The use of interviews for data collection also limits the validity due 
to the chosen cross-sectional research design. Longitudinal approaches 
with real-time observations of ongoing strategic alignment in and be-
tween portfolios could open up completely new possibilities in future 
research. The interviewees were selected from key persons, i.e., man-
agers involved in innovation PPM. The selection of a limited number of 
interviewees with the help of a contact person may have caused sample- 
related validity limitations. It is possible that project managers, other 
directors involved in portfolio committees, and managers of other 
portfolios might have different experiences and viewpoints concerning 
strategic alignment. However, with the sampling approach and the use 
of multiple informants from the same firm, we attempted to triangulate 
the data and ensure sufficient diversity of responses. 
The analytical framework was developed iteratively while analyzing 
the data, which may limit the validity. Some sub-categories in the 
frameworks were mentioned merely by single interviewees and thus do 
not necessarily reflect the organizationŌĆÖs reality in full. Since strategic 
alignment has been treated in the literature either as an input for or as an 
outcome of PPM, the practice-centric analysis and further development 
of the frameworks may require further consideration. 6.4. Ideas for future research 
The findings create new possibilities for investigating strategic 
alignment of and between project portfolios in the future. The catego -
rizations developed in this study could be useful for future hypothetico- 
deductive studies to test whether and how such factors follow from 
selecting projects strategically or achieve the success criterion of stra-
tegic fit in project portfolios. It is important to acknowledge the exact 
strategy guiding innovation project portfolios and to analyze the dif-
ferences in strategic alignment between firms with very different inno-
vation strategies. Due to the contextuality of PPM, this study encourages 
research on the use of different PPM practices in connection with 
organizational culture and possible subcultures within the organization. 
Furthermore, as the empirical context was delimited to traditional 
manufacturing industries, it would be important to study the use of 
strategic alignment practices in more dynamic contexts, such as infor-
mation system portfolios and new service development portfolios. 
The issue of boundary identification and spanning between multiple 
project portfolios requires further attention, as it emerged only weakly 
in this study. It is possible that the sampling or question setting did not 
enable a sufficiently thorough coverage of the issue. It might be 
important to carry out more in-depth case studies in organizations that 
have several project portfolios to map their portfolio interfaces even 
more thoroughly. Additionally, since innovation project portfolios can 
both implement and renew strategies, we suggest further research on 
how the practices of strategic alignment serve the purposes of reconfi -
guration and renewal. Our findings indicate that certain strategic 
alignment practices are particularly geared toward restructuring the 
portfolio, but more focused empirical research is needed to understand 
such dynamics. 
Funding 
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding 
agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Data availability 
The data that has been used is confidential. 
Acknowledgements 
We thank the companies and interviewees for their kind cooperation 
in this research. An earlier version of this paper was presented at 
EURAM European Academy of Management conference, 15ŌĆō17 June 
2022, Winterthur, Switzerland. We thank the anonymous reviewers, the 
discussant, and the conference session participants for the encouraging 
feedback. 
References 
Archer, N.P., Ghasemzadeh, F., 1999. An integrated framework for project portfolio 
selection. Int. J. Proj. Manag. 17, 207ŌĆō216. 
Artto, K.A., Dietrich, P., 2004. Strategic business management through multiple projects. 
In: Morris, P.W.G., Pinto, J.K. (Eds.), The Wiley Guide to Managing Projects. John 
Wiley and Sons, London, pp. 144ŌĆō176. 
Artto, K., Kujala, J., Dietrich, P., Martinsuo, M., 2008a. What is project strategy? Int. J. 
Proj. Manag. 26 (1), 4ŌĆō12. 
Artto, K., Martinsuo, M., Dietrich, P., Kujala, J., 2008b. Project strategy ŌĆō strategy types 
and their contents in innovation projects. Int. J. Manag. Proj. Bus. 1 (1), 49ŌĆō70. M. Martinsuo and R. Anttila                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Project Leadership and Society 3 (2022) 100066
9Atkinson, R., 1999. Project management: cost, time and quality, two best guesses and a 
phenomenon, itŌĆÖs time to accept other success criteria. Int. J. Proj. Manag. 17, 
337ŌĆō342. 
Beringer, C., Jonas, D., Kock, A., 2013. Behavior of internal stakeholders in project 
portfolio management and its impact on success. Int. J. Proj. Manag. 31, 830ŌĆō846. 
Blichfeldt, B.S., Eskerod, P., 2008. Project portfolio management: there ŌĆÖs more to it than 
what management enacts. Int. J. Proj. Manag. 26, 357ŌĆō365. 
Christiansen, J.K., Varnes, C., 2008. From models to practice: decision making at 
portfolio meetings. Int. J. Qual. Reliab. Manag. 25, 87ŌĆō101. 
Clegg, S., Killen, C.P., Biesenthal, C., Shankaran, S., 2018. Practices, projects and 
portfolios: current research trends and new directions. Int. J. Proj. Manag. 36, 
762ŌĆō772. 
Cooper, R.G., Edgett, S.J., Kleinschmidt, E.J., 1997a. Portfolio management in new 
product development: lessons from the leaders ŌĆō I. Res. Technol. Manag. 40 (5), 
16ŌĆō28. 
Cooper, R.G., Edgett, S.J., Kleinschmidt, E.J., 1997b. Portfolio management in new 
product development: lessons from the leaders ŌĆō II. Res. Technol. Manag. 40 (6), 
43ŌĆō52. 
Cooper, R.G., Edgett, S.J., Kleinschmidt, E.J., 1999. New product portfolio management: 
practices and performance. J. Prod. Innovat. Manag. 16, 333ŌĆō351. 
Dvir, D., Lechler, T., 2004. Plans are nothing, changing plans is everything: the impact of 
changes on project success. Res. Pol. 33 (1), 1ŌĆō15. 
Dye, L.D., Pennypacker, J.S., 1999. Project Portfolio Management: Selecting and 
Prioritizing Projects for Competitive Advantage. Center for Business Practices, West 
Chester, PA.  
Elonen, S., Artto, K., 2003. Problems in managing internal development projects in multi- 
project environments. Int. J. Proj. Manag. 21, 395ŌĆō402. 
Englund, R.L., Graham, R.J., 1999. From experience: linking projects to strategy. J. Prod. 
Innovat. Manag. 16 (1), 52ŌĆō64. 
Engwall, M., 2003. No project is an island: linking projects to history and context. Res. 
Pol. 32, 789ŌĆō808. 
Engwall, M., Jerbrant, A., 2003. The resource allocation syndrome: the prime challenge 
of multi-project management? Int. J. Proj. Manag. 21, 403ŌĆō409. 
Fricke, S.E., Shenhar, A.J., 2000. Managing multiple engineering projects in a 
manufacturing support environment. IEEE Trans. Eng. Manag. 47, 258ŌĆō268. 
Jerbrant, A., Karrbom Gustavsson, T., 2013. Managing project portfolios: balancing 
flexibility and structure by improvising. Int. J. Manag. Proj. Bus. 6, 152ŌĆō172. 
Jonas, D., Kock, A., Gem├╝nden, H.G., 2013. Predicting project portfolio success by 
measuring management quality: a longitudinal study. IEEE Trans. Eng. Manag. 60 
(2), 215ŌĆō226. 
Kester, L., Hultink, E.J., Griffin, A., 2014. An empirical investigation of the antecedents 
and outcomes of NPD portfolio success. J. Prod. Innovat. Manag. 31, 1199 ŌĆō1213 . 
Kock, A., Gem├╝nden, H.G., 2019. Project lineage management and project portfolio 
success. Proj. Manag. J. 50, 587ŌĆō601. Kock, A., Heising, W., Gem├╝nden, H.G., 2016. A contingency approach on the impact of 
front-end success on project portfolio success. Proj. Manag. J. 47, 115ŌĆō129. 
Kopmann, J., Kock, A., Killen, C.P., Gem├╝nden, H.G., 2017. The role of project portfolio 
management in fostering both deliberate and emergent strategy. Int. J. Proj. Manag. 
35, 557ŌĆō570. 
Loch, C., 2000. Tailoring product development to strategy: case of a European 
technology manufacturer. Eur. Manag. J. 18, 246ŌĆō258. 
Maniak, R., Midler, C., 2014. Multiproject lineage management: bridging project 
management and design-based innovation strategy. Int. J. Proj. Manag. 32, 
1146 ŌĆō1156 . 
Martinsuo, M., 2013. Project portfolio management in practice and in context. Int. J. 
Proj. Manag. 31, 794ŌĆō803. 
Martinsuo, M., Geraldi, J., 2020. The management of project portfolios: relationships of 
project portfolios with their contexts. Int. J. Proj. Manag. 38, 441ŌĆō453. 
Martinsuo, M., Korhonen, T., Laine, T., 2014. Identifying, framing and managing 
uncertainties in project portfolios. Int. J. Proj. Manag. 32, 732ŌĆō746. 
Martinsuo, M., Lehtonen, P., 2007. Role of single-project management in achieving 
portfolio management efficiency. Int. J. Proj. Manag. 25 (1), 56ŌĆō65. 
McNally, R.C., Durmus ┬Ėo╦Üglu, S.S., Calantone, R.J., 2013. New product portfolio 
management decisions: antecedents and consequences. J. Prod. Innovat. Manag. 30, 
245ŌĆō261. 
Midler, C., 2013. Implementing a low-end disruption strategy through multiproject 
lineage management: the Logan case. Proj. Manag. J. 44 (5), 24ŌĆō35. 
Patanakul, P., Shenhar, A., 2012. What project strategy really is: the fundamental 
building block in strategic project management. Proj. Manag. J. 43 (1), 4ŌĆō20. 
Petit, Y., Hobbs, B., 2010. Project portfolios in dynamic environments: sources of 
uncertainty and sensing mechanisms. Proj. Manag. J. 41 (4), 46ŌĆō58. 
Shenhar, A., Dvir, D., Levy, O., Maltz, A.C., 2001. Project success: a multidimensional 
strategic concept. Long. Range Plan. 31, 699ŌĆō725. 
Shenhar, A., Levy, O., Dvir, D., 1997. Mapping the dimensions of project success. Proj. 
Manag. J. 28 (2), 5ŌĆō13. 
Spieth, P., Lerch, M., 2014. Augmenting innovation project portfolio management 
performance: the mediating effect of management perception and satisfaction. R&D 
Management 44, 498ŌĆō515. 
Steffens, W., Martinsuo, M., Artto, K., 2007. Change decisions in product development 
projects. Int. J. Proj. Manag. 25, 702ŌĆō713. 
Unger, B.N., Gem├╝nden, H.G., Aubry, M., 2012a. The three roles of a project portfolio 
management office: their impact on portfolio management execution and success. 
Int. J. Proj. Manag. 30, 608ŌĆō620. 
Unger, B.N., Kock, A., Gem├╝nden, H.G., Jonas, D., 2012b. Enforcing strategic fit of 
project portfolios by project termination: an empirical study on senior management 
involvement. Int. J. Proj. Manag. 30, 675ŌĆō685. M. Martinsuo and R. Anttila                                                                                                                                                                                                                 