Questionnaire  items
IT  Soft  Skills  (Byrd  and  Turner  [10];  Lee  et  al.  [52])
Interpersonal  Skills  (IS)
IS1  Our  IT  staff  is  capable  of  teaching  others.
IS2  Our  IT  staff  has  the  ability  to  plan,  organize,  and  lead  projects.
IS3  Our  IT  staff  has  the  ability  to  plan  and  execute  work  in  a  collective  environment.
IS4  Our  IT  staff  has  the  ability  to  accomplish  multiple  assignments.
IS5  Our  IT  staff  works  well  in  cross-functional  teams  to  address  business  problems.
IS6  Our  IT  staff  has  the  ability  to  work  cooperatively  in  a  project-team  environment.
IS7  Our  IT  staff  has  the  ability  to  work  closely  with  users.
IS8  Our  IT  staff  has  the  ability  to  write  clear,  concise,  and  effective  memos,  reports,  and  documentation.
Technology  Management  Skills  (TSM)
MS1  Our  IT  staff  is  knowledgeable  about  the  key  success  factors  that  must  be  present  if  our  organization  is  to  succeed.
TMS2  Our  IT  staff  is  encouraged  to  learn  new  technologies  and  related  business  knowledge.
TMS3  Our  IT  staff  closely  follows  trends  in  current  technologies.
TMS4  Our  IT  staff  considers  IT  investments  as  long  term  and  consistent.
TMS5  Our  IT  staff  is  willing  to  understand  and  employ  new  techniques.
IT  Hard  Skills  (HS)  (Byrd  and  Turner  [10];  Lee  et  al.  [52])
HS1  Our  IT  staff  is  skilled  in  multiple  programming  languages.
HS2  Our  IT  staff  is  skilled  in  distributed  processing  or  distributed  computing.
HS3  Our  IT  staff  is  skilled  in  network  management  and  maintenance.
HS4  Our  IT  staff  is  skilled  in  developing  web-based  applications.
HS5  Our  IT  staff  is  skilled  in  data  warehousing,  mining,  or  marts.
Interﬁrm  Collaboration  (CO)  (Stank  et  al.  [85];  Kim  et  al.,  [46])
CO1  Our  ﬁrm  and  its  major  supplier  coordinate  their  efforts  harmoniously.
CO2  Our  ﬁrm  and  its  major  suppliers  of  various  departments  frequently  attend  cross-functional  meetings.
CO3  Our  ﬁrm  and  its  major  supplier  meet  frequently  for  both  formal  and  informal  discussions  of  important  issues.
CO4  Our  ﬁrm  benchmarks  best  practices/processes  and  shares  results  with  its  major  suppliers.
CO5  Our  ﬁrm  has  supply-chain  arrangements  with  its  major  supplier  that  operate  under  principles  of  shared  risks  and  rewards.
CO6  Our  ﬁrm  effectively  shares  o