boundary-spanning responsibilities and strategic activity, inadequate attention has been
existing research, the ﬁndings also show boundary-spanning managers to be more strategically
active than their non-boundary-spanning counterparts.
Wooldridge (1997) addressed this issue, ﬁnding that managers in boundary-spanning
positions reported higher levels of strategic inﬂuence than managers in non-boundary-
spanning functions. They theorized that managers in boundary-spanning positions
ferences between boundary-spanning managers and their non-boundary-spanning
1997) found that managers who held boundary-spanning positions exerted more stra-
tegic inﬂuence than their counterparts in non-boundary-spanning roles. The theoretical
basis for this ﬁnding was boundary-spanning managers’ external network position, i.e.
environment ( Jemison, 1984). Theoretically, boundary-spanning managers have
differently, boundary-spanners play a mediating role between environmental uncer-
dencies (Pfeffer and Salancik, 1978). The previous study then, suggests that boundary-
spanners have an advantage over their non-boundary-spanning counterparts (Burt,
1992) that stems from their external network position. That is, boundary-spanners have
Hypothesis 4: Managers with boundary-spanning responsibilities have higher levels of
divergent strategic activity than non-boundary-spanning managers.
Together the ﬁrst four hypotheses raise two interesting questions. Do boundary-spanning
hold for non-boundary-spanning managers or is internal network position only relevant
(Cohen and Levinthal, 1990; Floyd and Wooldridge, 2000). Thus, since boundary-
boundary-spanning managers, we expect these managers to be centrally located within
Hypothesis 5: Managers with boundary-spanning responsibilities have higher levels of
boundary-spanning managers.
However, while boundary-spanning managers may, on the whole, engage in more
non-boundary-spanning managers may also be internally positioned to inﬂuence strategy
(Thakur, 1998). Like boundary-spanning managers, non-boundary-spanners can engage
processes, non-boundary-spanning managers are also able to participate in divergent
Hypothesis 6: For non-boundary-spanning managers, there is a positive association
Boundary-spanning. Although the boundary-spanning activity is not limited to a particular
determinant of boundary-spanning domain (Tushman and Scanlan, 1981). Thus, an
their boundary-spanning activity (Brass, 1984). Sub-unit domain also deﬁnes a constraint
on how much inﬂuence results from boundary-spanning (Floyd and Wooldridge, 1997).
Thus, our measure of boundary-spanning was based on functional descriptions of sub-
Team. To classify respondents as having positions with boundary-spanning or non-
boundary-spanning responsibilities, we closely followed procedures utilized by Floyd and
classiﬁed as boundary-spanning: direct patient care, marketing, human resource man-
agement, purchasing. Non-boundary-spanning positions included MIS, accounting,
roles with upper managers for externally oriented individuals within non-boundary-
spanning units. Thus, while ﬁnance was coded as a non-boundary-spanning unit, the
ﬁnancial planner in charge of forecasting was coded as a boundary-spanner. In total,
34 mid-level managers were classiﬁed as boundary-spanners and 55 were coded
non-boundary-spanners.
divergent strategic activity would be higher for boundary-spanning than for non-
boundary-spanning managers). Since factors other than boundary-spanning could affect
for divergent activity were higher for boundary-spanning managers than non-boundary-
reported levels of network centrality would be higher for managers who have boundary-
network centrality would hold for non-boundary-spanning managers as well. Again,
1. Boundary-spanning
(1997) theorized that due to their external network position, boundary-spanning
managers engage in higher levels of strategic activity than non-boundary- spanning
managers. They argued that boundary-spanners play a key, mediating role between
Boundary-spanning
Non-boundary-spanning
Boundary-spanning
Non-boundary-spanning
boundary-spanners create resource dependencies that are the source of organizational
gression of divergent strategic inﬂuence on network centrality measures for non-boundary-
research we conﬁrmed that among the managers in this study, boundary-spanners
displayed higher levels of divergent activity than non-boundary-spanning managers
(Hypothesis 4). In addition, the results showed boundary-spanners to be more centrality
located internally than non-boundary-spanning managers (Hypothesis 5), raising the
non-boundary-spanning managers to predict levels of divergent strategic activity.
gent activity for the sub-sample of non-boundary-spanning managers (Hypothesis 6).
help renew the ﬁrm. In addition, the study found that boundary-spanning managers
were more centrally located than their non-boundary-spanning counterparts. Taken
Finally, we found that non-boundary-spanning managers, while engaging in divergent
This ﬁnding suggests that formal position in the organization, as evidenced by boundary-
spanning or non-boundary-spanning roles (Floyd and Wooldridge, 1997), is only part of
Jemison, D. B. (1984). ‘The importance of boundary spanning roles in strategic decision-making’. Journal of
Tushman, M. and Scanlan, T. J. (1981). ‘Boundary spanning individuals: their role in information transfer