herefore, by integrating team boundary spanning 
ognize the importance of team boundary spanning behav-
hypothesis 5: team boundary spanning moderates the 
fies that team boundary spanning is a valuable contextual 
boundary spanning activities are vital for entr
we predict that team boundary spanning can intensify the 
and that team boundary spanning moderates such relation-
boundary spanning
boundary spanning was high (simple slope = 0.40
accentuated by high team boundary spanning. such con-
team boundary spanning is notably important for the 
team boundary spanning moderates such indirect influ
elationships in terms of team boundary spanning—team 
10). while evidence that team boundary spanning is asso-
team boundary spanning and potential consequences ac
thus, team boundary spanning is immensely valuable for 
boundary spanning on the relationship that shar
−.02, n.s.) when team boundary spanning was low, then 
contrary, a low level of team boundary spanning 
of team boundary spanning in multi-organizational con-
is stronger under high team boundary spanning.
effects of team boundary spanning have been empirically 
boundary spanning acts as a boundary condition 
pothesis 4 supposed that team boundary spanning 
rship, team reflexivity, team boundary spanning, new venture performance
high team boundary spanning.
f shared leadership with team boundary spanning on team reflexivity.
team boundary spanning in accounting for the shared 
agement team boundary spanning-firm performance relation-
  shared leadership × team boundary spanning
ger under high team boundary spanning. this finding con-
, 2018). a high level of team boundary spanning 
team boundary spanning was rated by a nine-item scal
research on team boundary spanning.
team boundary spanning
team boundary spanning moderates the indirect influe
team boundary spanning as a crucial contingency. the
team boundary spanning was low (simple slope = 0.07,
shared leadership and team boundary spanning on team 
hypothesis 4: team boundary spanning moderates the 
with team boundary spanning to impact team reflexivity, 
dies have indicated that team boundary spanning is an 
  team boundary spanning
boundary spanning and the mediation of team ref
rather than in low team boundary spanning. therefore, by 
social cohesion in npd team boundary spanning. journal of 
 sense, we shed light on team boundary spanning, 
marrone, j. a. (2010). team boundary spanning: a multi-