GROUPS, BOUNDARY SPANNING,
AND THE TEMPORAL IMAGINATION
Allen C. Bluedorn and Rhetta L. Standifer
ABSTRACT
The temporal imagination is the understanding of the intersection of one
entity’s timescape with the larger timescapes of which that entity is a part.Weexamineindetailwhatthetemporalimaginationis,complementedwithadiscussion of the related timescape idea, and why the temporal imaginationis necessary to function in any timescape. We also discuss group attributesthatwilllikelyaffectthedevelopmentofthetemporalimaginationanditsuseand how its use in group boundary spanning efforts affect both the groupsand the larger organization.
INTRODUCTION
Thetemporalimaginationistheabilitytounderstandtheintersectionofoneentity’stimescape with the larger timescapes of which that entity is a part. The entity canbe an individual, a group, or an entire organization, but this chapter focuses onboundary spanning groups and their parent organizations. Several attributes ofboundary spanning groups that are likely to inﬂuence the quality of the group’stemporal imagination are then presented and analyzed (group diversity, sharedmental models within the group, longevity, and autonomy).
Two generations ago, C. Wright Mills’ wrote The Sociological Imagination
(1959), which ever since has provided an enduring description of the enterprise
Time in Groups
Research on Managing Groups and Teams, Volume 6, 159–182Copyright © 2004 by Elsevier Ltd.All rights of reproduction in any form reservedISSN: 1534-0856/doi:10.1016/S1534-0856(03)06008-0
159
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/books/edited-volume/chapter-pdf/9414627/s1534-0856_03_06008-0.pdf by University College London user on 31 May 2026160 ALLEN C. BLUEDORN AND RHETTA L. STANDIFER
ofsocialscienceasdeﬁnedbytheconceptinthebook’stitle.AccordingtoMills,
“The sociological imagination enables us to grasp history and biography and therelationsbetweenthetwoinsociety”(p.6).Further,thesociologicalimaginationallowspeople“tounderstandwhatishappeninginthemselvesasminutepointsofthe intersection of biography and history in society” (p. 7). Thus it would be fairtosaythatthesociologicalimaginationistheabilitytounderstandtheintersectionofhistoryandbiography,andinthatunderstandingtocomprehendtheeffecteachhas on the other.
It is impossible, however, to understand that intersection completely without
an understanding of the temporal dimensions of both biography and history,such an understanding being the proper focus of the temporal imagination . The
term “temporal imagination” has been used sparingly in a variety of disciplines,including literature ( Barth, 1991; Weitzel, 1999 ), sociology ( Nock, 1998 ), and
political science ( Chowers, 1998 ). To the best of our knowledge, it has not been
used previously in the organization sciences.
What is the temporal imagination? Why is it necessary to function in any
timescape? How does its use in group boundary spanning efforts affect both thegroups and the larger organization? These will be the fundamental questionsaddressedanddevelopedinthischapter.Wewillbeginbyconsideringtheconceptofthetemporalimaginationitself,complementedwithadiscussionoftherelatedtimescapeidea,followedbyadiscussionofgroupattributesthatwilllikelyaffectthe development of the temporal imagination and its use.
THE TEMPORAL IMAGINATION
CervantesdiedonApril23,1616.ShakespearealsodiedonApril23,1616,whichleadswithoutmuchthoughttotheconclusionthatbothbardsdiedonthesameday– an erroneous conclusion. For the date of Cervantes’ death is the date accordingtotheGregoriancalendar,whichcameintouseinSpainin1582( Richards,1998 ,
p. 248), whereas the date of Shakespeare’s passing is the date according to theJuliancalendar(detailsaboutCervantesandShakespearefrom Whitrow,1988 ,p.
119),whichwasstillinuseinEnglandatthetimeandwouldcontinuetobeusedthereuntil1752( Richards,1998 ,p.248).ThusShakespeareactuallylivedtendays
longer than Cervantes because the date of Shakespeare’s death on the Gregoriancalendar would be May 3, 1616 ( Whitrow, 1988 , p. 119).
The Gregorian calendar was instituted by Pope Gregory XIII in 1582 because
the Julian calendar was falling out of step with the seasons, leading Easter tohead into parts of the year the church felt were undesirable ( Bluedorn, 2002 ,
pp.160–161).However,Gregorywasapope,soAnglicanEnglanddidnotadoptthe
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/books/edited-volume/chapter-pdf/9414627/s1534-0856_03_06008-0.pdf by University College London user on 31 May 2026Groups, Boundary Spanning, and the Temporal Imagination 161
reformedcalendaruntil1752,therebycreatingthefalseimpressionthatCervantes
and Shakespeare died on the same day.
In this example, it would be fair to say that anyone who saw the two dates and
concludedthatthesetwogiantsofWesternliteraturehadperishedonthesamedaywas using a limited temporal imagination. To reach the proper conclusion abouttheir two deaths, at a minimum one would need to know the following: (1) thecalendarusedthroughoutmuchoftheworldinthe21stcenturyforsecularmatterswasinstitutedinthelatesixteenthcentury(1582);but(2)itsadoptionwasaslowprocess,especiallyoutsideCatholiccountries,andthatprocessofadoptionwouldcontinuewellintothetwentiethcentury.Inparticular,onewouldneedtoknowthatEnglanddidnotadopttheGregoriancalendaruntil1752,wellafterShakespeare’sdeath.Withoutthisknowledge,itwouldbenaturaltoassumethatthedatesgivenfor both men’s deaths were dates on the same calendar, hence that both deathshad occurred on the same day. For time and things temporal tend to be culturalmatters, and they often reside in the deepest parts of culture, at the level Scheinlabeledbasicunderlyingassumptions( 1992,pp.16–22).Assuch,itiseasytotake
physical manifestations of culture, like the calendar, for granted and to assumethat they have always been in use in their current forms.
The calendar – be it Gregorian, Julian, Hebrew, Chinese, or Mayan – serves as
an example of one component of a timescape . Although others had used the term
earlier(e.g. Benford,1980/1992 ),BarbaraAdam(1998) developedtheconceptof
timescape, writing:
Where other scapes such as landscapes, cityscapes and seascapes mark the spatial features
of past and present activities and interactions of organisms and matter, timescapes emphasisetheir rhythmicities, their timings and tempos, their changes and contingencies. A timescapeperspective stresses the temporal features of living. Through timescapes, contextual temporalpractices become tangible. Timescapes are thus the embodiment of practiced approaches totime (p. 11).
Thecalendarandcalendarsystemthatasocietyusesareonepartofthatsociety’s
“practicedapproachestotime,”henceapartofitstimescape.Whensuchpracticesare combined mindfully with a broader understanding of the timescape toconsciously affect decisions and actions, it is appropriate to say that the temporalimagination is being employed. Thus we deﬁne the temporal imagination – aderivative of the sociological imagination (understanding the intersection ofhistoryandbiography)–as theabilitytounderstandtheintersectionofone’sown
temporal behavior (i.e. timescape) with that of the larger timescape .
Temporalimaginationspromotethefunctioningandsurvivalofindividualsand
groups.Attimes,suchanimagination,ifusedproperly,canprovideacompetitiveadvantageleadingtoparticularlyhighperformance.Givensuchpotentialimpacts,developing a strong temporal imagination seems imperative. Developing a
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/books/edited-volume/chapter-pdf/9414627/s1534-0856_03_06008-0.pdf by University College London user on 31 May 2026162 ALLEN C. BLUEDORN AND RHETTA L. STANDIFER
powerful temporal imagination begins by learning what characteristics and
dimensionstolookforinothertimescapes–aswellasinone’sown.Thus,anec-essary condition for developing an insightful temporal imagination is the abilityto discern a timescape’s temporal dimensions. Toward the end of promoting suchdiscernment, we identify six universal dimensions of timespaces in the followingdiscussion.
EXPLORING THE TIMESCAPE
Webelievethateverytimescapewillhaveitsuniqueattributes,iffornootherrea-sonthanthateverysocio-culturalphenomenonwillhaveauniquehistory,henceitsdevelopmentwillhaveproducedidiosyncraticformsandcharacteristics.Neverthe-less,therearefundamentaltemporalphenomenathatwilloccurinanytimescape.Theabilitytoidentifythesephenomenaandunderstandtheirrolesinthespeciﬁedtimescape are requisite abilities for a well-functioning temporal imagination.
Adam suggests several fundamental temporal phenomena in her general
description of timescapes, emphasizing “their rhythmicities, their timings andtempos, their changes and contingencies” (1998, p. 11). Rhythmicities andtheir timings and tempos are important temporal phenomena that combine toform portions of a timescape, as is indicated in Adam’s terms “timings” and“contingencies.” Bluedorn (2002) identiﬁed some of the same fundamental
temporal phenomena that Adam suggested, also emphasizing rhythms and therelationships among rhythms.
Both researchers also identiﬁed how rapidly things are done as an important
temporal characteristic, albeit Adam uses the term “tempo”; Bluedorn, “speed.”Bluedorn identiﬁed polychronicity, temporal depth, temporal focus, and punctu-ality as fundamental temporal phenomena as well.
Polychronicityistheextenttowhichpeople:(1)prefertobeengagedintwoor
more tasks or events simultaneously and are actually so engaged (the preferencestrongly implying the behavior and vice versa); and (2) believe their preferenceis the best way to do things ( Bluedorn, 2002 , p. 51). Anthropologist Edward Hall
developedtheconceptofpolychronicityandwastheﬁrsttouseittoexplainhumanbehavior (see Bluedorn, 1998 ;Hall, 1959/1981, 1983 ). Hall used the concept to
describeandexplainbothindividualandculturaldifferences,and Bluedorn(2002,
p. 48)described it as “a fundamental strategy for engaging life.” Polychronicity
is an essential element in any well-developed temporal imagination because itdescribesafundamentaltemporalcharacteristicofindividualsandtheirtimescapesaswellasofacollectivitysuchasanorganizationanditstimescape.
1Thusthose
seekingtodevelopaninsightfultemporalimaginationshouldcertainlyexaminethe
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/books/edited-volume/chapter-pdf/9414627/s1534-0856_03_06008-0.pdf by University College London user on 31 May 2026Groups, Boundary Spanning, and the Temporal Imagination 163
timescapetonoteitslevelofpolychronicity–justaspeopledevelopingatemporal
imagination should note the timescape’s characteristic temporal depth and focus.
Social scientists have identiﬁed “time orientation” (e.g. Kluckhohn &
Strodtbeck, 1961 , pp. 13–15) as a fundamental way to describe how individuals
andculturesdifferintheirbeliefsandemphasesontime,thetermtendingtoreferto the relative emphasis placed on the past, present, and future (see Bluedorn,
Kaufman&Lane,1992 ,p.26).Morerecently Bluedorn(2000,2002) haspointed
outthatthissingleconceptoftenmaskstwoindependentconstructs:onehavingtodowithwhichgeneraltemporalregion(past,present,orfuture)apersonorculturetendstoemphasize;theotherhavingtodowithhowfarintothepastandthefuturepeopleandculturestendtolookwhentheyarethinkingaboutthings.Theformerhe termed temporal focus; the latter, temporal depth. Therefore, we suggest thatthese are important temporal aspects of entities and the timescapes in whichthey reside. They are best considered as two distinct temporal phenomena ratherthan one.
Finally,followingtheworkofLevine(e.g. Levine,1997 ;Levine,West&Reis,
1980;Levine & Wolff, 1985 ),Bluedorn (2002) indicated that punctuality – how
importantitistobeontimeandwhatisdeﬁnedasbeingontime–isafundamentaltemporalphenomenon,andassuch,liketheothertemporalphenomenainventoriedso far, it can properly describe both entities and their timescapes.
To summarize, we have identiﬁed six fundamental temporal characteristics
that would seem to be properties of all timescapes: rhythmicities/rhythms,tempo/speed, polychronicity, temporal depth, temporal focus, and punctuality.Given that they are reasonably well established in the time literature as such,they are likely to be found in all timescapes, albeit other temporal characteristicsarelikelytobefoundintimescapestoo.Further,thetemporalimaginationcannowberecastas understandingtheintersectionoftwoormoretimescapes becausethe
entity, including individuals, will have regular practiced approaches to time, thusallowingustospeakofanindividual,group,ororganization’s internaltimescape
as well as of the timescapes of the larger systems of which the entities are a part.Knowing,however,whichfundamentaltemporalpropertiesatimescapepossessesisnotenoughtofruitfullyemploythetemporalimagination;otherknowledgeandbehaviors are necessary too.
DEVELOPING THE TEMPORAL
IMAGINATION IN GROUPS
To develop and use the temporal imagination effectively, one must identify and
developknowledgeaboutone’sinternaltimescapeaswellasthelargertimescapes
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/books/edited-volume/chapter-pdf/9414627/s1534-0856_03_06008-0.pdf by University College London user on 31 May 2026164 ALLEN C. BLUEDORN AND RHETTA L. STANDIFER
ofwhichoneisapart.Forgroupsandorganizationstodoso,knowledgeisrequired
aboutthepotentialadvantagesofgroupsandofhowgroupsandothercollectivitiesinteract with their environments.
Groups Advantages
Given ﬁnite time and other limited resources, the individuals who compose a
groupshouldbeabletoseemoreaspectsofatimescape’srealitythananysolitaryindividual, ceteris paribus . Further, such an advantage will accrue only when
the members of the group attempt to process their knowledge to build a moreaccurate and larger overall picture of that timescape reality, rather than when thegroup’s members argue that their observations are the only correct descriptionsof the timescape. The group will need to see its goal as producing a larger, moreaccurate and complete description of the timescape, but a description that isalwayssubjecttorevisionandadditionaldevelopment.Thus,theargumentshouldnever be about issues such as: Is the elephant more like a wall, a spear, a snake, atree, a fan, or a rope? – the debate carried on by the six blind men in John Saxe’s
(1892)famous poem. Rather, the discussion of how to interpret the observations
should focus on what information each observation provides about the realityin question. To get the group to operate in this fashion and with this orientationis where knowledge of organizational behavior and group dynamics can trulyinform this task, as will be demonstrated shortly. But before exploring furtherthe inner workings of groups that might enhance their ability to use temporalimaginations, the relationship between groups and other collectivities with theirenvironments needs to be addressed, especially one strategic aspect of thatrelationship.
Actors are Parts of Their Own Timescapes
Gareth Morgan (1997, p. 258) has noted, “Many organizations encounter great
problemsindealingwiththewiderworldbecausetheydonotrecognizehowtheyarepartoftheirenvironment.”Implicitinouranalysisisthepremisethatthelargertimescapes that a group or organization participates in are crucial aspects of theirenvironments.Acritical–albeitsubtle–pointforanytemporalimaginationtorec-ognizeisthattheactoritselfisapartofthelargertimescapeinwhichitexists,whichmeans that to understand the intersection of the actor with its timescape requiresmuch more comprehension than simply noting the fundamental temporal charac-teristicsofboththeactorandthetimescapeandhowtheyaresimilaranddifferent.
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/books/edited-volume/chapter-pdf/9414627/s1534-0856_03_06008-0.pdf by University College London user on 31 May 2026Groups, Boundary Spanning, and the Temporal Imagination 165
Asbasicasthesepointsaretoanadequatetemporalimagination,theyformbut
the foundation upon which truly imaginative temporal insights are based. Oncethese basics are understood, the next step is to proceed to a deeper understandingoftheintersectionofactor(e.g.individual,group,ororganization)andtimescape.Namely,howdospeciﬁcactionsthatactorstakeaffect/changethetimescape,andin turn, how do those subsequent timescape changes affect the actor? Morgan
(1997, p. 260) provides examples of how organizations, sometimes acting as an
entireindustry,makedecisionsandtakeactionswithonlytheshort-termfutureinmind. Considering only short-term consequences, this implies, however, that hadlonger-termfuturesandotherpossibleimpactsonboththeenvironmentandtheirconsequences for the organization been considered, other decisions might haveresulted.
Ifweconsideranexamplefocusingonthetemporalaspectsofboththeorgani-
zationanditstimescape,wemayseethetypeofthinkingthetemporalimaginationmightemploytoidentifysucheffectsandconsequences.Theexampleisthedevel-opmentoftheemphasisonspeedthatisattheheartoftheorganizationalstrategyknown as time-based competition ( Blackburn, 1991; Stalk & Hout, 1990 ). Let us
consider: (1) this strategy from the perspective of a single focal organization; (2)the impact this organization might have on its timescape if it adopts this strategy;and (3) the likely subsequent impacts these timescape changes might have on theorganization itself.
Assume that the organization’s strategic management team is considering the
optionoftime-basedcompetition,thatis,ofalteringitswayofoperatingsothatitcandevelop,produce,andbringtomarketnewproductsfasterthanitscompetitors(seeStalk & Hout, 1990 , p. 29). Making these changes will create costs for the
organizationaswellaspotentialbeneﬁts,sothestrategistswouldneedtoconsiderthe ratio of the two, as well as the feasibility of making the changes and theprobability that the strategy will work (i.e. will produce the minimal acceptablebeneﬁtsanddosowithanacceptablecost-beneﬁtratio).Suchtraditionalthinkingislikelytofocusontheresultsfortheorganization,andtofocusonthemintermsof proﬁtability.
Let us now add thinking directed by the temporal imagination to this decision
and see some of the issues it might highlight. First, what are some of the organi-zational changes regarding temporal matters that a shift to a time-based strategymightrequireorproduce?Time-basedstrategiesrequire,virtuallybydeﬁnition,anemphasis on speed, on doing things faster. Thus one of the immediate challengesfor the organization will be a change in the temporal portion of its culture, of itsinternaltimescape,tovalueandpracticedoingthingsfaster.Thiswillbenecessarybecausenostrategycanbeimplementedoptimallywhenitisincompatiblewiththeorganization’sculture( Bluedorn&Lundgren,1993 ).Clearly,thisculture-change
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/books/edited-volume/chapter-pdf/9414627/s1534-0856_03_06008-0.pdf by University College London user on 31 May 2026166 ALLEN C. BLUEDORN AND RHETTA L. STANDIFER
effortwillbeeasiertheclosertheorganization’stimescapealreadyistovaluesand
“practicedapproaches”emphasizingtheimportanceofdoingthingsfast.Thisisaneasyobservation,onethatdoesmovebeyondjustbasicdescriptionsoftimescapefeatures–theinternaltimescapeinthiscase–butonethatdoesnotoverlystretchthe developing temporal imagination.
Morechallengingarethenexttwoquestions:(1)Whateffectwilltheshifttothis
strategyhaveonthelargertimescapeinwhichtheorganizationfunctions?and(2)Whateffectmightthosechangestothelargertimescapehaveontheorganization?First, let us assume that the focal organization is an industry leader, or that if itwas not before the change, that it became one after the shift to the time-basedstrategy.(Wewillbegthequestionofcausalityhereandsimplyassumeanempir-icalassociationwithorganizationalsuccess.)Institutionalforcessuchasmimeticimitation( DiMaggio&Powell,1983 )willlikelyleadotherorganizationsoperat-
ing in the same timescape to adopt versions of time-based strategies themselves.Assuming they do, this will directly change at least one fundamental dimensionofthetimescape:theextenttowhichdoingthingsfastisvalued.Comparedtothemomentsbeforethefocalorganizationadoptedthetime-basedstrategy,theentiretimescapewillnowplaceamuchgreateremphasisonspeed,ondoingthingsfast.Othertemporaldimensionsofthetimescapearelikelytobeaffectedtoo,butthoseeffects are more difﬁcult to anticipate.
Second, the focal organization’s original time-based strategy will no longer
confer the same degree of competitive advantage it once did, if at this pointit will confer any competitive advantages vis- `a-vis the competition at all. This
suggests the temporal imagination would reveal that the competitive advantageconferred by the initial version of the time-based strategy will be ﬁnite ratherthan indeﬁnite, and that subsequent competitive advantages will have to come byeither enhancing the time-based strategy, that is, by doing things even faster, orby seeking competitive advantages in other areas.
To follow through with this example, let us assume the focal organization’s
strategistsdecidetoenhancethetime-basedstrategyinresponsetothetimescape’schanges, that they make further changes so that their organization values andpractices doing things even faster. As would be expected, the other organizationsin the timescape would respond as they did before, by enhancing their owntime-based strategies, and the entire timescape comes to value and practicedoing things even faster still. But as only the most creative temporal imaginationmightanticipatefromthisspiralofpositivefeedbackloops,atsomepointfurtherenhancements could well become counterproductive, that things would be donetoofast.Forexample,atonepointinthehistoryoftheJapanesecomputerindustry,
product changes and improvements were being developed and brought to marketso quickly that customers were delaying purchases in anticipation of yet better
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/books/edited-volume/chapter-pdf/9414627/s1534-0856_03_06008-0.pdf by University College London user on 31 May 2026Groups, Boundary Spanning, and the Temporal Imagination 167
machines being available later. This led to a conscious effort to actually reduce
therateofproductdevelopmentinthisindustry( Ancona&Chong,1996 ,p.262).
This example demonstrates that organizations are not only part of their own
timescapes,butalsohowthetemporalimaginationisimportant.Wewillnowseeinmoredetailhowthatimaginationcanbedevelopedandenhancedinaparticulartype of group.
GROUPS AND BOUNDARY SPANNING
We stated earlier that given the ﬁnite time and resources usually available toorganizations, groups are better suited to the development of a robust temporalimagination than individuals because of the aggregated vision that comes frommultiple perspectives. In this regard, all groups (and their organizations) beneﬁtfrom this collective perspective; but particularly useful are those groups thatengage in boundary spanning activities on behalf of their organizations.
Boundary spanners and boundary spanning groups establish and maintain
relationships between the organization and external social networks, providinga primary conduit of information about these networks that the organization usesto make decisions. Therefore, groups engaged in boundary spanning activitiesinterpret the external environment to the organization, as well as represent theorganization back to entities in the environment. (This description is reminiscentof Likert’s description of individuals performing linking functions betweengroups,1961, p. 166, albeit we focus more on groups as the linking agents than
individuals.) In the past, boundary spanning roles included sales representatives,recruiters, and bargaining agents ( Kahn, Wolfe, Quinn, Snoek & Rosenthal,
1964).However,technologyandincreasedinterorganizationalcollaborationhave
broadened the deﬁnition of what constitutes a “boundary spanner.”
Just as past researchers ( March & Simon, 1958; Pennings, 1998; Thompson,
1967) have emphasized the importance of organizational boundaries and the
boundaryspanner’sroleasaconduitofinformationfromatraditionalperspective,we believe it is equally important to the temporal viewpoint. By gathering andassessing information from outside the organization and by using that informa-tion to aid the organization in its decision making, the boundary spanning groupdevelops an understanding of its own internal timescape, that of its organization,andoftherelationshipsofbothtothelargertimescapesintheenvironment.Italsoaddressestheissuesofhowto“link”itselfandtheorganizationtotheenvironmentsothattheenvironmentandorganizationareeachrepresentedtotheother,therebyenrichingthegroup’sandtheorganization’stemporalimagination.Therefore,wewillrestrictourdiscussionofgroupstothosewhoseprimarypurposeistoperform
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/books/edited-volume/chapter-pdf/9414627/s1534-0856_03_06008-0.pdf by University College London user on 31 May 2026168 ALLEN C. BLUEDORN AND RHETTA L. STANDIFER
boundary spanning activities and part of whose mission is the development and
understanding of the timescape and hence the temporal imagination of the groupand the organization.
As mentioned previously, timescapes are formed by practiced approaches
to time. For groups functioning within an organizational framework, thesepracticed approaches can include multiple calendars (society’s, the ﬁscal year,etc.), deadlines imposed within (or upon) the group, meetings, the methods ofsynchronizingmemberschedules,seasonalcycles,andthevariousidiosyncrasiesof the industry in which the group functions. The ways in which boundaryspanning groups address these temporal practices can change, depending uponthe attributes or characteristics of the group. In other words, the characteristicsof a group affect the way in which that group confronts or handles practicedapproaches to time, creating the group’s unique timescape. Likewise, attributesof boundary spanning groups also affect the group’s temporal imagination andits ability to understand and effectively use that imagination to help it and itsorganization manage their relationships with the larger environment.
Becauseofthis,weshallnowdiscusshowvariousgroupattributescancontribute
totheinternaltimescapesofgroupsfocuseduponboundaryspanningactivitiesandthe resultant effect on such groups’ temporal imaginations. Although the generalresearch on group attributes is both broad and extensive, we will focus on thefollowing speciﬁc attributes: informational diversity within the group, temporaldiversitywithinthegroup,extentofsharedmentalmodelswithinthegroup,grouplongevity, and degree of group autonomy.
Prior to a discussion concerning group diversity, it should be noted that
researchers study many sources of diversity in groups, including gender, race,tenure,andeducationalbackgrounds.Infact,pastresearchers( Guzzo&Dickson,
1996;Jackson, May & Whitney, 1995 ;Magjuka & Baldwin, 1991 ) have linked
group diversity to group effectiveness, creativity, and decision-making. Giventhe vast scope of research on this topic, however, and with an eye toward what isparticularlyrelevanttogroupsengagedinboundaryspanningactivities,werestrictour discussion to two types of diversity, one of which is found in the extant liter-ature and one of our own making: informational diversity and temporal diversity,respectively.
Informational Diversity
Informational diversity is deﬁned as differences in knowledge and perspectives
among group members due to differences in education, experience, and expertise(Jehn, Northcraft & Neale, 1999 ). The nature and purpose of boundary spanning
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/books/edited-volume/chapter-pdf/9414627/s1534-0856_03_06008-0.pdf by University College London user on 31 May 2026Groups, Boundary Spanning, and the Temporal Imagination 169
groups,whichoftenentailcross-functionalgroupmembershipand/ordifferentor-
ganizationalorigins(i.e.agroupcreatedforthepurposesofdevelopinganongoing,interorganizationalrelationship),increasesthelikelihoodofsuchdiversitywithinthese groups. The empirical research that examines the effects of such diversitywithin groups has produced mixed results ( Ancona & Caldwell, 1992; Jackson,
1992).Withregardtoboundaryspanninggroups,however,wefeelgreaterlevelsof
informationaldiversitywithinsuchgroupswillprovideanadvantageovergroupswithlowerlevelsofsuchdiversity,intermsofthegroup’stimescapeandtemporalimagination.
2
One reason is that informational diversity creates a broader, richer group
timescape for boundary spanning groups. This occurs because the diverse groupof boundary spanning members gathers information and material from a greaternumber of sources as individual members target the areas with which they arefamiliar. Likewise, such diversity in group members provides a richer foundationofexperiencefromwhichtoassesstheinformationandmaterialgatheredoverthecourse of boundary spanning activities.
Groups with diverse experience can also better determine how the results of
their boundary spanning activities can best serve the temporal needs of theirown group and the organizations they represent. It is interesting to note thatwe (and researchers such as Ofori-Dankwa & Julian, 2001 ) question whether
it is sometimes better notto be perfectly synched rhythmically in all ways with
external components of one’s larger social system. Indeed, Ofori-Dankwa and
Julian (2001) have suggested the idea of an “entrainment quotient,” meaning the
easeandspeedwithwhichindividuals,groups,andorganizationscanadjusttimeorientations to better assess the need to synchronize with outside components.Groups whose members’ diversity of experience allows the groups’ timescapesto effectively “link” to the timescape of its environment, and whose temporalimaginationissuchthatthegroupisabletodetectandeffectivelymanipulatethislink, might have a higher “quotient” than a more homogeneous group.
Later in this chapter, we will examine several caveats that are necessary when
discussing the effects of diversity in groups. However, we prefer to discuss thesenotes of caution after our examination of the second type of group diversity:temporal diversity, to which we now turn.
Temporal Diversity
Just as diversity of experience affects a boundary spanning group’s timescape
and temporal imagination, the extent to which the group members differ in keytemporaldimensionsalsoinﬂuencesthegroup’sabilitytounderstandanddevelop
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/books/edited-volume/chapter-pdf/9414627/s1534-0856_03_06008-0.pdf by University College London user on 31 May 2026170 ALLEN C. BLUEDORN AND RHETTA L. STANDIFER
its own internal timescape and how the group ﬁts within the timescape of its
organization and the larger environment. We deﬁne temporal diversity as theextent to which the group exhibits variance along the key temporal dimensionsdiscussed earlier in the chapter. These temporal dimensions would includespeed and punctuality, rhythmic activity, polychronicity, and temporal focus anddepth.
In the previous section, we stated that informational diversity leads to positive
outcomes (e.g. a well-developed timescape and temporal imagination). However,as a study conducted by Jehn et al. (1999) illustrates, the results of diversity are
not always positive. As we will see, diversity is not uniformly beneﬁcial withregard to these temporal dimensions either.
For example, we feel that in terms of speed and punctuality, groups exhibiting
higherlevelsofdiversitywillexperiencemoreproblemsthangroupsthataremorehomogeneous. Hence, if some members emphasize fast decision-making whileother members choose to deliberate for longer periods of time, conﬂict (i.e. pro-cess,task,andrelationshipconﬂict)ismorelikely.Asameta-analysisofconﬂict’seffect on team performance shows ( De Dreu & Weingart, 2002 ), such conﬂict
among group members diminishes the performance (i.e. the quality of decisions)of the group. Likewise, if punctuality is terribly important to certain members,while others are more cavalier about arriving on time, similar results shouldbe expected.
We suggest that the group’s emphasis on speed and punctuality should be
dictatedbytheculturalrhythmsandthedynamismoftheenvironmentwithwhichthe group is scanning and interacting, rather than by the individual preferencesof group members. Such sensitivity to the external timescape exempliﬁes theimportance of a well-developed temporal imagination in boundary spanninggroups, as well as the importance of understanding how the timescape of theorganization and the group impacts the larger environmental timescape, and viceversa. If a group has the ability to detect rhythmic patterns and practices withinits external environment, and if the group is able to effectively manage its owntemporal behavior to its advantage, both the group and the organization(s) itrepresentsbeneﬁt.Forinstance, Eisenhardt(1989) showedthatdynamicenviron-
mentsdictatetheneedforfasterspeedindecisionmaking.Therefore,aboundaryspanning group that understands the intersection of its timescape with those inits environment will respect the cultural norms of that environment and respondappropriately with faster speed in its temporal behavior. And to optimally beneﬁtitsparentorganization,thegroupwillnotonlymodifyitsowntemporalbehaviorstodealwiththoseinenvironmentaltimescapes,butitwillworktoproducebroadertemporal adjustments from other relevant parts of the organization toward asimilar end.
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/books/edited-volume/chapter-pdf/9414627/s1534-0856_03_06008-0.pdf by University College London user on 31 May 2026Groups, Boundary Spanning, and the Temporal Imagination 171
Another temporal dimension – rhythms – presents more of a theoretical chal-
lenge.Nevertheless,wefeelthattheabilitytodetectrhythmsintheenvironmentisessentialtoboundaryspanninggroupsandislikelythe sinequanon oftheirtem-
poralimaginations.Therefore,althougheverygroupmemberneednotbeamasterat environmental rhythm detection, this ability is essential to the group’s abilityto understand timescapes and thus exercise the group’s temporal imaginationeffectively. Organizations can, of course, help promote a group’s ability to detectand interpret environmental rhythms by consciously assigning individuals whoexhibit this ability to boundary spanning groups (see Bluedorn, 1997 , about how
to identify such individuals and for an analysis of how they detect environmentalrhythms).
While the general ability to detect environmental rhythms is crucial for
boundary spanning groups, we believe that boundary spanning groups whosememberscandetectdifferent typesofrhythmicpatternsintheenvironmentwillbe
bettersuitedtotheirtaskthangroupswhosememberscandetectonlyonetypeofrhythm.Therefore,diversityintheabilitytodetectdifferentpatternsispreferableamong the members of boundary spanning groups. To better understand why,consider the painting by Georges Seurat, A Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La
Grande Jatte , created using the technique of Pointillism. The portrait is made up
of nothing but small dots of pure color; it is up to the eye of the viewer to mixand interpret the dots as a uniﬁed image. To truly understand the signiﬁcance ofSeurat’swork,thepersongatheringtheinformationmustseeandappreciateboththe micro patterns of the dots as well as the uniﬁed pattern created by them.
Soitiswithboundaryspanninggroupsinterpretingtheexternaltimescapeand
relating it back to their parent organizations. This is because most temporal phe-nomenaareeitherrhythmsorpropertiesofrhythms(e.g.polychronicitydescribespeople’s characteristic rhythms for engaging events and activities). And sincerhythms are often subtle and can possess wave lengths with orders-of-magnitudedifferences (cf. Bluedorn, 2002 , pp. 130, 138), individuals who vary in their
characteristic temporal depths will aid the group’s ability as a whole to detectand interpret a wider variety of rhythms (i.e. rhythms whose wave lengths varywidely). Thus using Seurat’s painting as a metaphor for the environment, groupmembers who stand close to the painting (i.e. who have short-term temporaldepths) will be most likely to see the dots and details about them in the painting,whereas members who stand back several feet (i.e. who have long-term temporaldepths) will be more likely to see the images formed by the dots. So if boundaryspanning groups can access and interpret different rhythmic patterns present inthe environment and their organization, doing so will promote a broader, richertemporal imagination and timescape for the group, and ultimately for the group’sparent organization.
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/books/edited-volume/chapter-pdf/9414627/s1534-0856_03_06008-0.pdf by University College London user on 31 May 2026172 ALLEN C. BLUEDORN AND RHETTA L. STANDIFER
In terms of polychronicity, boundary spanning groups exhibiting relatively
polychronic behaviors can be more effective in their boundary spanning align-ment activity than teams exhibiting relatively monochronic behavior; therefore,polychronic behavior by the group is preferred because more group polychromicbehavior is likely to generate more information and environmental scanning, andaccomplish a larger variety of tasks. Polychronic groups are more likely to seemore aspects of the Seurat painting.
Does this mean that there should be little diversity among group members in
theirownpolychronic/monochronicpreference?Inotherwords,shouldrelativelymonochronicpeoplebediscouragedfromboundaryspanninggroupmembership?Notnecessarily,becauseitisthegroupasawholethatshouldexhibitpolychronicbehavior with regard to the goal of boundary spanning. Thus a group with ﬁvevery monochronic members, each working on a different task for the group, isby deﬁnition much more polychronic at the group level than another group with
ﬁve very polychronic members each of whom is working on the same grouptask. Whether or not polychronic individuals can more readily work together in aboundary spanning group, especially on the tasks of integrating and interpretingthe disparate data about external timescapes, remains an open question. It wouldbe premature to specify the desired characteristics of individual group membersin terms of their positions on the polychronicity continuum.
The ﬁnal temporal dimension under discussion here is temporal focus. (We
previously addressed the need for diversity of temporal depths in our discussionof the Seurat painting). Just as with informational diversity and the ability todetect different types of rhythms, diversity with regard to temporal focus ispreferable for groups engaged in boundary spanning activities. If a group ischarged with gathering and interpreting vast amounts of information from avariety of environmental sources, it is helpful if some members focus on the pastand others on the future, thereby painting a more detailed, expansive portrait ofthe environment and how it relates to the organization.
Cautions and an Example
Earlier,weremarkedthatseveralcautionarynotesarenecessarywhendiscussing
the effects of diversity in groups. Recall for a moment the discussion of Seurat’spainting and the problem of observing and interpreting the reality of it. Theexistence(andawarenessoftheexistence)ofmultipleperspectives(e.g.differentperspectivesduetoexperience,temporalfocus,etc.)canaidinaclearerandfullervision of the painting. However, for these multiple perspectives to coalesce intoa complete and accurate view of the painting, the members of the group must
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/books/edited-volume/chapter-pdf/9414627/s1534-0856_03_06008-0.pdf by University College London user on 31 May 2026Groups, Boundary Spanning, and the Temporal Imagination 173
be able (and willing) to communicate, combine, and arrange the assortment of
perspectives in a meaningful way. What follows are several thoughts regardingthesuccessfulintegration/utilizationofmultipleperspectivesduetoinformationalor temporal diversity among group members. It should be noted, however, thatthe successful integration of multiple perspectives in groups constitutes a large,formidable topic in and of itself. Therefore, we limit our discussion to a fewsuggestions particularly relevant to boundary spanning groups.
First, a diversity of perspectives creates the need for more integrating mech-
anisms to achieve better coordination ( Lawrence & Lorsch, 1967 ). This could
potentially make boundary spanning activities more complex for the group;however, the beneﬁts outweigh the potential problems in this case. Promotingand maintaining a group atmosphere in which multiple perspectives are welcomeshould at least help reduce problems for such boundary spanning groups andincrease the likelihood that such mechanisms will be encouraged and used.
Second, boundary spanning groups whose membership consists of a high
degree of diversity with regard to organizational origin (e.g. cross-functionalgroups created for interorganizational purposes) should expect a decrease (albeitnotcompletely)ofpositiveresultsbecauseofalackoffamiliarityamongmembersand possibly a lack of trust. One way to counteract this problem would be toallow such interorganizational groups to remain intact for longer periods of time,thereby allowing members to become familiar and comfortable with one another.(See our discussion below about group longevity for further elaboration onthis point.)
Finally,wemustask:Howmuchdiversityistoomuchdiversity?Theansweris,
itdepends .Forinstance,greaterlevelsofinformationaldiversityaredesirablefor
the development of a boundary spanning group’s temporal imagination. In fact,a certain amount of informational diversity is necessary in boundary spanninggroups for a rich temporal imagination to develop. However, moderate levels ofdiversitycancausegroupstosplinterintosubgroupsalong“faultlines,”causingadetrimentaleffecttothegroupanditspurpose( Lau&Murnighan,1998 ).Higher-
than-moderatelevelsofinformationaldiversitymightresultinbetterdevelopmentthan in groups with moderate levels of such diversity, particularly with regard tothe tasks often associated with boundary spanning groups. (The strength of suchaneffectmightdependuponthesalienceofdifferencesrelativetothetaskathand,and whether these differences were perceived and subgroups created early in theformation of the group, Lau & Murnighan, 1998 .)
Theoptimallevelof temporal diversity,however,requiresfurtherconsideration.
As we discussed, temporal diversity involves multiple key dimensions; these di-mensionscan(andweexpect,will)differintermsofpreferablelevelsofdiversity.In terms of speed and/or punctuality, we expect moderate levels of diversity to
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/books/edited-volume/chapter-pdf/9414627/s1534-0856_03_06008-0.pdf by University College London user on 31 May 2026174 ALLEN C. BLUEDORN AND RHETTA L. STANDIFER
causeresultssimilartothoseofinformationaldiversity.Forexample,ifthegroup
is split evenly between members who are always on time and members who arealwayslate(i.e.twogroups),afaultlinemightemergebetweenthe“on-time”and“late”groups,causingconﬂict.(Ofcourse,iftheneedtobepunctualisnotcrucialto the task, then its salience might be minimized.) If, however, there is no cleardivision, either because of common punctuality practices (i.e. one group) or be-cause there is a high level of diversity (i.e. many groups) in terms of punctuality,the issue of being on time might not emerge as an issue within the group becausesubgroups will not appear.
Withregardstoothertemporaldimensions,however,wesuggestthatmoderate
levelsofdiversitymightnothavesuchadetrimentaleffect.Forinstance,intermsoftemporalfocusortheboundaryspanninggroup’sabilitytodetectdifferenttypesof rhythms, higher levels of this type of temporal diversity might have a positiveeffect up to a certain point. When a variety of perceptions is valuable to the taskathand(e.g.creativityanddecision-making),researchershavelinkeddiversitytopositive effects in groups ( Guzzo & Dickson, 1996; Jackson, 1992 ). We suggest
that such is the case in terms of these particular types of temporal diversity. Atextremelevelsofsuchtemporaldiversity,however,thenegativeaspectswillmostlikelyoutweighanypositivebeneﬁtsduetoincreasedconﬂictanduncertainty,suchashasbeensuggestedbyotherresearchers( Greening&Johnson,1997 ;Hambrick,
Seung Cho & Chen, 1996 ;Williams & O’Reilly, 1998 ). Of course, there is little
or no empirical evidence with regard to temporal diversity or the development ofagroup’stemporalimaginationatthistime;assuch,ourdiscussionispreliminaryto such research.
Let us now consider an example of how these forms of diversity in boundary
spanning groups might inﬂuence a group’s understanding of the synergistic rela-tionship of its parent organization’s internal timescape with the larger timescapeoftheexternalenvironment.Wewillreturntotheexampleoftime-basedcompeti-tion.Aboundaryspanninggroupwhosemembershavedifferingareasoftemporalexpertise will be more likely to develop a clearer, more accurate composite ofthe internal and external timescapes. This is so because, at the most fundamentallevel,suchagroupwillbebettersuitedtoassesstemporaldifferencesbetweentheorganizationandtheenvironment.Thefactthatthegroupcanaccessandinterpretinformation from a variety of environmental sources also allows it to determinehow organizational changes will alter the timescape of the environment and how,in turn, those external alterations will impact the organizational timescape. Intime-based competition there is a point of diminishing returns because of thedetrimental,cyclicaleffectsasboththeorganizationandtheenvironmentrespondto the other with an ever-greater emphasis on speed. A boundary spanning groupthat can gather information from a wider variety of environmental sources might
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/books/edited-volume/chapter-pdf/9414627/s1534-0856_03_06008-0.pdf by University College London user on 31 May 2026Groups, Boundary Spanning, and the Temporal Imagination 175
detectthateffectfasterthanagroupthatonlyaccessesoneareaofenvironmental
information.
Likewise, differences along temporal dimensions (i.e. overall temporal di-
versity) affect how time-based competition might have been approached in theearlier example. For instance, a group that emphasizes speed might be able todetermine the extent to which the environment embraces (or rejects) the idea ofspeed and whether a competitive advantage based on speed can be sustained bythe organization within that environment.
Shared Group Mental Models
Anotherpotentiallyinﬂuentialattributeofthetemporalimaginationistheexistence
of shared mental models among group members. A “mental model” is deﬁnedas an organized knowledge structure that allows for effective interaction with theenvironment ( Mathieu, Heffner, Goodwin, Salas & Cannon-Bowers, 2000 ). The
idea of “shared” models of understanding dates back to the 1930s, when Mead
(1934/1974) described the necessity of such shared models for teams engaged in
complex activities requiring a good deal of cooperation. When a mental modelis “shared,” teams are better able to effectively coordinate activity and decisionmaking(Stout,Cannon-Bowers&Salas,1996 ).Sharedmentalmodelsarehelpful
togroupsengagedincomplex,dynamictasks( Mathieuetal.,2000 )andhavebeen
positively linked to organizational team effectiveness ( Klimoski & Mohammed,
1994). Speciﬁcally, shared mental models make it possible for groups to explain
phenomena, draw inferences, make predictions of future events, and recognizerelationships among environmental elements and other contextual components(Cannon-Bowers, Salas & Converse, 1993 ). Given this, we feel shared mental
modelsareparticularlyhelpfultogroupsengagedinboundaryspanningactivities.
According to shared mental model researchers (e.g. Cannon-Bowers et al.,
1993; Klimoski & Mohammed, 1994 ), teams can use different types of mental
models to achieve collaborative, cooperative goals. These models include ashared understanding of technology, mutual knowledge about procedures orenvironmental conditions, and collective knowledge of member roles, sources ofinformation, and common patterns of interaction.
We would like to add another shared mental model to this list: a shared mental
model that denotes a common (shared) timescape and temporal imagination.Indeed, other researchers have discussed the idea that different groups (andcultures)constructsharedmeaningsoftime( Ancona,Okhuysen&Perlow,2001 ).
Boundary-spanninggroupmemberswhosharecommon,practicedapproachestotime(i.e.meaningsrelatedtospeed,punctuality,deadlines,industryrhythms,etc.)
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/books/edited-volume/chapter-pdf/9414627/s1534-0856_03_06008-0.pdf by University College London user on 31 May 2026176 ALLEN C. BLUEDORN AND RHETTA L. STANDIFER
should experience the same beneﬁts mentioned above that are provided by other
mental models. These beneﬁts include the ability to draw inferences, to makepredictionsoffutureevents(butnottoregardthosepredictionsascertainties),andto recognize relationships found in the environment. All these beneﬁts directlyrelate to a group’s shared understanding of its own and other timescapes, allof which denote a broader, richer temporal imagination being employed by theboundaryspanninggroup.Likewise,asharedtemporalmentalmodelofpracticedapproaches to time should aid boundary spanning groups with heterogeneouscompositions(informationalortemporal)intaskssuchasintegratinginformationfrom varied perspectives, yet still allow a creative ﬂow of different ideas andopinions during the integrative process.
Finally, we suggest that a shared temporal mental model within a group
could act as an integrating mechanism, which we recommended earlier. Ancona
et al. (2001) have described the need for such a mechanism (called “temporal
coordination mechanisms”) to control for differences in temporal perspectivesandoffsetpotentialtemporalconﬂictsbetweengroupsandoutside,environmentalentities.Wesuggestthatasharedtemporalmentalmodelwithinagroupcouldactassuchamechanismandcouldalsomakeothersuchmechanismseasiertocreateand implement.
Group Longevity
Organizational groups vary in the length of time they exist; some groups come
together for short, project-based tasks, then separate, while other groups are cre-ated for more strategic, long-term purposes. How does this difference affect thetemporalcharacteristicsofthesegroups,andisoneformpreferableovertheotherwhenboundaryspanningisthegroup’spurpose?Wesuggestthatbothshort-termandlong-term groups are appropriate, depending upon the reason for boundary
spanning,andinfact,abalanceofbothtypesofgroupsmightbepreferablewithinorganizations. In general, a combination of long-term and short-term boundaryspanning groups helps create a balance of perspectives within organizations.
On the one hand, Bluedorn and Ferris (2000) found that the longer the
organizationhasbeeninexistence,thelongeritstemporaldepthwouldbe.There-fore, it seems reasonable to suggest that when organizations need a long-rangeperspective, stable, long-term boundary spanning groups should be emphasized.Suchgroupswillgatherandinterpretinformationfromtheenvironmentofinterestfor a longer period of time as a uniﬁed body, the result of which should be aclearer picture of how their timescape relates to the external one.
For groups that are interorganizational in nature, longer group longevity might
be particularly important. Such groups are composed of members that represent
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/books/edited-volume/chapter-pdf/9414627/s1534-0856_03_06008-0.pdf by University College London user on 31 May 2026Groups, Boundary Spanning, and the Temporal Imagination 177
different (and often competitive) organizational parties. Longer tenure for these
groups is necessary to ensure norms of reciprocity ( Ziller, 1965 ), as well as
feelings of trust and collaborative tendencies among members.
However, researchers also have shown the merits of short-term groups. One
such virtue relates to the effect of familiarity. Researchers found that the positiveeffect of familiarity among group members is most signiﬁcant early in the lifeof the group ( Cannon-Bowers et al., 1995; Katz, 1982 ). Such familiarity allows
groups to come up to speed quickly and coordinate rapidly. However, if thegroup remains intact over long periods of time, familiarity leads to a decrease incommunication and in performance.
3One could speculate that familiarity might
push the group toward groupthink in its deliberations and decision making too.
Given the apparent beneﬁts of both long- and short-term groups, what is
best in terms of temporal issues and boundary spanning groups? We suggestthat groups of varying tenure be employed to engage in boundary spanningactivities. In terms of the organization’s comprehension and alignment of itstimescapetothatofitsenvironment,deeper,richerunderstandingsarecreatedbytaking advantage of the strengths of groups of varying tenure. Long-term groupsprovide long-term experience and perspective, while short-term groups provideﬂexibility and faster decision-making regarding domain-speciﬁc issues. If bothshort- and long-term groups are in place, the organization has a greater varietyof perspectives and information it can draw upon, depending, of course, uponthe reason and need for the boundary spanning activity. (We should note thatreferencestoeithershort-orlong-termgroupsdoesnotimplyanythingabouthowmuch time group members spend with each other in boundary spanning or otheractivities. As with many group activities in organizations, much group work willbe carried out by people acting individually. Group activities conducted by thegroupactingasaface-to-facewholemayonlyoccurinmeetingsheldafewtimesduring the year.)
Degree of Autonomy
Thisﬁnalgroupattributeconcernsthedegreetowhichboundaryspanninggroups
are allowed the freedom to direct their own activities. Groups with autonomyusually perform tasks that are highly interdependent within the group, and areusually given the responsibility and authority to control aspects of their workrelated to those tasks ( Guzzo & Dickson, 1996 ). Given the nature of their goals,
wefeelboundaryspanninggroupsbeneﬁtfromasenseofautonomy,particularlyfrom a temporal standpoint.
Suchautonomyallowsboundaryspanninggroupstocreatetheirowntimescape,
which may (or may not) mirror the timescapes of parent organizations; in fact,
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/books/edited-volume/chapter-pdf/9414627/s1534-0856_03_06008-0.pdf by University College London user on 31 May 2026178 ALLEN C. BLUEDORN AND RHETTA L. STANDIFER
the timescape of the boundary spanning group might actually be more similar
to outside entities than to the organizations that created the groups. This can bea good thing. To achieve the goals of boundary spanning, these groups must beallowedtocreateatimescapethatallowsthemtoservetheirparentorganizationsbest, and such timescapes should reﬂect and integrate aspects of the larger socialsystem with which these groups need to interact, and then interpret for theirparent organizations. This is the very nature of boundary spanning. Furthermore,when the timescapes of these boundary spanning groups successfully reﬂectand integrate these elements, the boundary spanning group becomes a sort oflubricant between the organizations,
4allowing an easier ﬂow of communication
and information than might otherwise occur without an ongoing, connectingentity.Withoutthefreedomandauthoritytobreakfromtemporalconformitywiththeirorganizations,boundaryspanninggroupswillberestrictedintheirabilitytoaccuratelyscan,assess,andrepresenttheenvironmenttotheparentorganizations,and likewise, the organizations back to the external environment.
CONCLUSION
In this chapter, we have proposed the concept of the temporal imagination, notas a precisely deﬁned theoretical construct that can be instantly operationalizedto begin a program of empirical research, but like its sociological progenitor, asa sensitizing concept ( Blumer, 1954 ). A sensitizing concept is a general idea that
can point to phenomena that are potentially important ( Blumer, 1954 , p. 7). In
this case, it points to them for time and group scholars to consider, perhaps toinvestigate.
Theresultsofsuchconsiderationmayrevealsigniﬁcantcompetitiveadvantages
toanyindividual,group,ororganizationthatcultivatesthetemporalimagination’sdevelopmentandintegratesitintostrategicdeliberations.Competitiveadvantagesaccrue not just because additional data are obtained and interpreted, as aninformation-processing perspective would suggest (e.g. Galbraith, 1977 ), but
becauseaperspicacioustemporalimaginationthatservesindividuals,groups,andorganizationswellislikelytoresultfromaconﬂuenceofidiosyncraticfactorssuchas the histories of both the imaginers (i.e. individuals, groups, and organizations)and the timescapes of which they are a part. Such idiosyncrasies will make eachtemporalimaginationunique;indeed,eachapplicationofeachtemporalimagina-tionwillbeunique.Thusspeciﬁcmanifestationsoftemporalimaginations,beingunique, will also be inimitable, and according to the resource-based theory ofthe ﬁrm, inimitability is a key attribute of any organizational resource that givesthe ﬁrm a competitive advantage ( Barney, 1986, 1991 ). And the more inimitable
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/books/edited-volume/chapter-pdf/9414627/s1534-0856_03_06008-0.pdf by University College London user on 31 May 2026Groups, Boundary Spanning, and the Temporal Imagination 179
the resource, the longer-lived the competitive advantage will be – something that
is likely to be true for individuals and groups, just as it is for organizations.
Regardless of whether the temporal imagination invests its practitioners with
signiﬁcant competitive advantages vis- `a-vis others, it promises to provide its
practitioners with a better understanding of their worlds. This may be the mostimportant advantage of all.
NOTES
1.Bluedorn (2002, pp. 278–279) has demonstrated that polychronicity was an attribute
of the organizations he studied by illustrating the point that polychronicity can be acharacteristic of both individuals and collectivities, the former having been demonstratedin several studies (see Bluedorn, 2002 , pp. 48–82). In a similar vein, individuals can
obviously develop and use temporal imaginations, and when acting collectively as in aboundaryspanninggroup,suchagroupcan potentially developpracticesforunderstanding
timescapes–thegroup’sownaswellasothers.Thiscouldhappenifthesynergiesofwithin-group interaction produce perceptions and understandings beyond those of any individualgroup member. In this sense a group can be described as developing and using a temporalimagination.
2. While the focus of this discussion is the effect of informational diversity upon the
group’s temporal development, we feel the positive effect of informational diversity (aswell as the effect of some forms of temporal diversity, which we discuss below) upon thegroup’s timescape and temporal imagination will ultimately have a positive effect uponthe group’s effectiveness for the organization as a boundary-spanning entity as well. Inother words, we feel that the relationship between informational (and temporal) diversityand group effectiveness is an indirect one, mediated by the richness and complexity of thegroup’s timescape and temporal imagination.
WilliamsandO’Reilly(1998) maintainthattheimpactofdiversityingroupsgoesbeyond
simple main effects. Likewise, the assertion that the relationship between group diversityand performance is an indirect one has been studied by group researchers, with mixedresults. For instance, previous researchers have found a direct link between diversity andeffectiveness( Bantel&Jackson,1989;Magjuka&Baldwin,1991 );however,recentstudies
have found no such direct correlation ( Jehn et al., 1999) , stressing instead the importance
of mediating constructs such as task conﬂict. Other researchers have suggested such me-diating constructs as task complexity and the interdependence of group members. We feelthat because we know the purpose of our group (boundary spanning), we can make someassumptions regarding the nature and context of these other mediating variables. Likelyboundary-spanning tasks include gathering and assessing environmental information forthe purposes of organizational decision making and strategizing. Such tasks are typicallycomplex,ambiguous,andrequireafairamountofinterdependenceamongthegroupmem-bers. Therefore, our discussions of information and temporal diversity and their impactupon groups presumes such a task environment.
3. It is worth considering that the decrement in communication and performance in the
above studies might also come from other intervening constructs – see our previous noteabout the impact of mediating variables upon group outcomes.
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/books/edited-volume/chapter-pdf/9414627/s1534-0856_03_06008-0.pdf by University College London user on 31 May 2026180 ALLEN C. BLUEDORN AND RHETTA L. STANDIFER
4. WewouldliketothankeditorMargaretNealeforsuggestingtoustheconceptofthe
boundary spanning group as lubricant.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
ThischapterwaswrittenwithsupportprovidedbyaSummerResearchFellowship
from the College of Business at the University of Missouri-Columbia. We wouldalsoliketoacknowledgethesuggestionsandguidanceprovidedbyMargaretNealeand two anonymous reviewers, for which we are most grateful.
REFERENCES
Adam,B.(1998). Timescapesofmodernity:Theenvironmentandinvisiblehazards .London:Routledge.
Ancona,D.,&Chong,C.L.(1996).Entrainment:Pace,cycle,andrhythminorganizationalbehavior.
Research in Organizational Behavior ,18, 251–284.
Ancona, D. G., & Caldwell, D. F. (1992). Demography and design: Predictors of new product team
performance. Organization Science ,3, 321–341.
Ancona,D.G.,Okhuysen,G.A.,&Perlow,L.A.(2001).Takingtimetointegratetemporalresearch.
Academy of Management Review ,26, 512–529.
Bantel,K.A.,&Jackson,S.E.(1989).Topmanagementandinnovationsinbanking:Doescomposition
ofthetopteamsmakeadifference? StrategicManagementJournal ,10(SpecialIssue,Summer),
107–124.
Barney, J. (1991). Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. Journal of Management ,17,
99–120.
Barney, J. B. (1986). Organizational culture: Can it be a source of sustained competitive advantage?
Academy of Management Review ,11, 656–665.
Barth,J.R.(1991).ThetemporalimaginationinWordsworth’s Prelude:Timeandthetimeless. Thought,
66(261), 139–150.
Benford, G. (1992). Timescape . New York: Bantam Books. (Original work published in 1980.)
Blackburn, J. D. (Ed.) (1991). Time-based competition: The next battleground in American manufac-
turing. Homewood, IL: Business One Irwin.
Bluedorn, A. C. (1997). Primary rhythms, information processing, and planning: Toward a strategic
temporal technology. Technology Studies ,4, 1–36.
Bluedorn, A. C. (1998). An interview with anthropologist Edward T. Hall. Journal of Management
Inquiry,7, 109–115.
Bluedorn, A. C. (2000). Time and organizational culture. In: N. M. Ashkanasy, C. P. M. Wilderom
& M. F. Peterson (Eds), Handbook of Organizational Culture and Climate (pp. 117–128).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Bluedorn,A.C.(2002). Thehumanorganizationoftime:Temporalrealitiesandexperience .Stanford,
CA: Stanford University Press.
Bluedorn, A. C., & Ferris, S. P. (2000, October 13). Temporal depth, age, and organizational perfor-
mance.PaperpresentedintheINSEADStrategicManagementSeminarSeries,Fontainebleau,France.
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/books/edited-volume/chapter-pdf/9414627/s1534-0856_03_06008-0.pdf by University College London user on 31 May 2026Groups, Boundary Spanning, and the Temporal Imagination 181
Bluedorn,A.C.,Kaufman,C.F.,&Lane,P.M.(1992).Howmanythingsdoyouliketodoatonce?An
introduction to monochronic and polychronic time. Academy of Management Executive ,6(4),
17–26.
Bluedorn,A.C.,&Lundgren,E.F.(1993).Aculture-matchperspectiveforstrategicchange. Research
in Organizational Change and Development ,7, 137–179.
Blumer, H. (1954). What is wrong with social theory. American Sociological Review ,19, 3–10.
Cannon-Bowers,J.A.,Salas,E.,&Converse,S.(1993).Sharedmentalmodelsinexpertteamdecision
making. In: N. J. Castellan, Jr. (Ed.), Individual and Group Decision Making (pp. 221–246).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Cannon-Bowers,J.A.,Tannenbaum,S.I.,Salas,E.,&Volpe,C.E.(1995).Deﬁningcompetenciesand
establishingteamtrainingrequirements.In:R.A.Guzzo&E.Salas(Eds), TeamEffectiveness
and Decision Making in Organizations (pp. 333–380). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Chowers,E.(1998).TimeinZionism:Thelifeandafterlifeofatemporalrevolution. PoliticalTheory ,
26, 652–685.
DeDreu,C.K.W.,&Weingart,L.R.(2002,August9–14).Taskversusrelationshipconﬂict:Ameta-
analysis. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Academy of Management, Denver,CO.
DiMaggio, P. J., & Powell, W. W. (1983). The iron cage revisited: Institutional isomorphism and
collective rationality in organizational ﬁelds. American Sociological Review ,48, 147–160.
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989). Making fast strategic decisions in high-velocity environments. Academy of
Management Journal ,32, 543–576.
Galbraith, J. R. (1977). Organization design . Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Greening, D. W., & Johnson, R. A. (1997). Managing industrial and environmental crises. Business
and Society ,36, 334–361.
Guzzo,R.A.,&Dickson,M.W.(1996).Teamsinorganizations:Recentresearchonperformanceand
effectiveness. Annual Review of Psychology ,47, 307–338.
Hall,E.T.(1981). Thesilentlanguage .NewYork:AnchorBooks.(Originalworkpublishedin1959.)
Hall, E. T. (1983). The dance of life: The other dimension of time . Garden City, NY: Anchor Press.
Hambrick,D.C.,Cho,T.S.,&Chen,M.-J.(1996).Theinﬂuenceoftopmanagementteamheterogeneity
on ﬁrm’s competitive moves. Administrative Science Quarterly ,41, 659–684.
Jackson, S. (1992). Team composition in organizational settings: Issues in managing an increasingly
diverse work force. In: S. Worchel, W. Wood & J. A. Simpson (Eds), Group Process and
Productivity (pp. 138–173). London: Sage.
Jackson,S.E.,May,K.E.,&Whitney,K.(1995).Understandingthedynamicsofdiversityindecision-
making teams. In: R. A. Guzzo & E. Salas (Eds), Team Effectiveness and Decision Making in
Organizations (pp. 204–261). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Jehn, K. A., Northcraft, G. B., & Neale, M. A. (1999). Why differences make a difference: A ﬁeld
studyofdiversity,conﬂict,andperformanceinworkgroups. AdministrativeScienceQuarterly ,
44, 741–763.
Kahn,R.L.,Wolfe,D.M.,Quinn,R.P.,Snoek,J.D.,&Rosenthal,R.A.(1964). Organizationalstress:
Studies in role conﬂict and ambiguity . New York: Wiley.
Katz,R.(1982).Theeffectsofgrouplongevityonprojectcommunicationandperformance. Adminis-
trative Science Quarterly ,27, 81–104.
Klimoski, R., & Mohammed, S. (1994). Team mental model: Construct or metaphor? Journal of
Management ,20, 403–437.
Kluckhohn, F. R., & Strodtbeck, F. L. (1961). Variations in value orientations . Evanston, IL: Row,
Peterson.
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/books/edited-volume/chapter-pdf/9414627/s1534-0856_03_06008-0.pdf by University College London user on 31 May 2026182 ALLEN C. BLUEDORN AND RHETTA L. STANDIFER
Lau, D. C., & Murnighan, J. K. (1998). Demographic diversity and faultlines: The compositional
dynamics of organizational groups. Academy of Management Review ,23, 325–340.
Lawrence,P.R.,&Lorsch,J.W.(1967). Organizationandenvironment:Managingdifferentiationand
integration . Boston, MA: Division of Research, Graduate School of Business Administration,
Harvard University.
Levine, R. (1997). The geography of time: The temporal misadventures of a social psychologist, or
how every culture keeps time just a little bit differently . New York: Basic Books.
Levine,R.V.,West,L.J.,&Reis,H.T.(1980).PerceptionsoftimeandpunctualityintheUnitedStates
and Brazil. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,38, 541–550.
Levine,R.,&Wolff,E.(1985).Socialtime:Theheartbeatofculture. PsychologyToday ,19(3),28–35.
Likert, R. (1961). New patterns of management . New York: McGraw-Hill.
Magjuka, R. J., & Baldwin, T. T. (1991). Team-based employee involvement programs: Effects of
design and administration. Personnel Psychology ,44, 793–812.
March, J. G., & Simon, H. A. (1958). Organizations . New York: Wiley.
Mathieu,J.E.,Heffner,T.S.,Goodwin,G.F.,Salas,E.,&Cannon-Bowers,J.A.(2000).Theinﬂuence
ofsharedmentalmodelsonteamprocessandperformance. JournalofAppliedPsychology ,85,
273–283.
Mead, G. H. (1974). Mind, self, and society: From the standpoint of a social behaviorist . Chicago:
University of Chicago Press. (Original work published 1934.)
Mills, C. W. (1959). The sociological imagination . London: Oxford University Press.
Morgan, G. (1997). Images of organization (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Nock, S. L. (1998). Turn-taking as rational behavior. Social Science Research ,27, 235–244.
Ofori-Dankwa,J.,&Julian,S.D.(2001).Complexifyingorganizationaltheory:Illustrationsusingtime
research. Academy of Management Review ,26, 415–430.
Pennings, J. M. (1998). Structural contingency theory. In: P. J. D. Drenth & C. J. de Wolff (Eds),
HandbookofWorkandOrganizationalPsychology (pp.39–60).EastSussex,UK:Psychology
Press Ltd.
Richards,E.G.(1998). Mappingtime:Thecalendaranditshistory .Oxford:OxfordUniversityPress.
Saxe,J.G.(1892). ThepoeticalworksofJohnGodfreySaxe .Boston:Houghton,MifﬂinandCompany.
Schein, E. H. (1992). Organizational culture and leadership (2nd ed.). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Stalk,G.,Jr.,&Hout,T.M.(1990). Competingagainsttime:Howtime-basedcompetitionisreshaping
global markets . New York: Free Press.
Stout,R.J.,Cannon-Bowers,J.A.,&Salas,E.(1996).Theroleofsharedmentalmodelsindeveloping
team situational awareness: Implications for training. Training Research Journal ,2, 85–116.
Thompson, J. D. (1967). Organizations in action . New York: McGraw-Hill.
Weitzel,W.C.,III(1999). Thespaceofmemory:Romanticism,modernity,andthetemporalimagina-
tion. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA.
Whitrow, G. J. (1988). Time in history: The evolution of our general awareness of time and temporal
perspective . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Williams, K. Y., & O’Reilly, C. A. (1998). Demography and diversity in organizations: A review of
forty years of research. Research in Organizational Behavior ,20, 77–140.
Ziller,R.C.(1965).Towardatheoryofopenandclosedgroups. PsychologicalBulletin ,64,164–182.
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/books/edited-volume/chapter-pdf/9414627/s1534-0856_03_06008-0.pdf by University College London user on 31 May 2026