The boundary spanner’s role in
organizational learning: unleashing
untapped potential
Siu Loon Hoe
Boundary spanners represent a group of employees whose potential remained relatively
untapped in organizational learning. This offers tremendous opportunity for the practicing
manager to design knowledge processes and technology around these boundary spanners to
further promote organizational learning.
Background
T o ensure success in organizational learning, it is not adequate to just understand
knowledge processes and associated technology. This is because there are many other
factors that are necessary for knowledge processes to occur and the technology to be fully
utilized. In particular, there is a need to understand a special group of employees who
facilitate these processes and technology.
In recent years, there has been renewed interest in boundary spanning and the employees
performing this role. The group of employees engaged in such activities is known as
boundary spanners. This group of employees brings knowledge into the organization from
the external environment and vice versa. Typically, they include sales and customer service
representatives who work closely with customers.
Organizational boundaries
Organizational boundaries deﬁne the limits of organizations and departments within
organizations. These boundaries regulate the ﬂow of knowledge between the organization
and its outside environment, and between the functional departments. Brailsford (2001) said
that these boundaries impede the ﬂow of knowledge and the sharing of ideas. However,
whenever problems surface beyond the boundary of an organization or department, there
will be activities across the organizational boundaries to ﬁnd a solution. These activities are
referred to as boundary spanning.
Boundary spanning is a phenomenon that takes place at the limits of organizations. This
means that knowledge from inside the organization is exchanged with those outside the
organization and vice versa. Dollinger (1984) mentioned that boundary spanning is
important to organizations because the ﬂow of knowledge it generates helps them better
understand the outside world.
Boundary spanners
Employees who perform such a role are called boundary spanners. Sarason and Lorentz
(1998) referred to these individuals as ‘‘gatekeepers’’ while Katz and Tushman (1979)
identiﬁed them as ‘‘coordinators’’. Boundary spanners frequently communicate across
organizational boundaries and perform a variety of activities that may support the
organization or link several organizations together. They represent their own organizations to
customers and facilitate knowledge sharing across the customer’s organization and theirs.
DOI 10.1108/14777280610687989 VOL. 20 NO. 5 2006, pp. 9-11, Q Emerald Group Publishing Limited, ISSN 1477-7282 j DEVELOPMENT AND LEARNING IN ORGANIZATIONS j PAGE 9
Siu Loon Hoe is a managing
consultant based at Atos
Origin, Singapore.
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/dlo/article-pdf/20/5/9/282642/14777280610687989.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
Successful boundary spanners understand market conditions and the practices of all
external customers such that reasonable strategies can be developed in collecting and
sharing the necessary knowledge. Boundary spanners usually work with external
customers, suppliers and other employees to resolve problems. MacDonald (1995)
suggested that knowledge is often brought into organizations through informal and
individual contacts of boundary spanners. Boundary spanning contacts may develop
formally or informally, depending on the type of project. These contacts are usually located in
different places, and require the boundary spanners to process knowledge in different ways
and for different purposes.
The ability to disseminate knowledge across organizational boundaries is one of the core
strategic building blocks of a learning organization. Boundary spanners must be able to
acquire market knowledge from key customers and competitors, and disseminate
knowledge to internal colleagues. Tushman and Scanlan (1981) mentioned that boundary
spanning requires strong external and internal links because it involves obtaining
knowledge from outside the organization and disseminating the knowledge to internal
users. Thus, in addition to obtaining market knowledge, boundary spanners must also be
able to distribute the knowledge across internal boundaries. In this sense, boundary
spanners can inﬂuence the way employees in the organization perceive the external
environment. This is because boundary spanners determine the amount of knowledge that
enters the organization and who should receive this knowledge.
Boundary spanners work in areas where external and internal organizational boundaries
cross and overlap. They occupy unique positions in organizations because of their
work-related competence, and control over the acquisition and dissemination of knowledge.
These boundary spanners may be employees, supervisors or managers. Their unique
position arises due to their individual motivation more than as a result of their position in the
organizational hierarchy.
Role and selection
Consequently, boundary spanning roles are generally more loosely deﬁned and continually
changing than nonboundary spanning jobs. There may exist issues of role ambiguity and
role conﬂict. This is because a boundary spanner usually has to balance internal staff and
external customer demands. Most often, trying very hard to compromise between different
sets of internal and customer practices creates tensions. On the positive side, because of
this uncertainty and lack of clarity of the roles, boundary spanners may be able to act on
unexpected opportunities that can bring about improved conditions for the customer.
Boundary spanners may be selected ﬁrstly based on their functional areas. Those
employees in the areas of sales, customer service and project management are prime
candidates for boundary spanning activities. Beyond these functional areas, boundary
spanners should preferably exhibit personal qualities such as being sociable and friendly,
enjoy new experiences and able to express their thoughts freely. Other qualities include
being ﬂexible, adaptable and spontaneous.
Conclusion
The role of boundary spanners in acquiring, disseminating, and using market knowledge is
key to success in organizational learning. This often-neglected group presents a hidden
source of potential to be tapped. Managers who wish to enhance organizational learning
should focus on this group of employees and design knowledge process and technology
around them to support their knowledge activities.
Keywords:
Learning organizations,
Knowledge management
References
Brailsford, T .W. (2001), ‘‘Building a knowledge community at Hallmark Cards’’, Research T echnology
Management, Vol. 44 No. 5, pp. 18-25.
Dollinger, M.J. (1984), ‘‘Environmental boundary spanning and information processing effects on
organizational performance’’, Academy of Management Journal , Vol. 27, pp. 351-68.
PAGE 10 jDEVELOPMENT AND LEARNING IN ORGANIZATIONS j VOL. 20 NO. 5 2006
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/dlo/article-pdf/20/5/9/282642/14777280610687989.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
Katz, R. and Tushman, M. (1979), ‘‘Communication patterns, project performance, and task
characteristics: an empirical evaluation and integration in an R&D setting’’, Organizational Behavior
and Human Performance , Vol. 23 No. 1, pp. 139-62.
MacDonald, S. (1995), ‘‘Leaning to change: an information perspective on learning in the organization’’,
Organization Science, Vol. 6 No. 5, pp. 557-68.
Sarason, S.B. and Lorentz, E.M. (1998), Crossing Boundaries: Collaboration, Coordination, and the
Redeﬁnition of Resources , Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA.
Tushman, M.L. and Scanlan, T .J. (1981), ‘‘Boundary spanning individuals: their role in information
transfer and their antecedents’’, Academy of Management Journal , Vol. 24 No. 1, pp. 289-305.
Corresponding author
Siu Loon Hoe can be contacted at: siuloon.hoe@atosorigin.com
VOL. 20 NO. 5 2006 jDEVELOPMENT AND LEARNING IN ORGANIZATIONS j PAGE 11
T o purchase reprints of this article please e-mail: reprints@emeraldinsight.com
Or visit our web site for further details: www.emeraldinsight.com/reprints
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/dlo/article-pdf/20/5/9/282642/14777280610687989.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026