ployee control and ﬂexibility
Tyler R. Morgan, Adam Rapp, R. Glenn Richey, Jr. and Alexander E. Ellinger
Department of Marketing, The University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, Alabama, USA
Abstract
Purpose – The purpose of this research is to explore how ﬁrm market orientation, as a culture, affects the service climate that develops in the ﬁrm.
Design/methodology/approach – Empirical testing is performed at the managerial level and boundary-spanning employee level as part of this
multilevel study. The sample includes participants from a US-based ﬁrm operating in the hospitality industry.
Findings – Results indicate that a market-oriented ﬁrm culture interacts with other elements such as boundary-spanning employee ﬂexibility and
control to positively impact the service climate that develops.
Research limitations/implications – This research provides theoretical implications for the development of a service climate within a
market-oriented ﬁrm culture and the inﬂuence of managers on boundary-spanning employees in the development of the climate.
Practical implications – As managers attempt to develop a service climate through a market-oriented ﬁrm culture, they will ﬁnd success by
providing boundary-spanning employees with control and hiring employees that possess ﬂexibility as a personality trait.
Originality/value – The framework developed in this research provides insights regarding the multilevel nature of service climate development and
the impact of a market-oriented culture.
Keywords Culture, Flexibility, Market orientation, Service climate, Boundary spanner
Paper type Research paper
An executive summary for managers and executive
readers can be found at the end of this issue.
Introduction
Marketing continuously evolves. The early work of marketing
focused on product orientation where the ﬁrm facilitated the
transfer of ownership and distribution of goods (Achrol, 1991;
Gummesson, 1991). Now, out of necessity, many ﬁrms have
shifted to market orientation in their pursuit of improved ﬁrm
performance by increasing the value that products deliver to
consumers through a better understanding of their needs
(Kumar et al., 2011). As many markets become crowded with
competition,
it
is
increasingly
important
for
ﬁrms
to
differentiate themselves from their competitors. Firms have
done this is by increasing the value they provide customers
through the services they offer (Gebauer et al., 2011;
Karmarkar,
2004).
Although
the
beneﬁts
of
providing
superior service are well understood (Day and Wensley, 1988;
Zeithaml et al., 1996), the mechanisms through which ﬁrms
can achieve such service are not. We explore the mechanisms
that facilitate superior service, and thus, a competitive
advantage for ﬁrms. Speciﬁcally, we investigate constructs at
two different levels within the ﬁrm (i.e. employee and
manager) that have the potential to inﬂuence service climate.
First, we examine market orientation, which Slater and Narver
(1995) deﬁne as a ﬁrm culture that places priority on customer
value while also providing norms for behavior regarding ﬁrm
development and responsiveness to market information. A
market-oriented culture can beneﬁt the ﬁrm as it pursues an
advantage
over
competitors
through
service.
Speciﬁcally,
market-oriented ﬁrms aim to gain a competitive advantage by
focusing
their
efforts
on
understanding
customers
and
competitors,
while
also
promoting
the
inter-functional
coordination of ﬁrm resources (Narver and Slater, 1990). A
ﬁrm’s culture describes the norms and values that ﬁrm managers
and employees believe are present, while the ﬁrm’s climate
illustrates how the ﬁrm operationalizes the culture in everyday
behaviors (Deshpandé and Webster, 1989). If managers have
successfully developed a culture within the ﬁrm, then a climate
should be present to reinforce the values and beliefs of that
culture. Boundary-spanning employees aim to project a climate
of service to their customers through an enhanced understanding
of their needs as developed