BRIDGING THE GAP: MANAGERS' EXTERNAL RELATIONSHIPS 
AND THEIR EFFECTS ON SUBORDINATES 
Neil Andrew Cohen 
A DISSERTATION 
in 
Management 
For the Graduate Group in Managerial Science and Applied Economics 
Presented to the Faculties of the University of Pennsylvania 
in 
Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for the 
Degree of Doctor of Philosophy 
2011 
Supervisor of Dissertation 
f^C 
Dr. Katharine J. Klein, Professor of Management 
Graduate Group Chairperson 
Dr. Eric Bradlow, Professor of Marketing, Statistics, and Education 
Dissertation Committee: 
Dr. Adam Grant, Associate Professor of Management 
Dr. David Harrison, Professor of Management, University of Texas at Austin 
Dr. Michael Useem, Professor of Management 
UMI Number: 3475924 
All rights reserved 
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS 
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted. 
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript 
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed, 
a note will indicate the deletion. 
UMT 
Dissertation Publishing 
UMI 3475924 
Copyright 2011 by ProQuest LLC. 
All rights reserved. This edition of the work is protected against 
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code. 
ProQuest LLC 
789 East Eisenhower Parkway 
P.O. Box 1346 
Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346 
BRIDGING THE GAP: MANAGERS' EXTERNAL RELATIONSHIPS 
AND THEIR EFFECTS ON SUBORDINATES 
Copyright 
2011 
Neil Andrew Cohen 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Like most doctoral students, I've arrived at moment in which I reflect on the 
phase of the journey about to be completed and the new phase about to begin. The only 
difference between me and many others who have come before is that my journey began 
over 25 years ago as a junior at Brown University and included an 18 year sojourn in 
Corporate America before returning to academia. With a journey of this length comes a 
long list of important people who have stoked my passions, shepherded my training, and 
provided me the emotional support and inspiration necessary to make this dream a reality. 
I thank Dr. David Runkle, my undergraduate advisor at Brown, who first reached 
out to me and suggested the possibility of engaging in scholarly research. I am a big 
believer in the role of serendipity and fate and believe whole heartedly that were it not for 
Dave's proactivity in 1985,1 wouldn't be in academia at all. Dr. Paula Petrik and the late 
Dr. Robert Hawkes, both of the Department of History at George Mason University, 
played similar roles in 2002-2003 when I took courses with them as a prelude to jumping 
back into the academic world. 
I am extremely appreciative of the opportunities afforded to me by Richard 
Fairbank and Nigel Morris, CEO/Chairman and President/COO respectively of Capital 
One Financial Corporation during my tenure there from 1994-2005. In addition to 
founding and growing a wildly successful corporation, Rich and Nigel created an 
organization at Capital One that provided young analytical types like me the opportunity 
to cut their teeth at business leadership and management. I spent many years at Capital 
One experiencing the exhilarating highs and lows of leadership. Out of these experiences 
iii 
came my thirst to study and more thoroughly understand the complex dynamics of 
organizational leadership. 
My dissertation committee has been nothing short of supportive and inspiring and 
I will be forever in their debt. Mike Useem brought a lifetime of developing and 
observing leaders as well as a sharp pragmatic eye to the questions I examine in this 
study. He was instrumental in asking the "yes, but what about..." questions that reflected 
the realities of organizational life and dynamics. 
In Dave Harrison, I found a mentor who had deep experience in almost all facets 
of the critical elements of my study, most notably a scholar who had previously married 
social network analysis with micro organizational phenomenon. I've learned that Dave 
can bring his wealth of experience to bear in a moment's notice, incisively finding the 
point of leverage (or weakness) in the theory, method, or analytical strategy of the 
project. Importantly, it was Dave who made the critical requirement that my study 
account for the effects of managers' external relationships and boundary spanning roles 
above and beyond the effects of traditional internal leadership behaviors. 
Adam Grant arrived at Wharton in the summer of 2009 and immediately joined 
my committee. What a stroke of good fortune for me! I've learned that Adam is a literal 
font of knowledge and experience. It is a hallmark of his (at least in my eyes) that 
whenever he answers a question of mine, he invariably includes a citation, and most 
likely the associated pdf itself, of an article that opens up significant new vistas for me. 
Adam's input covered all aspects of the study as well. In particular, though, I am grateful 
iv 
to him for pushing me on the theoretical framing of the study. The theoretical 
contributions are much clearer because of Adam's involvement. 
Katherine Klein has been my advisor, dissertation chair, and dedicated mentor 
during all of my years at Wharton. It is not possible to offer enough thanks to Katherine 
for all that she has contributed during my apprenticeship. I initially gravitated to working 
with Katherine because of her scholarly focus on leadership and teams. And, in another 
moment of serendipity, it was through Katherine's more recent research that I came to 
immerse myself in social networks and the ways that social network frameworks might 
inform the study of leadership. Yet, it is really Katherine's infectious enthusiasm for our 
research and the development of her students that has kept me engaged. Over the years, 
she has been an outstanding teacher and trainer, an inspiring and fun research partner, and 
an extremely supportive friend. I couldn't have asked for anything more. 
I am indebted to many of other colleagues at Wharton. Lori Rosenkopf quietly 
played a critical role in my development through her roles as doctoral coordinator, 
instructor of the doctoral seminar in networks, and as my manager, from 2006-2009 when 
she was course head of Management 101. And, JP Eggers played that critical initial 
buddy/mentor role in the very first stages of my socialization at Wharton in the summer 
of2005. 
As much as any faculty member, Andrew Knight, Mathis Schulte, and Noah 
Eisenkraft have served as teachers and mentors for me in the ways of our craft. When in 
doubt on a methodological, empirical, or analytical point—no matter how large or small, 
wise or not so~I knew that I could reach out to these three gurus for the latest and 
v 
greatest thinking and that they would offer it up quickly and thoughtfully. I also offer 2 
thanks to Noah who selflessly provided the systems back bone for my networK surve; .-
,„J suffered through with me during all of the iterations and customization that came 
with two time periods, three respondent groups, and four research sites. 
While Andrew, Mathis, and Noah were a bit ahead of me at Wharton, Dave Lebel 
and Shimul Melwani have been along for the ride, more or less experiencing the ups and 
downs of the Ph.D process in lock step with me. Although I was remote from 
Philadelphia for much of the final two years of the process, I knew that I could lean on 
Dave and Shimul for emotional support and that I would return the same for them. 
I cannot thank enough the people of Organizations A, B, C, and D and in 
particular my supporters and sponsors at each: Don, Garrett, Gary, Randy, Ann, John, 
Scott, and Ellen. Don, Gary, John, and Scott, as senior executives in each organization, 
provided much needed sponsorship for the study with their staffs and, for better or for 
worse, took a flier on the notion that network data gathering would be valuable to them 
and would not light any fires. I think we delivered on both counts. Garrett, Randy, Ann, 
and Ellen were simply invaluable both in making the tactics of the projects a reality and 
in problem solving with me to ask questions in just the right way to uncover the 
phenomena in question. 
I thank my extended family, the Cohens, Meyers, and Rosses, who have been 
consistently interested in and supportive of my research and studies, even when I found 
myself in a dark mood about them or when I fired up the PC and Internet to work at odd 
and seemingly inappropriate times. In particular, I thank my parents for stoking my 
vi 
academic passions, for imbuing me with the intellectual curiosity so necessary to succeed 
as a scholar, and for loving and supporting me unconditionally over the past 45 years. 
And, I thank my beautiful and talented children, Josh and Lily. I thank them in a 
small way for tolerating the complexity and messiness of my commuting in the first years 
of my program and for the odd hours I've kept over the past few months as I've finished 
this project. But, more importantly, I thank them for being the great kids that they are 
and for reminding me, like all parents, what's really important in life. 
Finally, I come to my extraordinary wife, Deb. Truthfully, I would have to add an 
entire chapter to this dissertation to fully articulate what Deb means to me and how she 
has loved, supported, and inspired me in the 25 years that we have been together. Suffice 
it say that everyone should be so fortunate as I to have a life partner who brings such 
amazing passion, heart, beauty, and intellect to everything she does and everyone she 
touches. 
vii 
ABSTRACT 
BRIDGING THE GAP: MANAGERS' EXTERNAL RELATIONSHIPS 
AND THEIR EFFECTS ON SUBORDINATES 
Neil Andrew Cohen 
Supervisor: Dr. Katherine J. Klein 
In this dissertation, I develop a conceptual model for how managers' roles as 
boundary spanners within their organizations affect the perceptions, attitudes, 
relationships, and performance of their subordinate employees. Drawing on literatures in 
social networks, status characteristics theory, social identity theory, and resource 
allocation theory, I suggest that managers' external relationships—the connections that 
managers make to organization members outside of their subordinate work group—have a 
material impact on their subordinates' perceptions of their work environment and their 
managers. These perceptions, I argue, serve as four specific mechanisms in an indirect 
effects model that connect managers' external relationship to their employees' task 
performance and work attitudes (e.g. organizational commitment) and the Leader 
Member Exchange (LMX) relationships between manager and subordinate. I apply the 
theoretical model to two salient types of managerial relationships: those with their bosses 
and those with their horizontal peers. 
I test the hypotheses in a field study across three sites encompassing 200 front line 
managers, their bosses, and their front line subordinate employees. I find that managers' 
viii 
external relationships serve as both conduits of information and perceptual cues of 
managerial status in the eyes of their subordinates. When managers have more extensive 
peer networks and deeper relationships with their bosses, their subordinates have greater 
access to organizational information and perceive the managers as higher status within 
the organization. Status is, in turn, related to subordinate performance, organizational 
commitment, and LMX with the focal manager. Information access is associated with 
subordinate organizational commitment. In addition, when subordinates perceive that 
they have the necessary resources to adequately perform their roles and when they 
perceive the manager as being "one" with the group—both potential aspects of the 
manager's boundary spanning role—they experience greater organizational commitment 
and LMX relationships. The framework and study shed considerable light on the nature 
of managers' boundary spanning roles and the manner in which their external 
relationships may shape these roles. 
The theoretical model and results make contributions to the literatures on 
leadership, social networks, and boundary spanning. I discuss these contributions as well 
as the implications of my findings for practicing managers. 
IX 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Acknowledgements iii 
Abstract viii 
Table of Contents x 
List of Tables xi 
List of Figures xii 
Section I: Introduction 1 
Section II: Inputs and outputs of the conceptual model 10 
Section III: Theory and Hypotheses 18 
Section IV: Method and Analytical Considerations 51 
Section V: Results 78 
Section VI: Discussion and Conclusion 104 
Bibliography 149 
Tables 165 
Figures 206 
Appendix A: Survey items 216 
x 
LIST OF TABLES 
1 Summary of Sample and Survey Response 165 
2 Sample Differences: Pilot Site vs. Study Sites 166 
3 Summary of Data Collection Approach 167 
4 Summary of Peer Networks 168 
5 Confirmatory Factor Analysis of Leader Leader Exchange (LLX) Scales 169 
6 Confirmatory Factor Analysis of Intervening Variables 170 
7 Confirmatory Factor Analysis of Subordinate Assessed Dependent Variables 171 
8 Level 1/Subordinate Level Means, Standard Deviations and Pearson Correlations 172 
9 Level 2/Manager Level Means, Standard Deviations and Pearson Correlations 174 
10 Summary of Results (Three Panels) 175 
11 Managers'External Relationships Predict Resource Access 178 
12 Managers' External Relationships Predict Information Access 179 
13 Managers' External Relationships Predict Manager Status 180 
14 Managers' External Relationships Predict Ascribed Identity 181 
15 Managers'External Relationships Predict Manager Availability 182 
16 Managers' External Relationships Predict Time Constraints 183 
17 Network Benefits and Costs Predict Sales Performance 184 
18 Network Benefits and Costs Predict Sales Subordinate Performance (Mgr Rated) 186 
19 Network Benefits and Costs Predict Organizational Commitment 188 
20 Network Benefits and Costs Predict Leader Member Exchange 190 
21 Managers'External Relationships Predict Sales Performance 192 
22 Managers' External Relationships Predict Subordinate Performance (Mgr Rated) 197 
23 Managers' External Relationships Organizational Commitment 200 
24 Managers' External Relationships Leader Member Exchange 203 
25 Explanatory Variable Correlations with Manager Personality 204 
26 Manager Personality as Predictors of Intervening Variables 205 
XI 
LIST OF FIGURES 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 Theoretical Model 
Managers' Peer Advice Network, Organization A 
Managers' Peer Friendship Network, Organization A 
Managers' Peer Advice Network, Organization B 
Managers' Peer Friendship Network, Organization B 
Managers' Peer Advice Network, Organization C 
Managers' Peer Friendship Network, Organization C 
Summary of Results 
Information Access: Peer vs. Boss Effects 
Manager Status: Peer vs. Boss Effects 206 
207 
208 
209 
210 
211 
212 
213 
214 
215 
Xll 
SECTION I: INTRODUCTION 
When leadership researchers study managers, they generally study the manner in 
which managers supervise their subordinates and the effects these choices have on 
subordinate performance and work attitudes (Yukl, 2006). Within this rich stream of 
research, researchers have documented that managers may have tremendous effect on 
subordinate performance and work attitudes through the relationships they build with 
individual employees (see Graen & Uhl-Bien, 1995, for a review) and through the 
subordinate focused behaviors and leadership styles they choose to employ (Bass, 1990; 
Stogdill, 1974; see Judge & Piccolo, 2004; Judge, Piccolo, & Hies, 2004 for recent meta­
analyses). In this research, managers have an effect on subordinates, their work attitudes 
and their performance through either one-on-one/dyadic relationships or through the 
actions that managers take toward the work group or team as a whole (e.g. Balkundi & 
Harrison, 2006; Edmondson, 1999; Hackman, 1987). 
While this body of work is critical to our understanding of managerial roles and 
processes, it tells only a portion of the story about the role of a manager within an 
organization. For years, both the academic (Minztberg, 1973; Yukl, 2006) and 
practitioner (Davis, 1996; Kotter, 1999) literatures have recognized that managerial 
responsibilities extend beyond the direct management and supervision of subordinates. 
Formal managerial roles are seen as boundary spanning (Ancona & Caldwell, 1992) or 
brokerage roles (Mehra, Dixon, Brass, & Robertson, 2006) with the manager situated, 
within an organizational social system, as the critical, and often only, point of connection 
between his or her subordinates and the broader organization beyond the work group 
1 
(Mintzberg, 1973; Likert, 1961; Graen, Cashman, Ginsburg, & Scheimann, 1977). In 
these roles, managers are called upon to transfer resources and information in and out of 
the group (Whetten, 1978; Likert, 1961) and to serve as the face of the organization in the 
eyes of subordinates and the face of the work group in the eyes of the broader 
organization (Pfeffer, 1981; Mintzberg, 1973). To deliver on this brokerage role, 
managers must build and maintain relationships with stakeholders beyond than their 
subordinates—-e.g. peers, superiors, customers, investors, regulators, and others. 
Yet, leadership research rarely considers this web of external relationships that 
managers have with others throughout the organization, most notably their peers and their 
bosses1, or the effect these relationships have on the manager's subordinate employees. 
To be sure, there are rich and growing literatures which explore the impacts of 
individuals' relationships with their direct supervisors (e.g. Gerstner & Day, 1997; Graen 
& Uhl-Bien, 1995; Dienesch & Liden, 1986) and their network of relationships 
throughout the organization (e.g. Ibarra & Andrews, 1993; Mehra, Kilduff, & Brass, 
2001; Sparrowe, Liden, Wayne, & Kraimer, 2001). However, this research does not 
explicitly address those members in managerial roles and the connection of these upward 
and horizontal relationships to the delivery of downward supervision. Recognizing this 
gap in our understanding of managerial processes, two recent studies do explicitly study 
the impact of a manager's external relationships on providing early evidence that 
employees benefit from working for well connected managers (e.g. Tangirala, Green, & 
Ramanujam, 2007; Venkataramani, Green, & Schleicher, 2010). While encouraging, 
1 Throughout this document I will refer to the superior of the focal manager as the "boss." 
2 
these studies only begin our exploration of the issues of managers' boundary spanning. 
In particular, these studies leave open the question as to how the effects of managers' 
external relationships are transferred to subordinates. What are the mediating or linking 
mechanisms involved here? More pointedly, what are the aspects of the manager's 
boundary spanning role that benefit or potentially hinder their subordinates? In addition, 
research to date has yet to explore a full array of both external relationships and relevant 
individual subordinate level outcomes. 
In this dissertation, then, I explore managers' external relationships, their 
boundary spanning roles, and their effects of each on subordinates, focusing on three 
interrelated research questions. First, and foremost, do managers' external relationships 
affect the nature of the work life for their subordinates? In effect, how do managers' 
external relationships provide benefits to managers and subordinates alike? To what 
extent do managers' external relationships shape subordinate perceptions, attitudes, 
relationships, and performance? Second, how do external relationships affect more distal 
subordinate level outcomes such as performance and commitment? More pointedly, what 
are the more proximal effects through which managers' external relationships shape more 
distal outcomes. Third, and finally, do these effects and mechanisms differ by type of 
external relationships, in this case vertical relationships, i.e. between manager and boss, 
as compared to lateral relationships between managers and their peers? 
I construct and test theory that explores three types of effects of managers' 
external relationships. First, external relationships may create benefits for managers and 
subordinates. Following Podolny (2001), I draw a distinction between two manners in 
3 
which relationships and networks create benefits for organizational participants. First, 
under social network theory, managers use their external relationships to gain access to 
key task related resources1 and organizational information which they then make 
available to their subordinates (Tushman & Katz, 1980; Tushman & Scanlan, 1981). 
Second, drawing on status characteristics and expectation states theory, I argue that 
managers' external relationships serve as status markers (Berger, Cohen, & Zelditch, 
1972) in the eyes of their subordinates, such that subordinates use their managers' 
external relationships as signals of the manager's status within the organization. 
The second set of potential effects follow Adler & Kwon (2002) and consider 
potential downsides or costs of managers' external relationships. Drawing on social 
identity theory, I argue that managers' external relationships build cohesion and solidarity 
for them with external groups (Adler & Kwon, 2002; Coleman, 1990). But, this external 
solidarity may come at the expense of their cohesion and solidarity with their 
subordinates, weakening their identities as members of the subordinate work group 
(Tajfel & Turner, 1986; Hogg, 2001). Second, drawing on resource allocation theory 
(Becker, 1965), I argue that managers with extensive networks will be time constrained 
(Jansenn, 2001), leading them to be less available and accessible to their subordinates. 
2 As described in the theory section, in this study, I follow Spreitzer (1996) and Kanter (1986) and define 
"resource" as the things people need within and from an organization to get the job done. I note, however, 
that Foa and Foa (1974) define resources more broadly as "anything that can be transferred from one 
person to another (Brinberg & Castell, 1982, pg 260 )." Within the Foa & Foa framework, resources 
include six categories: money, goods, services, information, love, and status. I position information and 
status as distinct constructs as they are tend to occupy unique roles in social networks theory, and hence the 
theory of this study. Following Spreitzer and Kanter, then, resources generally refers to money, time, 
physical space, and materials and tools. 
4 
The final set of effects is more distal to the managers' external relationships and 
reflects the fundamental interests of organizational scholars and practitioners alike. 
Organizational scholars are fundamentally concerned with two types of outcomes at the 
subordinate level: performance and work attitudes (Katz & Kahn, 1978; Labianca & 
Brass, 2006; Harrison, Newman, & Roth, 2006). As such, I examine the effect that 
managers' external relationships have on subordinate task performance and 
organizational commitment common and sought after exemplars each of employee 
performance and work attitudes (Chiaburu & Harrison, 2008; Harrison et al., 2006). In 
addition, following the lead of Tangirala et al. (2007) and Venkataramani et al. (2010), I 
include the Leader Member Exchange (LMX) relationship between manager and 
subordinate as a key outcome of interest (Liden & Maslyn, 1998). The theory I build 
regarding these more distal outcomes takes two forms. First, I build an indirect effects 
model (Mathieu & Taylor, 2006) which suggests that managers' external relationships 
create the benefits and costs described above which in turn shape organizational 
commitment, performance, and LMX. Second, I integrate the notion of the costs and 
benefits to propose a curvilinear relationship between managers' boundary spanning 
relationships and these three subordinate outcomes. Figure 1 provides a summary of the 
theoretical model developed here. 
I use the theoretical framework to examine managers' relationships with two key 
types of stakeholder—peers and bosses. Peers and bosses reflect two of the most 
prominent managerial relationships (Mintzberg, 1973) and highlight differences between 
vertical, hierarchical relationships vested with power and control and rich in 
5 
organizational resources (Brass, 1984; Sparrowe & Liden, 2005; Graen et al., 1977) and 
horizontal, discretionary relationships potentially rich in knowledge and know-how 
(Mehra et al., 2006; Hansen, 1999). In addition, while other relevant stakeholder groups 
(e.g. customers, suppliers, shareholders, etc.) exist for some types of managers, bosses 
and peers are the stakeholders most common across managers in general. 
I test my hypotheses in a field study encompassing three US based service 
organizations. In these settings, I examined the external relationships of front line 
managers and their impact on the front line workers (subordinates) in those organizations. 
In conducting these tests, I controlled for the managers' display of transformational 
leadership behaviors. As already noted, researchers have compiled a wealth of evidence 
of the value of the downward or internal managerial role. In examining the external or 
boundary spanning roles, a strong test must account for these internal role effects 
(Chiaburu & Harrison, 2008). Research shows that transformational leadership is a 
strong predictor of subordinate attitudes and performance and is strongly correlated with 
other downward leadership behaviors (Judge and Piccolo, 2004). In addition, recent 
research suggests that transformational leadership may be a key factor in determining a 
leader's network configuration (Bono & Anderson, 2005). In the absence of controlling 
for transformational leadership, then, we would be left wondering the extent to which 
external relationships and roles add value beyond the well established internal 
perspective. 
The results of the empirical study paint a complex and nuanced picture of the 
effects of managers' external relationships and boundary spanning roles. The analyses 
6 
support a nuanced indirect effects model (Mathieu & Taylor, 2006) in which (a) 
managers' vertical and horizontal relationships predict subordinate information access, 
perceptions of managerial status, and manager accessibility and (b) these three effects 
are, in turn, related, in varying degrees, to subordinate organizational commitment, 
performance and LMX. At the same time, the results do not reveal substantial costs or 
downsides of managers' external relationships, highlighting instead the benefits that 
accrue to managers and subordinates. In addition, the analyses reveal a focused set of 
direct effects, primarily linking the managers' upward relationships with their bosses to 
the organizational commitment and performance of their subordinates. This combination 
of results, then, focuses attention on the intervening mechanisms, shedding considerable 
light on the manager's boundary spanning role, how external relationships may shape the 
role and how enactment of the role benefits subordinates. 
In building the theoretical framework and conducting the empirical tests of the 
hypotheses I make several contributions to the literatures on leadership, social networks, 
and boundary spanning. First, while this is not the first study to explicitly explore the role 
of the manager's external networks in bridging between his or her subordinate work 
group and the group's external environment (e.g. Tangirala et al., 2007; Venkataramani et 
al., 2010), it brings a more holistic framework to bear, which provides a more nuanced 
look at the phenomenon. By examining a wide range of effects, both proximal and distal, 
I build an integrative theory and analysis which highlights the subtle differences between 
mechanisms and the effects they may have on subordinate outcomes. Studies of 
managers' boundary spanning roles have yet to examine many of the potential 
7 
mechanisms through which the role may have an impact or the integration among them. 
In addition, this study encompasses a sample of distal subordinate outcomes more fully 
representative of the interests of micro-organizational scholars. Most notably, the study 
provides insight into both the subordinate level task (e.g. performance) and socio-
emotional (commitment) outcomes of managers' boundary spanning roles. The 
exploration of these cross level network effects is relatively new and, as such, the 
combination of multiple mechanisms and multiple outcomes in this study substantially 
extends our understanding of how the managers' boundary spanning role is formed and 
operates. 
Second, while the primary focus of this study is on managers' external activities, I 
theorize that the external relationships and their resulting effects stand as distinct from 
more traditionally explored internal or downward leadership dimensions and behaviors. 
To account for this, distinct from prior studies, in the empirical section, I control for the 
managers' display of transformational leadership. This creates a high theoretical and 
empirical hurdle for the external effects that are the focal point of the study. More 
broadly, this study paints a theoretical picture of the integration of manager's internal and 
external activities and their internal and external reputations. 
Third, by invoking and testing an intervening effects model, this study contributes 
to the social networks literature by continuing to unbundle the mechanisms through 
which social networks have their effects. The study explicates not just whether and in 
what form managers' boundary spanning roles matter, but how and why, articulating the 
key mechanisms that link, in complex ways, the managers' external ties and the work life 
8 
of their subordinates. For the most part, previous network studies do not quantify these 
effects (e.g. Mehra et al., 2006) nor do they theorize across them in an integrated fashion. 
In addition, following Adler & Kwon (2002), this study is one of the few that explicitly 
simultaneously considers the benefits and risks inherent in the construction of social 
networks, exploring the tensions and the possibility of tradeoffs between them. In not 
finding significant costs, the empirical portion of my study contributes by placing 
considerations of cost in a secondary position. Finally, this study provides practical 
implications for managers and those involved in their professional development, by 
illuminating the value in the trade-offs involved in building and maintaining interpersonal 
networks throughout the organization. 
The remainder of this dissertation unfolds as follows. In Section II, I identify and 
define the inputs and outcomes of my research question: the types of relationships 
(bosses and peers) under consideration and the choice and definition of the three 
outcomes of interests. In Section II, I also describe the hurdle posed by previous research 
focused on downward leadership factors and the relationships of managers internal to the 
work group. In Section III, I build theory and hypotheses, depicted in Figure 1, 
describing how managers' external relationships are associated with four aspects of the 
managers' boundary spanning role and how these mechanisms, in turn, may shape 
subordinate level outcomes. I build this theory for managers' positive external 
relationships with peers and bosses. In Section IV, I describe the empirical and approach 
I take to testing the hypotheses. In Section V, I describe the results from the empirical 
9 
tests. In section VI, I discuss the theoretical and practical implications and conclusions 
from the study. 
SECTION II: 
INPUTS AND OUTPUTS OF THE CONCEPTUAL MODEL 
The purpose of this study is to examine the effects that managers' external 
relationships with peers and bosses have on their direct subordinates, how the managers' 
external relationships shape their boundary spanning roles, and how the intervening 
effects that come from behaving as boundary spanners may shape the performance and 
attitudes of their subordinates. As depicted in figure 1, at the core of my conceptual 
model, I argue that the effects of managers' external relationships are best understood by 
examining several key intervening effects (Mathieu & Taylor, 2006) that combine to 
influence subordinate level outcomes. In this section, prior to building the model itself, I 
lay the groundwork by (a) defining the external relationships under consideration, (b) 
identifying and defining the subordinate outcomes of interest, (c) positioning external 
relationship effects as distinct and incremental from traditional downward leadership 
factors. 
II.l Inputs: External relationships with bosses and peers 
II. La Boss and peer relationships as distinct external relationships 
In this study, I examine two salient types of managers' external relationships, 
those with their boss and those with their managerial peers. The boss is defined as the 
10 
manager's direct superior with whom the manager has a formal reporting relationship. I 
define peers as those individuals at the same level in the organization performing roles 
that are similar to or interdependent with those of the focal manager (Chiaburu & 
Harrison, 2008). Each of these relationships (or types) is a key factor in the work life of 
the manager. Managers may spend a substantial portion of their time interacting with 
peers (Mintzberg, 1973; Ferris and Mitchell, 1987), and thus, peers represent likely 
sources of diverse interpersonal relationships and the resources that flow from them. 
Boss relationships, while consuming less time than peers (Mintzberg, 1973), are a 
specific form of a manager/subordinate relationship. Voluminous research documents 
that superiors have impacts on subordinate effort and behaviors, attitudes and emotions, 
and performance through the behaviors and leadership styles they enact (e.g. Bass, 1990; 
Stogdill, 1974) and the nature of the relationship they build with their subordinates (e.g. 
Graen & Uhl-bien, 1995). Thus, the relationship a manager enjoys with his or her boss 
should have substantial bearing on the manner in which the manager affects the work 
environment of his or her subordinates. 
II.Lb Conceptualizing boss relationships vs. peer networks 
The boss relationship is a single dyadic relationship between the boss and the 
manager. I capture the nature of dyadic relationships between managers and their bosses 
through the concept of Leader Leader Exchange (LLX), where LLX is a specific 
application of Leader Member Exchange or LMX (Liden & Maslyn, 1998). LMX 
reflects the mutual trust and respect that employees and their supervisors have for each 
11 
other and the resulting reciprocal influence that each has in the relationship (Graen & 
Uhl-Bien, 1995). The LMX relationship is rooted in two related processes. Under role 
theory, supervisors and their subordinates test different types of relationships that may 
define the dyad, ultimately arriving at or negotiating the roles, expectations and behaviors 
of both supervisor and subordinate (Graen, 1976; Katz & Kahn, 1978). And, as 
described by social exchange theory, supervisors and subordinates engage in an exchange 
of valued resources. For example, subordinates provide a level of effort and task 
performance in exchange for assignments, promotions, autonomy, and status (Graen & 
Scandura, 1987; Liden & Maslyn, 1998). Managers in high LMX dyads harvest 
influence with their subordinates not through the transactional doling out of rewards and 
consequences, but rather through establishing bonds of affection, mutual obligation, and 
expertise (French & Raven, 1959; Liden & Maslyn, 1998). As a result, in high LMX 
dyads, subordinates tend to exhibit higher levels of satisfaction (Graen & Novak, 1982; 
Duchon, Green, & Taber, 1986), subordinates have more attractive career paths 
(Scandura & Shriesheim, 1994), and subordinates tend to deliver higher levels of 
performance (Liden, Wayne, & Stillwell, 1993; Graen & Novak, 1982). 
In this study, there are two levels of LMX relationships: relationships between 
front line workers and their focal managers and relationships between the focal managers 
and their bosses. In order to differentiate the two, I follow the precedent set by Tangirala 
et al. (2007) and Venkataramani et al., (2010), using the term Leader Member Exchange (LMX) 
to reflect the relationship between subordinates and managers and using the term Leader Leader 
Exchange (LLX) to reflect the relationship between the focal manager and his or her boss. LLX 
12 
represents managers' external vertical relationships in my conceptual model. LMX is an 
outcome variable in the conceptual model. 
Unlike boss relationships, which usually only involve one other individual in a 
dyad, managers find themselves embedded in networks of relationships of multiple peers 
(and others) throughout the organization. While the strength of any one relationship or 
even the aggregate will have a bearing on the manager, peer relationships present benefits 
and challenges for managers due to their volume and the structure of the entire network 
of relationships (Brass, 1984; Ibarra, 1993; Sparrowe et al., 2001). In this study, I focus 
on the volume of relationships, captured in the social networks literature as degree 
centrality (Freeman, 1979). Degree centrality is simply a count of the number of 
relationships or ties of a specific type or content that an individual has. A manager's 
degree centrality in the peer network captures the extent to which the manager has direct 
relationships that provide instrumental or affective resources. 
II.l.c Dimensions of workplace relationships 
In the empirical portion of the study, I examine two fundamental aspects of the 
relationships that managers have with their bosses and peers. Within the organizational 
literature, researchers distinguish between two types of content that characterize ties 
within social networks: instrumental and affective. People have instrumental 
relationships with each other for the purpose of providing work or task related resources, 
such as technical and organizational information, budget allocations, and staffing for key 
projects (Blau, 1962, Lincoln & Miller, 1979; Ibarra, 1992; Tushman & Katz, 1980; 
13 
Balkundi & Harrison, 2006; Hansen, 1999). Individuals also have relationships, such as 
friendships, through which they build or exchange affective resources, such as social and 
emotional support, trust, and displays of positive affect (Lincoln & Miller, 1979; Ibarra, 
1993; Balkundi & Harrison, 2006). Affective relationships also often encompass trust 
relationships (Balkundi & Harrison, 2006). 
Like peer networks, the LLX relationship between managers and their bosses may 
have multiple dimensions to them. Although researchers initially conceptualized LMX as 
a purely instrumental construct (e.g. Dansereau, Graen, & Haga, 1975), more recently 
researchers have positioned LMX as a multidimensional construct that more holistically 
evaluates the nature of the relationship between manager and subordinate (Liden & 
Maslyn, 1998). Both theoretical foundations of LMX stress a multi-dimensional 
conceptualization. Under role theory, some dyads will be more task oriented, while 
others more socially focused, and others may encompass both dimensions (Katz & Kahn, 
1978; Liden & Maslyn, 1998). Similarly, as described above, network researchers have 
identified several different dimensions under which social exchange may occur. Beyond 
theory, recent empirical research also suggests that this multi-dimensional perspective 
adds to the significance of LMX as an explanatory variable (Greguras & Ford, 2006). 
I employ this more expansive definition of LMX in examining the LLX 
relationships in the empirical portion of this study, focusing on its four constituent parts: 
affect, loyalty, contribution, and professional respect. Affect is defined as "the mutual 
affection members of the dyad have for each other based primarily on interpersonal 
attraction, rather than work or professional values." Loyalty is "the expression of public 
14 
support for the goals and personal character of the other member of the dyad." 
Contribution reflects the "perception of the current level of work-oriented activity each 
member puts forth toward the mutual goals.. .of the dyad." And, professional respect is 
the perception of the degree to which each member of the dyad has built a reputation, 
within and/or outside the organization of excelling at his or her line of work. (Liden & 
Maslyn, 1998, pg 50) 
Although researchers find fine grained differences in outcomes (Baldwin, Bedell, 
& Johnson, 1997; Podolny & Baron, 1997; Greguras & Ford, 2006) and antecedents 
(Klein, Lim, Saltz, & Mayer, 2004) between the types of ties, recent research also 
suggests a degree of overlap between them. Instrumental and affective ties may be 
highly correlated and interdependent (Casciaro & Lobo, 2008; Liden & Maslyn, 1998) 
and instrumental resources may flow through affective ties (Hansen, 1999; Ibarra, 1992; 
Mehra et al., 2006; Podolny & Baron, 1997; Mehra et al., 2001). As such, in building 
theory, I treat the content of manager's relationships as uni-dimensional, but in the 
empirical study, I differentiate between instrumental and affective content.3 
II.2 Subordinate level outcomes 
J Recently, a third major distinction has emerged. A small portion of relationships or ties may be 
characterized as negative, centered on feelings of "dislike" (Labianca & Brass, 2006). Negative ties are 
generally considered to be affective in nature Qlabianca & Brass, 2006), but may also manifest themselves 
in the negative instrumental behaviors of actors (Sparrow et al., 2001). Negative relationships may be 
important as they do not simply have the opposite effect of positive ties (Labianca, Brass, & Gray, 1998) 
and may have an amplified effect on outcomes relative to positive ties (Labianca & Brass). As described in 
the discussion section, I did gather data on negative ties as well, in the form of "difficult relationships." In 
the interest of theoretical parsimony, I discuss the insights from these data in the form of post hoc analyses. 
15 
Within the voluminous research on individual employee's work experiences, 
organizational and leadership researchers often focus on three broad categories of work 
outcomes: employee performance, employee work attitudes, and the nature of 
relationships between employees and their leaders (Labianca & Brass, 2006; Harrison et 
al., 2006; Katz & Kahn, 1978). As such, I have selected three outcomes for this study 
that represent the more common outcomes of interest in each of these categories: task 
performance, organizational commitment, and leader-member exchange (LMX). I briefly 
define each of these outcomes next. 
II. 2. a Subordinate performance 
For the purposes of this study, I define performance as in-role or task 
performance, "the degree to which an individual meets or exceeds expectations about 
focal role requirements (Harrison et al., 2006, pg 307)." This definition is one of the 
more narrow definitions of performance, excluding extra-role behaviors, most notably 
organizational citizenship behaviors (e.g. Organ, 1988). I choose to focus on in-role 
performance as it provides the opportunity for objective, third party measurement and, in 
its narrowness, provides the most conservative test of the theory. 
II. 2. b Organizational commitment 
In this study, I follow Meyer & Allen (1984) and define organizational 
commitment as "emotional attachment to, identification with, and involvement in the 
organization (Meyer & Allen, 1984, pg. 373)." This definition, reframed as affective 
16 
commitment by Allen & Meyer (1990) is similar to Mowday, Porter, & Steer's (1979) 
conception of attitudinal commitment as "the relative strength of an individual's 
identification with and involvement in a particular organization, (pg. 226)" 
Organizational commitment is a key individual employee attitude and has strong 
correlations with employee performance, withdrawal and turnover behavior, and general 
well being (see meta-analyses by Meyer et al., 2002; Mathieu & Zajac, 1990). In 
addition, there is strong evidence to suggest that managers play a critical role in 
facilitating and nurturing the organizational commitment of their subordinate employees 
(Meyer et al.; Mathieu & Zajac, 1990)4. 
II. 2. c Leader Member Exchange—Manager/subordinate interpersonal relationships 
As described above, I capture the nature of dyadic relationships between 
managers and subordinates through the concept of Leader Member Exchange or LMX 
(Liden & Maslyn, 1998). 
II. 3 Influence of external relationships as distinct from established leadership 
effects 
4 Allen & Meyer's (1990) model of organizational commitment includes two additional components. 
Continuance commitment reflects the instrumental reasons and factors, often conceptualized as costs, that 
an individual may remain with an organization (Meyer, Stanley, Herscovitch, & Toplonystsky, 2002). 
Normative commitment refers to an individual's perceived obligation to remain with an organization 
(Meyer et al., 2002). Researchers observe, however, that these factors tend to have weaker observed 
empirical effects and may represent behavioral intentions rather than the attitudes of organization members 
(Solinger, van Olffen, & Roe, 2008). 
17 
For over 50 years, scholars have investigated the leadership factors that affect 
such outcomes as subordinate performance, work attitudes, and leader/follower 
processes. Research shows that managers' traits (Kenny & Zaccaro, 1983; Judge, Bono, 
Hies, & Gerhardt, 2002) and behaviors (Judge & Piccolo, 2004; House, 1977; Bass, 1990; 
Fiedler, 1967; Stogdill, 1974) have substantial impact on the work attitudes, productivity, 
and ongoing relationships of individuals within organizations. An inherent premise of 
this study is that managers' external relationships affect subordinates in ways that go 
beyond the effects of downward leadership behaviors. I address this set of issues in two 
ways. First, in the theory section, where appropriate, I articulate how managers' external 
relationships may contribute to intervening processes or outcomes above and beyond 
traditional leadership dimensions such as transformational leadership, initiating structure 
and consideration, Or internal leader-member exchange. These effects may represent the 
same mechanism with a magnified or incremental effect or they may represent different 
mechanisms. Second, in my empirical study, I explicitly control for extant leadership 
dimensions as potential explanatory variables, thus isolating the true incremental effects 
of managers' external relationships. In all cases, the hypotheses I generate presume that 
the effects exist above and beyond those associated with downward leadership 
dimensions. 
SECTION III: THEORY AND HYPOTHESES 
In this section, I articulate the theory of how managers' external relationships may 
shape subordinate level outcomes, both proximal and distal. Figure 1 displays a 
18 
graphical representation of the model, highlighting the four proximal outcomes which 
serve as intervening mechanisms through which external relationships may function and 
which represent the demands of the manager's boundary spanning role. After a brief 
overview (section III.l), this section is organized around the four processes (sections III.2 
to III. 5. For each mechanism, I build theory that explains the boundary spanning effect 
of the mechanism and then how that effect contributes to the distal subordinate outcomes. 
In section III.6, having discussed each effect individually, I integrate the theory to 
develop hypotheses linking external relationships directly to the distal subordinate level 
outcomes. Finally, in section III.7,1 discuss the potential differential effects of vertical 
boss relationships versus horizontal peer relationships. 
III.1 The benefits and costs of managers' external relationships 
Following Podolny (2001), I draw a distinction between two manners in which 
relationships and networks may create benefits for organizational participants. First, the 
central tenet of social networks theory is that interpersonal relationships function as 
conduits of resource exchange, in which the ties between two people facilitate the flow of 
information, affect, and tangible resources, among others (Brass, Galaskiewicz, Greve, & 
Tsai, 2004). Managers, by design, serve as conduits of information and resources 
between their workgroup and the organization beyond it, often finding themselves in a 
brokerage position (Mintzberg, 1973; Mehra et al., 2006). Managers use their external 
relationships to gain access to key task related resources and organizational information 
which they then make available to their subordinates (Tushman & Katz, 1980; Tushman 
19 
& Scanlan, 1981). Second, networks serve as informational or perceptual cues regarding 
the identity and reputation of the organizational member (Podolny, 2001). Drawing on 
status characteristics and expectation states theory, I argue that managers' external 
relationships serve as status markers in the eyes of their subordinates. Subordinates use 
their managers' external relationships as signals of the manager's status within the 
organization (Ashforth & Humphrey, 1995), assessing managers with broader, more 
positive connections as higher status within the organization (Kilduff & Krackhardt, 
1994; Brass, 1984). 
At the same time, theorists suggest that social networks may also come with 
potential costs or risks. Following Adler & Kwon (2002), I identify two categories of 
potential cost. First, while external relationships may facilitate perceptions of status and 
power for managers, they may also serve to weaken their solidarity with their subordinate 
work groups. Drawing on social identity theory, I argue that managers' external 
relationships build cohesion for them with external groups (Adler & Kwon, 2002; 
Coleman, 1988). But, this external solidarity comes at the expense of their cohesion and 
solidarity with their subordinates, weakening their identities as members of the 
subordinate work group (Tajfel & Turner, 1986; Hogg, 2001). Second, theorists suggest 
that extensive networks of relationships require investment and active maintenance 
(Adler & Kwon, 2002; Burt, 2001). Drawing on resource allocation theory (Becker, 
1965), I argue that managers with extensive networks will be time constrained (Jansenn, 
2001), leading them to be less available and accessible to their subordinates. 
20 
III.2 Managers' external relationships as conduits of resource exchange 
III. 2. a Managers' external relationships and subordinate access to information and 
resources 
That networks and interpersonal relationships serve as conduits of resource exchange is at 
the core of the social networks literature (Brass et al., 2004; Lincoln and Miller, 1979). Valued 
resources—information, affect, money, etc.—are passed from one individual to another through 
the ties that exist between these individuals. Ties as conduits of resource exchange frame the 
discussion of managers' external relationships in two ways. First, that managers are a conduit of 
information and resources is the centerpiece of the external portion of the manager's role (e.g. 
Tushman & Katz, 1980; Hansen, 1999; Mehra et al., 2006; Tsai & Ghoshal, 1998). In this role, 
managers act as brokers, filtering and synthesizing the flow of information and resources in and 
out the group (Mintzberg, 1973). Second, the portfolio of relationships that the manager 
maintains external to the group enhances his or her ability to play the boundary spanning role. 
In their role as boundary spanners, managers facilitate the movement of 
information in multiple directions. For example, they communicate with their bosses 
about the current performance and morale of their subordinates, thus providing their 
bosses with critical information about the well being of employees throughout the 
organization. Armed with this information, more senior executives are able to make 
changes to organization policies and procedures and re-allocate resources such that 
employee performance and well being are enhanced or optimized (Kanter, 1986). At the 
same time, managers are expected to use their connections with their bosses and their 
peers to bring information and resources from external sources to the subordinate 
employee (Graen et al., 1977; Spreitzer, 1996). I define access to resources and 
information as subordinates' having the tools and assets necessary to do their jobs and the 
21 
organizational knowledge that puts their jobs and tasks in context (Spreitzer, 1996). 
Relevant information includes technical task information and best practices (Mehra et al., 
2006) or organizational and competitive information (Lawler, 1992). For example, 
managers harvest information related to how the group's task fits into the organization as 
a whole or how it integrates with other neighboring sub-units. In effect, managers have 
access to the organizational context of their subordinates' task (Bowen & Lawler, 1992). 
In addition, managers must look to their bosses to provide tangible resources such as staff 
and budgets to allow their groups to perform optimally (Graen et. al, 1977; Kanter, 1986; 
Spreitzer, 1996). Further, managers may share information with each other that 
represents tacit knowledge and know-how that ultimately allows each group to execute 
their task more efficiently and effectively (Hansen, 1999). For example, sales managers 
who cover different geographic regions may share tactics with each other regarding to 
how to sell or position a particular product. Having gained this information from their 
peers, managers may then share it with their subordinates (Mehra et al., 2006; Tushman 
& Scanlan, 1981; Mintzberg, 1973; Graen et al, 1977). 
Although managers generally have access to both peers and bosses through the 
formal structure of the organization, managers with deeper and broader interpersonal 
relationships will have greater access to mission critical information and resources. 
Because of time constraints, bosses establish differentiated relationships with their 
subordinate managers and tend to select a small group of their managers to implicitly 
serve as their lieutenants (Graen, 1976). These lieutenant managers provide the boss with 
managerial leverage by taking on tasks and responsibilities that might otherwise be 
22 
performed by the boss himself. In so doing, bosses grant these lieutenant managers more 
autonomy and empower them by granting them access to much of the information 
available to the boss (Dansereau et al., 1975). It is necessary for bosses to provide this 
information so that the subordinate manager may effectively play the surrogate role. 
Over time, the relationships between superiors and their lieutenants solidify, with each 
member displaying greater affect, trust, and respect for each other (Graen & Uhl-bien, 
1995; Liden & Maslyn, 1998). Those subordinates who serve as lieutenants are viewed 
as part of the boss's "in-group." In order to maintain the subordinate as a trusted 
lieutenant, bosses tend to favor them, allocating disproportionate shares of such resources 
and spoils as assignments, bonuses, promotions, and task related resources to them 
(Dansereau et al., 1975; Scandura & Shriesheim, 1994). 
Managers may also take advantage of networks of peer relationships to access key 
information and resources. A key tenet of the social networks literature is that individuals 
who are central in intra-organizational social networks gain access to key information and 
resources that in turn enable performance, power and influence (Freeman, 1979; Burt, 
1992; Brass, 1984; Sparrowe et al., 2001; Mehra et al., 2001). A manager's peers within 
the organization perform similar (Mehra et al., 2006) or interrelated (Wageman, 1995) 
functions. As a result, when managers build and take advantage of interpersonal 
relationships with their peers they gain access to important task specific knowledge and 
potential best practices approaches (Hansen, 1999; Ancona & Caldwell, 1992; Szulnaski, 
1996). In addition, through their relationships with their peers, managers may learn the 
tacit rules of the road within the organization (Hill, Kogler, Bahniuk, Dobos, & Rouner, 
23 
1989) that shine a light on to whom to go for critical information or situation specific 
resources. Interpersonal relationships among peers create a form of social exchange 
(Blau, 1964) in which members feel compelled or obligated to assist each other in 
enhancing their performance (Seers, 1989; Ensher, Thomas, & Murphy, 2001; Chiaburu 
& Harrison, 2008). One manner in which peers may assist each other is by providing 
critical information, best practices, and resources. Although much of the transfer 
discussed here is instrumental in nature, managers may benefit the most when the 
relationships in question are affective. Often friendships that encompass mutual 
investment and trust and extend beyond transactional work relationships are necessary for 
the transfer of high stakes or sensitive information (Mehra et al., 2006; Graen & Uhl-
bien, 1995). At the limit, individuals who are part of cohesive groups built on a 
foundation of affective support feel compelled by group norms to favor those in their 
group or network (Coleman, 1988; Hogg, 2001). 
Managers' external ties, then, differ in their effect from manager's downward ties 
and behaviors. Where a leader's internal ties allow for sharing of information within the 
group (Balkundi & Harrison, 2006), external relationships expand the pool of information 
and possibilities (Ancona & Caldwell, 1992; Balkundi & Harrison, 2006; Mehra et al., 
2006). Internal ties and behaviors govern how information and resources are put to use, 
but external ties govern what information and resources are available. 
The preceding arguments suggest that when managers have extensive external networks, 
their subordinates will enjoy higher access to resources and information. Throughout this section, 
I use "network" to refer to both the peer network and the upward LLX relationship. Similarly, I 
24 
use "extensive" to refer to both the strength of the LLX relationship and the degree centrality 
within the peer network. 
Hypothesis 1: The more extensive a manager's network of external 
relationships, the greater will be his or her subordinates' access to 
information and resources. 
III.2.b The effects of access to information and resources on subordinates 
A variety of extant theories provide the link between information and resource 
access, on the one hand, and subordinate performance and organizational commitment, 
on the other. Self efficacy theory suggests that individuals are motivated to engage in 
task behaviors when they believe that they are capable of performing the focal task 
(Bandura, 1986). Enhanced resources, in the form of equipment, funding for events, 
training, etc., allow subordinates to successfully complete their tasks. And, having the 
right tools allows subordinates to perceive themselves as more capable to deliver on the 
task or of having greater task efficacy (Gist & Mitchell, 1992; Spreitzer, 1996; Eden, 
2001). Self-efficacy also creates the potential of greater fit between the individual 
subordinate and the organization (O'Reilly, Chatman, & Caldwell, 1991). Information 
access is also linked to theories of motivation from job design (Hackman & Oldham, 
1976). When subordinates have more information from the organization, they are better 
positioned to understand how their specific task fits into the overall mission of the 
organization (Bowman & Lawler, 1992; Hackman & Oldham, 1976) and the future 
direction of the work (Mehra et al., 2006). When workers understand the significance of 
25 
their task and how it contributes, they experience greater motivation and satisfaction 
(Hackman & Oldham, 1976; Spreitzer, 1996). 
Access to information also activates processes of organizational identification. 
The information that comes through external relationships extends well beyond that of 
simply the focal work group and serves to define the boundaries of the larger 
organization itself (Ashforth & Mael, 1989). Managers' bosses and peers are closer, than 
subordinates, to the strategy and integrated views of external environment of the 
organization (Yukl, 2006; Ancona & Caldwell, 1992), thus the information the manager 
may harvest provides the subordinates with a more holistic view of the organization, its 
mission and its sources of distinctiveness (Ashforth & Mael, 1989). In addition, 
managers with strong external ties may internalize the values of the organization 
themselves (Graen & Cashman, 1975; Tyler & Blader, 2000) and are more vocal 
champions of organizational goals and objectives (Shamir, Zakay, Popper, & Breinin, 
1998; Tangirala et al., 2007). Armed with such information, subordinates will tend to 
adopt the organization, its identity and values as their own (Ashforth & Mael, 1989; 
Tajfel & Turner, 1986). 
Drawing upon self efficacy theory and job design theory, when subordinates 
experience greater levels of information and resource access, they experience greater 
levels of task motivation, ultimately leading to higher performance. 
Hypothesis 2: The greater subordinate access to information and resources, 
the greater subordinate performance will be. 
26 
Similarly I draw upon the logics of self efficacy theory, job design, and 
organizational identification to suggest that greater access to information and resources 
enhances the subordinates psychological connection to the organization as a whole 
leading to greater organizational commitment. In addition, when subordinates see that 
the necessary resources have been provided by the organization, they perceive the 
organization as more supportive (Tangirala et al, 2007; Spreitzer, 1996; Eisenberger, 
Huntington, Hutchinson, & Sowa, 1986). When employees feel as if they fit and are 
being supported by the organization, they become more loyal and committed (Meyer et 
al., 2002). 
Hypothesis 3: The greater subordinates' access to information and resources 
is, the greater their levels of organizational commitment will be. 
III.3 Managers' external relationships as signals of status 
III. 3. a Managers' external relationships and their perceived status within the 
organization 
In describing institutional actors within markets, Podolny (2001) highlights the 
role of network ties as signaling the "quality" of a particular individual within a market or 
network. A third party observer perceives the network ties and position of a target actor 
and, based on the observer's assessment of the target actor's position and partners, 
makes an assessment of the hierarchical status of the target actor within the relevant 
market. While Podonly's conception operates on a macro, institutional level, we can 
apply it to a micro, intra-organizational context by appealing to Status Characteristics and 
27 
Expectant States Theory (Berger et al., 1972). Under this theory, individuals rank order 
other individuals and ascribe status to them based on status characteristics (Anderson, 
Berger, Cohen, & Zelditch, 1966; Berger et al., 1972). Status characteristics are visible 
and observable attributes of individual and include demographic characteristics, e.g. race, 
gender, age, as well as attained characteristics such as education, occupation, or 
hierarchical rank with an organization (Anderson et al., 1966; Berger et al., 1972; Blau & 
Duncan, 1967). In this conceptualization of status, individuals who occupy higher rungs 
in the rank ordering, e.g. EVPs over front line workers, are perceived by others as more 
prestigious and having greater levels of power within the relevant domain (Berger et al., 
1972; Adler & Kwon, 2002). Status, then, in Gould's definition is "the prestige accorded 
to individuals because of the abstract positions they occupy rather than because of 
immediately observable behavior. (Gould, 2002, p. 1147)" While in some instances the 
rank ordering of status may very well correlate with real power, e.g. more senior 
executives within an organization, in other situations, people may use the status 
characteristic independent of any other objective criteria to ascribe power to others. 
Expectant States Theory also holds that, having ascribed high status to a particular 
individual, the perceiver also comes to expect higher competence and performance from 
this individual (Ridgeway & Berger, 1986). 
Using Podolny's metaphor in this context, one's social network ties and his or her 
network position become status characteristics that others may use to make status 
assessments about the focal individual. Wilhin the Status Characteristics framework, 
network position may be conceptualized as an attained status (Blau & Duncan, 1967), 
28 
much like higher position in a formal organizational hierarchy (Cross & Cummings, 
2004). And, as with many positions of attained status, the relationship between power 
and status is co-evolutionary—power breeds performance (or performance perceptions) 
which breeds status which breeds power (Gould, 2002). Social network research—which 
focuses on individual relationships (or ties) between members and the broad network (or 
pattern) of ties that are created throughout organizations—demonstrates that the nature 
and pattern of an individual's connections creates differential status within organizations. 
More specifically, people who are more central in organizational networks achieve higher 
status, as perceived by others, in the form of reputations for influence, power, or 
leadership (Brass, 1984; Mehra et al., 2006, Kilduff & Krackhart, 1994). In addition, 
individuals who have relationships with high status others are perceived as high status 
themselves (Bonacich, 1987; Brass, 1984), are thought to have higher performance 
(Kilduff & Krackhardt, 1994) and have the opportunity to bestow their status upon others 
(Sparrowe & Liden, 2005). Therefore, managers who maintain large numbers of external 
relationships or who have relationships with high status peers will be perceived as high 
status themselves. Similarly, when individuals enjoy "in-group" status with their boss, 
they are viewed as higher status by those around them (Dienesch & Liden, 1986; Duchon 
et al., 1986; Rhoades & Eisenberger, 2002). 
Managers with strong ties to their bosses and peers, then, develop reputations as 
being of higher status in the eyes of others. In this study, I define perceived manager 
status as the subordinates' assessment that the manager commands respect and influence 
throughout the broader organization (Eisenberger et al., 2002). While two managers may 
29 
occupy the same position formally within the organizational hierarchy or organization 
chart, differences in their effectiveness are partially a result of differences in how much 
power and influence their subordinates believe they curry throughout the organization. 
Status effects from a manager's external relationships are substantially different 
from the benefits of the managers' internal ties and downward leadership behaviors. 
Although engaging in transformational leadership behaviors may trigger pre-conceived 
notions of leadership, and thus status (Lord, Foti, & de Vader, 1984), external ties 
provide direct proximal signals of status within the broader organization by connecting 
the manager to high status others (Sparrowe & Liden, 2005). 
Hypothesis 4: The more extensive a manager's external network, the higher 
status subordmates will perceive the manager to be. 
III.2.b The effects of managers' perceived status on subordinates 
Theories of social identity suggest that, when subordinates perceive their 
managers as high status, subordinates themselves will experience and enact a tighter 
connection to the organization. The manager represents the "face" of the group 
(Mintzberg, 1973; Pfeffer, 1981), such that subordinates translate their manager's higher 
status to higher status for the group as a whole and of the individual members in it 
(Sparrowe & Liden, 2005; Bonacich, 1987; Cialdini, Borden, Thorne, Walker, Freeman, 
& Sloane, 1976). But, social identity theory, a theory of intergroup and intra-group 
differences, suggests that people strive for status and desire to be members of high status 
groups (Tajfel & Turner, 1986). As such, they are more likely to attempt to remain in 
30 
high status groups (Terry, Carey, & Callan, 2001; Van Knippenberg & Ellemers, 1993) 
and are more likely to attempt to leave low status groups (Ellemers, van Knippenberg, de 
Vries, & Wilke, 1988). Membership in high status groups confers confidence and self 
esteem (Hogg, 2001). Further, people in high status groups come to expect higher levels 
of support from the organization (Eisenberger et al, 2002) and the prospects of enhanced 
career success (Podolny & Baron, 1997). As a result, members of high status groups 
experience greater levels of organizational attachment and commitment (Terry et al., 
2001). 
Hypothesis 5: The higher status subordinates perceive their managers to be, 
the greater the subordinates' organizational commitment will be. 
When subordinates perceive their managers as high status, the subordinates are 
motivated to build strong relationships with the manager and deliver more on behalf of 
the manager. Expectant States Theory suggests that once an individual ascribes high (or 
low) status to another, the perceiver comes to have higher performance expectations of 
the target (Ridgeway & Berger, 1986). Subordinates who work for high (perceived) 
status managers, then, expect that their relationship with the manager may be more 
valuable to the subordinate. As with other positions of attained status, managers who are 
high status are able to do more for their subordinates, to wield their influence on behalf of 
their subordinates. Well connected managers are in a better position to harvest resources 
and rewards for their subordinates (Graen et al., 1977). And, managers with strong 
connections and high perceived status make powerful sponsors (Sparrowe & Liden, 
2005) or mentors (Podolny & Baron, 1997) and may be, therefore, instrumental in their 
31 
subordinates' future career success. Even if, under Status Characteristics Theory, the 
manager only appears higher status, subordinates will still come to expect greater 
influence and performance from him or her. Subordinates will perceive that the manager 
can be more helpful to them in the future, i.e. can show more in-group favoritism, so 
subordinates afford the manager latitude now. Thus, subordinates of a high status 
manager will afford the manager more influence and will be willing to exert greater effort 
for the manager, because of the prospects of future social exchange (Blau, 1964). 
Subordinates with high status managers will be more likely to strive for high LMX 
relationships, expecting that the spoils will be that much richer (Sparrowe & Liden, 
2005). 
Hypothesis 6: The higher status subordinates perceive their manager to be, 
the higher the LMX relationship will be between the manager and 
subordinate. 
III.4 Managers' external relationships as signals of ingroup identity 
III. 4. a Managers' external relationships and their ascribed work group identities 
Dating back to Simmel (1908 [1955]), researchers and theorists have held the 
view that our identities (as viewed by self and others) are partially determined the 
relationships we keep. Identity is defined as 'a self-referential description that provides 
contextually appropriate answers to the question "Who am I?" or "Who are we?" 
(Ashforth, Harrison, & Corley, 2008), and, as such, refers to an intra-psychic 
phenomenon. In contrast, in this study, I examine the external view or the perception of 
32 
others (Fiske & Taylor, 1991), i.e. how others perceive and define a target individual. 
This construct is less consistently labeled, sometimes referred to as reputation (Dutton, 
Dukerich and Harquail, 1994; Mehra et al., 2006; McFarland & Pals, 2005) and at other 
times simply referred to as a categorization (Stangor, Lynch, Duan, & Glass, 1992; 
Kulik, Roberson, & Perry, 2007). Indeed, in social identity research (e.g. Hogg, 2001) 
the categorizations made by others are often referred to implicitly but are not defined, 
labeled, or measured. In this study I will refer to the perceptions of others or a target 
individual as an individual's ascribed identity, i.e. the answer to the question "who are 
you? (as seen by me)." The argument in this section is that individuals' interpersonal 
relationships serve to define their ascribed identity, i.e. who they are in the eyes of others. 
Social Identity Theory (SIT) suggests that, over time, individuals develop their 
identities and their assessments of others based on the social and organizational groups of 
which they are members (Tajfel & Turner, 1986; Ashforth & Mael, 1989). The stronger 
the group definitions and salience are, the more group membership influences how a 
manager perceives and identifies him or herself and how others perceive and identify the 
manager. Members of groups, or dyads, develop a prototype of what it means to be part 
of the focal group, and individual members come to identify themselves and categorize 
others based on the prototypes of the group as a whole (Tajfel & Turner, 1986; Hogg, 
2001). Individuals come to be perceived as "one" with group because they are similar to 
the group prototype (Hogg, 2001), because they exhibit in-group favoring behaviors 
(Haslam & Platow, 2001; Haslam, Platow, Turner, Reynolds, Megarty, Oakes, Johnson, 
Ryan, & Veenstra, 2001), or because they have extensive social connections with the 
33 
group in question (Ashforth & Mael, 1989). The more an individual is perceived as "one 
of us" or "one of them", the more his or her identity (self or ascribed) is associated with 
the group in question. For example, if a manager shares the same functional background 
and career path of his or her subordinates—e.g. coming up through the ranks of the sales 
force—both the manager and the subordinates will perceive the manager as one of "us," 
one of the subordinate group. Once an individual is deemed a member of a salient group, 
his or her identity is increasingly defined by the attributes of the group. Further, the 
behaviors of the member toward the group and of the group toward the member are 
increasingly a function of group membership rather than individual beliefs and identity. 
In my example, the manager who shares a salient background in sales with his or her 
subordinates will be defined as a "salesperson" rather than by his or her idiosyncratic 
background. People who identify with a particular group will favor the in-group in 
resource allocation decisions (Tajfel & Turner, 1986). Similarly, the more members 
perceive the leader or manager as one with the group, the more they expect him or her to 
engage in in-group favoring behavior. Further, the more members perceive a particular 
individual as being "one of us" the more power and influence accrues to that member, 
including the leader (Hogg, 2001). 
Although theorists in the social identity tradition make reference to the concept of 
perceiving others as being "one" with a particular social group, they do not frequently 
define the construct and even less frequently explicitly measure it. Rather, researchers in 
the SIT tradition experimentally manipulate group member proto-typicality, assuming the 
construction of identities (self and ascribed) as intervening variables (e.g. Hogg, Hains, & 
34 
Mason, 1998; Duck & Fielding, 1999). In this study, I explicitly define ascribed identity 
as the perception that subordinates hold of a focal manager that the manager exhibits 
"oneness" with the subordinate workgroup and that the subordinates perceive the 
manager to be a member of the work group. 
Managers who have strong relationships with external stakeholders, whether 
bosses or peers, will be less likely to be seen as subordinate in-group members, i.e. to 
have weaker ascribed identities. As such, external ties, which may be a benefit in 
creating opportunities for the manager outside the subordinate work group, could become 
a cost for the manager inside the group (Adler & Kwon, 2002). There are several 
possible reasons for this. First, at the core, social identity theory is a theory of intergroup 
conflict (Tajfel & Turner, 1986). In-group membership and proto-typicality, and in-
group bias, are evaluated relative to a salient out-group, with whom the in-group vies for 
status (Tajfel & Turner, 1986) or resources (March & Simon, 1958; Sherif, 1967). When 
managers have strong relationships with peers and bosses, subordinates may perceive 
them as being one with some salient out-group, perhaps "management" or an "upper 
echelon." Although these dynamics will vary by organization, industry, and national 
culture, if people in upper tiers of organizational hierarchies are viewed as in conflict 
with lower tiers, managers with strong ties to upper tiers may be perceived as distant 
from or not "one of the subordinate group. Two recent studies speculate that these 
5 Within this definition, the concept of "oneness" is implicitly left to the perceiver to determine what 
constitutes "oneness". This is consistent with the manner in which social identity theorists define self 
targeted social identity (Tajfel & Turner, 1986; Ashforth & Mael, 1989), although the concept is more fully 
bounded when operationalized in measures of social identification (Mael & Ashforth, 1992; Hogg et al., 
1998) in which identity is measured as a function of (a) feelings of belongingness, (b) assessments of 
interpersonal fit, and (c) beliefs that external assessments of the group transfer to the individual member as 
well. 
35 
dynamics are at play for select groups of middle managers. Shamir et al. (1998) found 
that when squad leaders in the Israeli army enacted transformational leadership behaviors 
involving invoking superordinate goals, their subordinate troops viewed them less 
favorably. Follow up interviews revealed that enlisted personnel had great distrust of 
senior officers and that when squad leaders invoked vision and mission statements, 
soldiers perceived the squad leaders as trying to act like senior officers. Similarly, Mehra 
et. al (2006) examined the friendship ties of sales managers in a financial services 
company. When sales managers were central in the network of their bosses' peers, the 
managers' subordinates viewed them less favorably. Follow up interviews revealed that 
subordinates perceived senior management as hoarding compensation for themselves and 
not sharing it equitably with employees in the lower ranks. Thus, managers who were 
aligned with senior management were perceived as one of them where "them" 
represented a distinctly negative out-group. 
In the event that external relationships do not trigger a negative out-group 
categorization, subordinates are still less likely to perceive the manager who has 
extensive external ties as one of "us." An individual's identity (self or ascribed) is 
usually a function of membership in multiple categories simultaneously (Simmel, 1908 
[1955]; Kulik et al., 2007; Ashforth & Mael, 1989; Settles, Seller, & Damas, 2002). Prior 
research documents that in situations of multiple potential external or other 
categorizations, the strength of identification with any one category diminishes (Crisp & 
Hewstone, 2001). Confronted with the possibility of seeing their manager as a "work 
group member" or a "management group member," subordinates may hold neither 
36 
identity as firmly. And, as a final alternative, managers' external associations beyond the 
work group may prime the identification with the broader or superordrnate organization. 
Prior research shows that identification with the superordinate group may reduce 
identification with any one sub-group (Duck & Fielding, 1999; Gaertner, Dovidio, Nier, 
Ward, & Banker, 1999). 
The social identity mechanism described here is the same as that which operates 
inside the group, simply operating in the opposite direction. Thus, though the mechanism 
is the same, external ties may have a decidedly different effect on ascribed identity than 
internal ties. At the same time, social identity is a different mechanism than downward 
leader behaviors. Indeed, social identity theory suggests that under conditions of high 
salience, social identity factors will dilute the effect of individual differences in 
leadership behaviors and or implicit leadership theories (Hogg et al., 1998; Hogg, 2001), 
favoring group based perceptions and attributions over individualized ones. 
Hypothesis 7: The more extensive a manager's external network is, the 
weaker the manager's ascribed identity will be. 
IIIA.b The effects of managers' ascribed identity on subordinates 
Looking through a social identity lens, then, external relationships may present a 
challenge to a manager's ability to lead subordinates. The weaker a manager's ascribed 
identity, the weaker the manager's intra-group influence. The essential prediction of the 
social identity theory of leadership (Hogg, 2001, Hogg et al., 1998) is that the more 
proto-typical a leader is of the group, i.e. the more the group perceives the leader as one 
37 
of them, the more social attraction is felt between leader and follower, and the more 
latitude and influence the leader enjoys. When subordinates perceive their managers as 
full group members, they have confidence that the manager will put the subordinate 
group's interests above those of other organizational members. The manager can be 
expected to lobby for rewards for the team and invest effort in removing roadblocks. 
Proto-typicality and similarity of the manager relieves stress that subordinates may have 
felt due to uncertainty. Further, the manager is more likely to re-affirm the in-group 
identity and thus improve the self esteem of the subordinate work group members. In 
these instances, leaders gain influence over followers and commitment of the followers 
for enhanced effort. For leaders who are less prototypical or are clearly aligned with 
competitive out-groups, subordinates tread more warily, affording the manager less 
latitude and discretion. Work arrangements become more transactional and negotiated. 
Hypothesis 8: The stronger a manager's ascribed identity, the stronger the 
LMX relationships between manager and subordinate. 
When the manager is less identified with the work group, subordinate 
organizational commitment will also suffer. Managers who are more distant from the 
group enjoy less latitude and influence (Hogg, 2001). Managers are often seen as the 
face or personification of the organization for subordinates (Mintzberg, 1973; Pfeffer, 
1981; Tangirala et al., 2007). To the extent that the manager is not seen as "one of us," 
efforts they may make to reinforce the connection between a subordinate and the broader 
organization may command less attention with the subordinates. Further, when 
subordinates perceive their managers as less aligned with the group's interest, they are 
38 
likely to perceive less general support from the organization leading to lower levels of 
organizational commitment (Eisenberger, Stinglhamer, Vendenberghe, Sucharski, & 
Rhoades, 2002; Meyer et al., 2002). 
Hypothesis 9: The stronger a manager's ascribed work group identity, the 
stronger the organizational commitment of the manager's subordinates. 
III.5 Managers' external relationships as consumers of time, a scarce resource 
III. 5. a Managers' external relationships and manager accessibility 
Despite the potential benefits that accrue to managers with extensive networks, 
building and maintaining relationships also come with costs and require investment 
(Adler & Kwon, 2002). In particular, I suggest that managers who have numerous 
strong external relationships will be more busy, i.e. time constrained, and will be less 
accessible to their subordinates. I define manager accessibility as the manager having the 
time available and using the time to be physically available to interact with subordinates 
to provide direction and input and to address issues salient to them. In building the 
theory in this section, I appeal to resource allocation theory. Under resource allocation 
theory, individuals recognize time as a fixed physical constraint in their lives and make 
decisions as to how to allocate it. In particular, people make decisions regarding the 
economic and other utility trade-offs between time spent at work, a school, at leisure, and 
in sustenance (Becker, 1965). Within the work environment, people are confronted with 
a myriad of choices of how to spend their time, including working toward task 
performance, engaging in organizational citizenship behavior, socializing and 
39 
networking, and any number of others activities (Drago & Garvey, 1998). In this 
conceptualization, time spent in one activity must come at the expense of time spent in 
another (Bergeron, 2007). 
The issue of time constraints is of particular salience for managers. Managers 
have greater aggregate demands on their time and more varied options (Goode, 1960). 
This conception is consistent with age old refrains regarding managers' lack of necessary 
time to deliver on their appointed tasks (Mintzberg, 1973; Hall & Lawler, 1970). 
Networking activities are part of the managers' option set. Interpersonal relationships 
require time. Friends, as an example, demand attention and interaction. In the absence of 
interaction, friendships generally atrophy (Burt, 2001). Thus the more positive 
relationships a manager has, the more time the manager must spend tending to them 
rather than engaging in other activities. But, under time constraints, managers must make 
choices about which relationships to foster. This cost based view is espoused by 
sociologists and exchange theorists (Burt, 1992; Blau, 1964) who suggest that there is an 
optimum number and kind of relationship that balances unique or advantaged information 
and resource effects with personal cost dynamics. Similarly, Leader Member Exchange 
theory is partially premised on the manager's lack of time to invest to create high quality 
LMX relationships with each subordinate (Dienesch & Liden, 1986; Graen, 1976), and 
evidence suggests that managers with broader spans of control, i.e. more direct 
subordinates, have greater differentiation in their LMX relationships than those who do 
not (Cogliser & Schriesheim; 2000). While LMX theory is limited to the allocation of 
time among a manager's subordinates, the argument here extends the logic to a broader 
40 
set of stakeholders making claims on the manager's time. To the extent that a manager 
has rich external relationships, his or her time for the remainder of the job definition will 
be limited to some degree. 
A second form of time constraint materializes in the form of obligations and 
expectations of behavior (Coleman, 1988). Relationships, whether at a dyadic level or 
within a group, ultimately come with expectations of member behavior. For a manager 
with external relationships, these behaviors may come in the form of providing assistance 
on pet projects of their relationship partners. Following social exchange theory (Blau, 
1964), participants in interpersonal relationships will come to expect a level of 
reciprocity in behavior in effect saying, "You're my friend and I do this for you, so I 
expect you to do this for me." Managers with strong interpersonal relationships may feel 
compelled to engage in work on projects that meet relationship partners' needs but, again, 
continue to detract from their otherwise stated roles and responsibilities. 
In either case, when managers have extensive external networks, their 
subordinates will have less access to them. As theorized, however, the mechanism of 
time which constrains manager accessibility is the same whether relationships are internal 
or external. Thus, the logic that suggests that managers with broad spans of control will 
have lower LMX relationships with more subordinates (Cogliser & Schriesheim, 2000) is 
simply amplified by consideration of external commitments as well. 
Hypothesis 10: The more extensive a manager's external network, the lower 
subordinates' access to the manger will be. 
41 
III. 4. b The effects of manager accessibility on subordinates 
Managers' accessibility has an impact on subordinate performance and the nature 
of the LMX relationships between managers and subordinates. First, integrating across 
the leadership and job demands research suggests that manager accessibility will have a 
negative impact on subordinate performance but only at low levels of access. When 
managers have less time available, they focus more readily on the core task and actually 
deliver better performance up to a limit (Janssen, 2001). Indeed, when under time 
pressure, managers make more frequent use of directive and task oriented behaviors than 
otherwise (DeCoster & Fertakis, 1968). Paradoxically, then, moderate levels of time 
pressure, or moderately constrained accessibility, focus managers' attention on 
subordinate task performance. As a result, subordinate performance may very well 
improve. Alternatively, under periods of extreme demands and limited accessibility 
managers may get overwhelmed or burned out (Janssen, 2001), leading to diminished in-
role performance, in this case leading and directing subordinates. The job demands 
literature finds a consistent curvilinear relationship between perceived job demands and 
individual performance. Performance is highest at moderate levels of demand and lower 
at the extremes. I predict that managers' time will have the same effect on subordinate 
performance. 
Hypothesis 11: There will be a curvilinear relationship between 
subordinates' aceess to their manager and subordinates' performance. 
Subordinates will perform best under conditions of moderate manager 
accessibility and lower at very low or very high accessibility. 
42 
Previously, I argued that managers with extensive external networks harvest 
information which in turn facilitates the organizational identification and commitment of 
their subordinates. At the same time, the time commitments created by these networks 
and the resulting lack of manager access may make it difficult for managers to effectively 
communicate or transfer key information (Manev & Stevenson, 2001). Research 
suggests that the quantity of managerial communication to subordinates improves 
subordinate organizational commitment (Mathieu & Zajac, 1990). In converse, with low 
access managers, subordinates are not exposed to key commitment enhancing 
communications. 
Hypothesis 12: The higher subordinates perceive access to their manager to 
be, the higher the subordinates' organizational commitment. 
Managers' accessibility will also have an impact on their LMX relationships with 
subordinates. While managers' focus on directing subordinates and delegating work may 
improve under periods of high job demands, relationships require time and attention to 
build and maintain (Burt, 2001). The time required to maintain external relationships 
will inevitably detract from the same type of efforts with subordinates. Both are sizable 
groups of individuals with idiosyncratic needs. Indeed, although a bit mixed (e.g. Kinicki 
& Vecchio, 1994), previous theory and empirics suggest that manager job demands lead 
to more differentiated subordinate relationships (see Cogliser & Schriesheim, 2000, for a 
review of prior research). 
Hypothesis 13: The more access subordinates have to their manager, the 
stronger the LMX relationship will be. 
43 
III.5 Integrating across the four effects: The curvilinear relationship between 
manager external ties and subordinate level outcomes 
The theory thus far has outlined two stages of an indirect effects model. First, 
manager external relationships (with bosses and peers) predict four benefits and costs 
(access to information and resources, perceived manager status, ascribed identity, and 
manager accessibility). Second, the four benefits and costs predict the distal effects for 
subordinates (performance, organizational commitment, and LMX). The next question, 
then, is how do the four intervening mechanisms integrate to chart the connections 
between managers' external relationships and subordinate level outcomes? 
I argue that the benefits and costs of managers' networks counterbalance each 
other at different levels of external relationships such that the relationship between a 
manager's external network and outcomes for his or her subordinates is curvilinear. At 
moderate levels of external network, subordinate performance, subordinate organizational 
commitment and the quality of the LMX relationship between manager and subordinate 
are high. But, when managers have either limited or very extensive networks, 
subordinate outcomes suffer. This inverted U-shaped effect occurs, I argue, because the 
benefits of external relationships are particularly pronounced at lower levels of external 
relationships but yield diminishing marginal returns at higher levels, while in contrast, the 
costs of external relationships have a minimum threshold before they are truly 
experienced. 
This may be best illustrated by comparing the tradeoffs between resources and 
time and between status and ascribed identity. Structuralists suggest that direct 
44 
relationships become redundant as sources of resource (Burt, 1992; Mehra et al, 2001). 
Within a particular network, having strong relationships with a specific subset of actors 
provides access to most of the relevant resource, for example best practices among peers. 
Beyond a point, the next incremental contact provides redundant information. Yet, the 
next incremental contact may still require tending (Burt, 2001) and favor exchange (Blau, 
1964). Indeed, research in job demands (Janssen, 2001) suggests that people don't 
experience the negative aspects of increased workload until very high levels of load are 
reached. And, from a practical standpoint, a manager's time may need to be balanced in 
order to allow resources to flow from outside to inside the group. If external 
relationships constrain a manager's time, he or she may have access to plenty of 
information with no capability to disseminate it (Manev & Stevenson, 2001). 
High quality relationships with bosses also create asymmetric effects between 
instrumental benefits and costs. At the core of LMX theory, superiors make decisions as 
to which direct report managers will and will not be in their in-group, serving as trusted 
lieutenants (Dansereau et al., 1975). This decision, or role making, is thought to be 
binary. The subordinate manager is either "in" or "out", participating in either an 
increasingly affect laden relationship or one that is purely transactional. Presumably, 
once in the in-group, managers achieve most of the relevant benefits, particularly in the 
form of information and resource access. While tighter relationships with the boss may 
add value on the margin, it seems that the first cut is the deepest and is likely to have the 
largest effect on the manager's ability to act as a conduit of resources back to his or her 
subordinates. Yet, this cut or decision is likely to have a non-linear effect on the 
45 
demands placed upon the manager by the boss, increasingly the demands for reciprocity 
(Gouldner, 1960) fairly dramatically. Indeed, at high levels of LMX, individuals may 
even experience high levels of personal stress from the demands placed upon them from 
above (Harris & Kacmar, 2006). 
Perceived status and ascribed identity mechanisms may also counteract each other 
similarly and combine to have a curvilinear effect as well. Undoubtedly, achieving high 
perceived status requires a minimum level of connection to others, but is also a function 
ofwhich others, as status is a function of whether the focal actor's ties are of high status 
as well (Bonacich, 1987; Sparrowe & Liden, 2001; Ibarra, 1993). With no connections, a 
manager's intra-organizational status suffers, but with excessive connections, the 
manager has invested in relationships that may not confer additional benefit. And, as 
suggested above, the in-group out-group distinction with the boss implied in LMX theory 
is more likely to be viewed by subordinates as closer to binary. Hence, incremental 
investment in the boss relationship will not likely enhance the lieutenant manager's 
perceived status. Conversely, a manager generally starts with a minimum level of 
identification with his or her work group. If nothing else, the manager's performance is 
usually a function of the performance of the people underneath him or her (Mintzberg, 
1973; Mehra et al., 2006), and thus, the manager's identity and reputation likely begin at 
least partially tied to the subordinate group. In contrast, alternative groups, such as peers 
or management teams, may not immediately appear as salient (Hamilton, 2007) as a 
moderate level of external interaction is presumed in the manager's role (Mintzberg, 
1973). As a result, subordinates will accept managers' external networks as taken for 
46 
granted, up to a certain level, but will develop assessments of both the salience of 
alternative groups and the managers' membership in those groups at high levels of 
network centrality. Similarly, I suggest that relationship building with the boss is 
expected up to a level and enhances perceptions of status. Beyond the level of achieving 
"in-group" status with the boss, additional efforts on the part of the manager are more 
likely to distance the manager from the subordinate group, eroding the manager's 
ascribed work group identity than to confer additional status on the manager. 
In summary, then, I expect that the benefits of external relationships are more 
pronounced at lower levels of network centrality and that the costs of external 
relationships are more pronounced at higher levels of network presence. Thus: 
Hypothesis 14: There is a curvilinear relationship between the extensiveness 
of a manager's external network and the performance of his or her 
subordinates. Subordinate performance will be highest at moderate 
levels of external managerial networks and lower at low or high levels of 
manager external networks. 
Hypothesis 15: There is a curvilinear relationship between the extensiveness 
of a manager's external network and the organizational commitment of 
his or her subordinates. Subordinate organizational commitment will be 
highest at moderate levels of external managerial networks and lower at 
low or high levels of manager external networks. 
Hypothesis 16: There is a curvilinear relationship between the extensiveness 
of a manager's external network and the LMX relationship between 
47 
manager and subordinate. LMX will be highest at moderate levels of 
external managerial networks and lower at low or high levels of manager 
external networks. 
III.6 Differences between boss and peer relationships 
The theory developed thus far makes no distinction between the effects of boss 
relationships and the effects of peer relationships. However differences in the stakes and 
stature of a boss relationship and the potential reach and breadth of a network of peer 
relationships suggest that in several instances the two relationships will have 
meaningfully different effect sizes. In this section, I highlight these differences. Where 
no discussion is offered, I theorize no difference between boss and peer relationships. 
Peer relationships differ from boss relationships in several fundamental ways. 
First, boss relationships are mandatory in that they are prescribed roles (Graen, 1976; 
Blau, 1962) and they are unequal in terms of power (Krackhardt, 1990) and demand for 
equality or reciprocity (Gouldner, 1960). Second, peer relationships are more numerous 
and result in more frequent interactions and opportunities for exchange on a regular basis 
(Chiaburu & Harrison, 2008; Ferris & Mitchell, 1987; Mintzberg, 1973). Managers will 
have more opportunities to reap the rewards of external peer relationships and 
subordinates have more opportunities to observe these relationships and experience their 
impact. This quantitative difference for peer relationships should have two effects. First, 
peer relationships should create far more variability in managers' time requirements and 
accessibility. When managers invest in building and maintaining large numbers of peer 
48 
relationships, the sum effect should be to increase the managers' time constraints and 
reduce accessibility. In contrast, although a high quality boss relationship will take 
incremental time to manage, it represents only one relationship. Thus, 
Hypothesis 17: The number of a manager's peer relationships will have a 
larger effect on manager's accessibility than will the nature of their boss 
relationships. 
The numerical nature of peer relationships should also have an impact on 
manager's ascribed identities. Managers' significant relationships with peers send a 
signal to subordinates regarding the managers' affinities (Ashforth & Humphrey, 1995). 
Unlike demographic or other social groups, organizational and subunit membership are 
fuzzier and open to interpretation (Ashforth & Mael, 1989). As such, the existence of 
discretionary connections with peers (Blau, 1962) and the time invested to maintain them 
(Burt, 2001) provide subordinates with information as to the degree of manager 
"membership" in a group distinct from their subordinate work group (Ashforth & Mael, 
1989). While boss relationships may certainly send the same signals, the unitary and 
non-discretionary nature of this relationship makes these signals less frequent and 
weaker. 
Hypothesis 18: The number of managers' peer relationships will have a 
larger impact on their ascribed identities than will the strength of their 
boss relationships. 
Finally, bosses and peers transmit different types of resources and information to 
managers. Peers occupy the same or similar roles or roles that are interdependent with 
49 
each other (Chiaburu & Harrison, 2008). As a result, managers are more likely to harvest 
task relevant information and know-how from peer relationships (Mehra et al., 2006) than 
from their boss. Subordinates who have access to enhanced task related information use 
that information to more productively execute their assigned responsibilities, turning in 
higher performance. In contrast, although extensive peer relationships will allow the 
manager to gain a broader perspective of the organization as a whole, peer organizational 
level information is fragmented (like the manager's), while the boss's, by virtue of his or 
her organization level, is likely to be more integrated (March & Simon, 1958). In 
addition, bosses, as managers of organizational identity and symbolism have greater 
incentive to provide their subordinate managers with information in an organized and 
impactful fashion (Pfeffer, 1981). Thus, bosses are more likely to be a powerful source 
of organizational level information. As such, the connection to the boss will have a 
greater impact on organizational commitment for subordinates. 
Hypothesis 19: The number of managers' peer relationships will have a 
larger impact on subordinate job performance than will the strength of 
their boss relationships. 
Hypothesis 20: The strength of the managers' boss relationships will have a 
larger impact on subordinate organizational commitment than will the 
number of their peer relationships. 
50 
SECTION IV: METHOD 
IV. 1 Empirical Setting 
I collected data for this study in three service organizations in the United States. 
As described below, three organizations were necessary in order to generate sufficient 
sample size for the analyses in the study. At the same time, by conducting the research in 
three different organizations, the results should be more generalizable. 
Organization A was the centralized customer service function of a large US 
consumer credit card lending organization. Organization A provided telephone and mail 
based customer service, problem resolution and fraud case management for consumer 
credit card holders. Customer service involved answering routine questions that 
customers had about their accounts, payment histories, credit lines, and interest rates and 
pricing. Problem resolution activities included investigating unidentified credit card 
charges, tracking of payments, and addressing issues involved with lost cards. For both 
customer service and problem resolution, the employees in this organization handled the 
more difficult questions and issues or those customers deemed by the company to be the 
most valuable. More standard questions or seemingly less valuable customers were 
handled by external companies under contract to Organization A. These companies were 
not part of the study. Fraud case management involved filing and investigating claims of 
fraudulent activity on the customers' accounts. In addition, portions of Organization A 
were engaged in sales activities to existing customers by way of inbound telephone calls. 
The company made offers for additional products in monthly statements and through 
email solicitations. Customers then called a toll free telephone number to talk to a 
51 
representative about these offers. There were approximately 900 employees in this 
organization who were located in one building in the mid-Atlantic United States. 
Organizations B and C were distinct business units of the same health care 
products distribution company. Organizations B and C were fully integrated business 
units that sold similar products but serviced different customer segments throughout the 
United States. The two organizations sold a wide variety of supplies to their customers 
ranging from low cost bulk tongue depressors to sophisticated in-office electronic 
medical testing equipment such as EKG machines. Organization B was the flagship brand 
of the parent company and sold to and serviced physicians' offices. Organization B had 
been in existence for 50 years and had approximately 1,800 employees. Organization C 
operated under a different brand name and had been recently acquired by the parent 
company. Organization C sold to and serviced clinics and extended care facilities and 
had approximately 1,200 employees. Staffs in these two organizations were organized in 
local branch offices throughout the United States. A branch office was responsible for 
sales and service within a specific mutually exclusive geographic territory. Organization 
B had 27 branches and Organization C had 12 branches. Although Organization B and 
Organization C might each have a branch in the same city or region, the branches were in 
different physical office locations and the staff in the different organizations did not work 
together. Branch staff performed three functions—sales, operations, and accounts 
receivable—all of which were included in this study. The sales function, populated 
primarily by sales representatives who called on customers directly, was responsible for 
opening new accounts with medical providers and calling on these accounts periodically 
52 
to demonstrate new products and to assist customers in optimizing their use of the 
company's offerings. Operations staff in the branch ensured that orders were received, 
processed, and ultimately delivered to the customer's satisfaction.6 These staff also 
fielded problem calls and interacted with the warehouse and delivery functions to ensure 
smooth service to the customer and to address service problems. Accounts receivable 
staff in the branches addressed issues of billing problems with customers and worked 
with customers whose statements were in arrears. 
IV.2 Pilot site 
In addition to gathering data in Organizations A, B, and C, I also gathered data in 
a fourth organization, Organization D. I gathered data in Organization D prior to A, B, 
and C using Organization D as a pre-test or pilot site. Data gathering in Organization D 
occurred approximately two (2) months prior to data gathering in Organizations A, B, 
and C. Organization D was a fully integrated company that provided online employment 
verification and other screening services to companies who were in the process of hiring 
new employees. The company was a subsidiary of a larger, publicly traded corporation. 
There were 115 employees in Organization D, from the President to the front line 
employees, all of whom were invited to participate in the pilot study. 
I conducted the pilot study for two reasons. First, I had estimated that the first 
manager survey of my study, which included the peer networks, would require 
approximately 40 minutes to complete and would require participants to complete a 
6 The physical delivery of products was handled by the Transportation and Warehouse functions which 
were not part of this study. 
53 
network roster survey with as many as 120 potential network ties on it. I used the pilot 
study to confirm that respondents would (a) respond to the survey and (b) would 
complete it without survey fatigue. The results from the pilot site were encouraging on 
these issues. 83 of 115 members of Organization D completed the survey (72% response 
rate). In follow up discussions with members of Organization D, I made slight revisions 
to the wording of the recruitment email for my subsequent studies and to the order and 
structure of the subsequent surveys. 
The second purpose for engaging the pilot site, Organization D, was to use it as a 
hold out sample to select items for several of the factors of the intervening variables in 
the model, perceived manager status, ascribed identity and manager accessibility . I 
used the participants in Organization D (and select participants in Organizations A, B, 
and C) as a separate sample on which to conduct an exploratory factor analysis (EFA) in 
developing these three scales. The process and results of these analyses are described 
later in this methods section. 
IV.3 Participants and Sample 
In each organization there were three groups of study participants—the focal front 
line managers (referred to as managers in this study), the managers' subordinates who 
were always front line workers without managerial responsibilities, and the front line 
managers' direct superiors, referred to here as bosses. I asked all managers in 
Organization A and in the branches of Organization A and B to participate in the study. 
7 As described in section IV.5, the items in manager accessibility ultimately reflected two factors or latent 
variables, manager availability and manager time constraints. 
54 
In Organizations B and C, I asked all subordinates of the focal managers to participate in 
the study. In Organization A, the sponsors of the study asked that I randomly sample 
eight (8) subordinates of each focal manager. Table 1 displays a summary for each 
participant group for each organization. The table displays the number of staff invited to 
participate, the number of respondents to each survey, and the number of participants 
whose data I ultimately used for the analyses described below. The samples for the 
analyses reflect complete groups of manager, boss, and at least two subordinates 
participating in the relevant time periods. 
As reflected in Table 1, response rates for managers and bosses were quite strong. 
In particular manager and boss response rates for survey 1, in which I gathered 
sociometric network data, all approached or exceeded 80%. Researchers view 80% 
response as a minimum threshold for network data in order to achieve an accurate view 
of network level dynamics (Wasserman & Faust, 1994). I achieved these response rates 
partially through offering each network participant a post study report summarizing his or 
her personal network. As reflected in Table 1, response rates for subordinate employees 
were 32% for survey 1 and 47% for survey 2. While the survey 2 response rate is similar 
to those reported in recent meta-analyses, the survey 1 response rate is approximately one 
standard deviation below reported mean experience in recent meta-analyses (Baruch & 
Holtom, 2006). 
IV. 3. a Assessment of Non-Response Bias 
8 Of 48 focal managers, 3 had fewer than 8 employees. For these managers, all of their subordinates were 
invited to participate in the study. 
55 
Given the subordinate response rates, I used several of Rogelberg & Stanton's 
(2007) methods to assess the potential for non-response bias. Two sets of data allowed 
me to compare respondents to non-respondents. As described below, at Time 2,1 asked 
managers in Organizations A, B, and C to rate the performance of each of their 
subordinate employees on a scale of l=low to 5 = very high. Managers completed these 
data for any of their subordinates without knowledge of who did and did not participate 
in the study. A T-test comparing the two populations revealed no significant difference 
between responders and non-responders (manager rated performance difference = .07 out 
of 5.0,p = .20). As subordinates are nested within managers, I also constructed a two 
level random intercept model with manager rated performance as the dependent variable 
and subordinate participation as a binary independent variable. The fixed effect 
parameter for subordinate participation was not significant (b = .10, p = .074). Thus, 
respondents and non-respondents did not significantly differ in their task performance. 
Organizations B and C provided me with demographic information for all invited 
study participants. These data included the employee's age, gender, ethnicity, and tenure 
with the company. T-tests revealed no differences in age (difference = .66 years,/? = .36) 
or tenure (difference = .57 years,/? = .18) between respondents and non-respondents. I 
constructed logit models to assess the degree to which responsiveness was correlated with 
gender or ethnicity. The analyses revealed that respondents did not differ from non-
respondents on the basis of age, gender (b = .0062, p = .96), but that white employees 
were less likely to respond and participate than non-white employees (b= -.37, p = .04). 
56 
In general, then, archival analysis within Organizations B and C suggest very limited 
response bias. 
Finally, Organization D, the pilot site, serves as a benchmark for response bias. 
All employees (including front line subordinates) in Organization D were invited to 
participate in the network portion of the study as well and were offered a feedback report 
summarizing their personal networks. As such, subordinate response in Organization D 
was higher, i.e. 62/95 or 65%. As Organization D is not part of the sample for the 
analyses reported in this study, it serves as an external benchmark. In addition, the higher 
response in Organization D provides a benchmark of a research site less susceptible to 
response bias. Using T-tests, I compared subordinate assessments of 8 key study 
variables, as described below, between Organization D and the other sites in the study. 
Table 2 displays the results of these T-tests, highlighting no significant differences 
between the pilot sample and the study sample on seven of eight constructs. 
The three sets of analyses described above suggest that there was limited response 
bias in the subordinate participants in organizations A, B, and C. 
IV.4 Data Collection and Survey Approach 
The bulk of the data for the study were gathered through online surveys, with the 
remainder gathered through archival methods. I asked the managers and subordinates to 
complete two surveys, separated in time by two months. The bosses were only asked to 
9 The initial proposal for this dissertation suggested three surveys in order separate independent variables, 
intervening variables, and dependent variables in time. This approach would provide some insulation from 
common source bias (Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Lee, & Podsakoff, 2003). After consulting with staff at each 
research site, I determined that three time periods presented risks of survey fatigue and response 
57 
complete survey 1 at the beginning of the study. Table 3 provides a summary of the data 
that were gathered in each survey from each participant group. 
Approximately one week prior to the beginning of the survey period, the senior 
sponsor of my study in each organization sent an email to all potential participants. This 
email articulated the goals of the study from both the researchers' and the organizations' 
point of view and clearly stated that participation was voluntary and confidential, though 
not anonymous. For all participants, this email stated that any participant would receive a 
report detailing the participant's responses to the survey and how those responses 
compared to the aggregates of his or her organization. For those participants asked to 
participate in the network portion of the study, this email also stated that these 
participants would receive a graphical picture of their personal network within the 
organization and some guidelines for how to interpret the same. For all participants, the 
email suggested that the two surveys together would require up to 60 minutes of their 
time to complete. 
The survey period in each organization for each survey was approximately three 
(3) weeks.10 On day 1 of the survey period, potential participants received an email from 
the researcher's email address outlining the study and the logistics for participating. This 
email reiterated that participation was voluntary and confidential and the offer of a report 
at the end of the study. At the beginning of the email, participants found a link that, 
degradation. I shifted the design to two time periods. While this approach maintained a separation in time 
for each respondent group that provided multiple variable types, it did require gathering transformational 
leadership, a control variable, in the same survey (timel) as the intervening variables. In order to provide 
additional insulation against common source bias, I included the Big Five Personality Inventory for 
subordinates (Goldberg, 1992). 
10 Survey periods differed slightly from one organization to the next due to the timing of holidays and of 
key company events. 
58 
when clicked, took them to the beginning of the survey. The surveys were customized to 
the three participant groups within each organization. Thus, in survey 1 there were six 
versions, and in survey 2 there were four versions. On the first page of the survey, 
participants were presented with the informed consent form and were asked to check the 
box at the bottom affirming their consent to be included in the study. This page and 
question appeared on both survey 1 and 2. Upon clicking on informed consent, 
participants went to the first page of the survey from which they selected their name from 
a drop down menu. From there the actual survey questions began. Survey 1 for network 
participants took about 40 minutes to complete. Survey 1 for non-network participants 
took about 20 minutes. Survey 2 required about 20 minutes for all participants. 
IV.5 Variables and Measures 
IV. 5. a Independent Variables 
The theory and hypotheses for the study contemplate two types of a manager's 
external relationships: Interpersonal ties to the manager's horizontal peers and the 
specific vertical relationship with the manager's boss. As a result, there were two sets of 
independent variables in the study. The first set captured the number of external peer 
relationships each manager had within his or her organization. The second set captured 
the nature of the specific relationship the manager had with his or her boss. 
59 
Peer networks. At Time 1, all managers completed two sociomatrices. In each 
case, on the computer screen, I provided the participant a list of all organization members 
within the hierarchical levels of interest within the organization—the front line 
managers and the level that included their bosses. Network researchers often 
differentiate network ties or relationships on the basis of whether they are instrumental or 
affective. Instrumental ties are those through which resources related to executing one's 
work, job, or tasks are passed (Lincoln and Freeman, 1979). In contrast, affective ties are 
relationships through which socio-emotional support is passed. Following Klein et al. 
(2004) and Baldwin et al. (1997), I gathered data on advice (i.e. instrumental) and 
friendship (i.e. affective) ties. For each network, I used wording adapted from Baldwin et 
al. (1997) and Klein et al. (2004). To construct the advice network, for each name 
presented to a participant, I instructed him or her to "please check the box if this person is 
someone you go to for work related or technical advice." After completing the advice 
network, participants completed a similar sociomatrix for the friendship network. Here, I 
instructed the participant to "please check the box if this person is someone you consider 
a friend, someone you would socialize with outside of work."1314 The full roster 
In order to facilitate the investigation of other research questions, bosses also completed the sociomatrix. 
Additional insights from these data are discussed in the discussion section. 
121 included bosses on the roster in order to explore research questions beyond the initial scope of this 
dissertation. 
lj I also gathered valued ties for both advice and friendship networks. When a participant checked the box 
indicating a tie, he or she was then asked to assess the intensity of the relationship on a 4 point scale. The 
analyses using the valued data return the same results as those with the binary data, so I present the binary 
data here for parsimony. 
14 The initial proposal for this dissertation contemplated a slightly different implementation of the network 
questions. Rather than the two step approach outlined here, the original proposal contemplated one 
question per roster name per network in which the respondent would evaluate the nature of the relationship 
with the alter on a five point scale. I chose the approach here in order to minimize survey fatigue in the 
face of rosters with as many as 120 names. 
60 
approach used here avoids the biases introduced by capping the number of potential 
nominations (Mehra et al., 2001) and it aids in participant recall (Perry-Smith, 2006). At 
the same time the check box approach I employed streamlined the number of responses 
each participant needed to provide, minimizing respondent fatigue. This approach 
generated 6 matrices, 2 each (advice and friendship) for the three organizations. Figures 
2-7 depict each of these six networks among the managerial peers in each organization. 
Table 4 provides a summary of the structure of these networks. 
I constructed two independent variables from these sociomatrices. Both are 
counts of the number of peer organization members who identify the focal manager as a 
tie, i.e. in-degree centrality (Freeman, 1979). In-degree centrality, an aggregation of the 
responses of all other network participants, avoids the limitations of self report data 
(Sparrowe et al., 2001). I calculated in-degree centrality for each of the two networks in 
each of the three organizations, normalizing within each network to account for 
differences in network size (Borgatti, Everett & Freeman, 2002). Advice in-degree is the 
number of a manager's peers who identify him or her as a source of work related advice. 
Friendship in-degree is the number of a manager's peers who identify him or her as a 
friend. 
Relationship with the boss (LLX). To capture the nature of the manager's 
relationships with his or her direct superior, the boss, I used Liden & Maslyn's (1986) 
LMX-MDM scales. The LMX-MDM is drawn from the Leader Member Exchange 
(LMX) literature, a literature whose focus is the measurement and assessment of the 
dyadic relationships between managers and their subordinate employees. In order to 
61 
maintain clarity of the relationships and organization levels in this study, I follow 
Tangirala et al. (2007) and Venkataramani et al. (2010) and refer to the relationship 
between a manager and his or her boss as Leader Leader Exchange or LLX. The 
relationship between a manager and his or her subordinate measured along the same 
dimensions retains the label Leader Member Exchange (LMX). 
The LMX-MDM is a 12-item set of scales which is organized into four three-item 
factors or subscales. The four factors are: (a) Affect, the degree to which there is 
affection and friendship between the boss and the manager, (b) Loyalty, the extent to 
which the respondent believes that his or her partner in the relationship would support 
and defend him or her to others throughout the organization, (c) Contribution, the extent 
to which the manager would expend extra effort in order to deliver results to the boss, 
and (d) Respect, the extent to which the respondent looks favorably upon the target's job 
related skills and accomplishments. Although the LMX-MDM has been developed more 
recently than other more established LMX measures, it has two distinct advantages in this 
study. First, recent studies establish that the LMX-MDM has incremental explanatory 
power as an independent variable above other scales (Greguras & Ford, 2006). Second, 
the distinct dimensions of the LMX-MDM allow the researcher to differentiate two 
different interpretations of the relationship between a supervisor and his or her 
subordinate. On the one hand, the relationship may be thought of as one of social 
exchange (Sparrowe & Liden, 1997) in which the two parties engage in providing effort 
and favors on each other's behalf. This, to some degree, represents an instrumental 
flavor to the relationship. On the other hand, the supervisor/subordinate relationship may 
62 
be more affective in nature, rooted in mutual liking and trust (Graen & Uhl-bien, 1995). 
The specific items for the four factors are detailed in Appendix A. 
In the LMX literature, the evaluation of LMX is most often performed by the 
subordinate in the relationship. However, in a few instances (e.g. Sparrowe, Soetjipto, & 
Kraimer, 2006; Greguras & Ford, 2006), the superior in the dyadic relationship evaluates 
the relationship as well. For this study, I chose to have LLX assessed by the boss. There 
are two rationales for this decision. First, the boss perspective on LLX mirrors the in-
degree approach on horizontal networks, providing a view of the relationship from an 
external party. Second, as the manager is the focal player in this study, the boss 
assessment of LLX somewhat insulates the analyses from hidden variable problems and 
common source bias. To the 12 items in the LMX-MDM, I added two additional items 
designed to mirror the items in the peer network sociomatrices. I asked the boss to assess 
the degree to which (a) "you view the employee as a friend, someone you would socialize 
with outside of work," and (b) "you view the employee as a source of work or technical 
advice." Participants assessed all 14 items on a 5 point Likert scale where 
l=significantly disagree and 5 = significantly agree. 
Prior to engaging in the analyses for the study, I confirmed that the four factors of 
the LMX-MDM were distinct and reliable measures. I conducted a confirmatory factor 
analysis15 to confirm that the items were best represented by the four factors suggested by 
prior research. Table 5 displays the results of this CFA. The sample for these studies 
was all bosses or managers in Organizations A, B, and C who were in the sample for the 
15 All confirmatory factor analyses were conducted using MPlus, Version 6. 
63 
analyses for the study. In Table 5, model 1, or the "full model" captures each of the four 
factors as separate factors. Models 2-7 constrain the full model by collapsing specific 
pairs of factors to one. Model 8 models LMX-MDM as one factor. As reflected in Table 
5, the full model fit the data well %2 (48, N=66) = 103, (Comparative Fit Index = .96, 
Root Mean Square Error of Approximation = .086, Standardized Root Mean Square 
Residual = .041). I also confirmed that each of the four factors displayed sufficient 
internal reliability. Cronbach's alphas for the constructs ultimately used in the analysis 
are displayed on the diagonal of Table 8. 
As a final step, I evaluated the pairwise correlations among these four constructs. 
As reflected in the note on Table 5, there are modest to strong inter-correlations among 
these variables. Throughout this study, I constrain study variables to share no more than 
50% variance or a Pearson correlation of .707 or less. As displayed in the note on Table 
5, Affect and Loyalty have a pairwise correlation of .73, and Contribution and Respect 
have a pairwise correlation of .75. I therefore removed Loyalty and Respect from the 
analysis. The two LLX variables, then, are LLX-Affect and LLX-Contribution.16 Affect 
and Contribution remain moderately correlated, r=.64. While this correlation is still 
moderately high, I checked for multicollinearity using VIF tests and found none. 
TV. 5. b Intervening Variables: Network Benefits and Costs 
161 also captured two single item measures between manager and boss designed to mirror the friendship 
and advice network questions on the sociomatrices. These items were measured on the same 5 point Likert 
scales as the remainder of the LMX-MDM items. The friendship proxy (analogous to friendship in-degree 
centrality among peers) had a .68 correlation with the three item LLX-Affect scale. The advice proxy 
(analogous to advice in-degree centrality among peers) had a .75 correlation with the three item LLX-
Respect factor. 
64 
The theoretical model identifies two benefits of managers' external relationships 
(information/resource access and perceived manager status) and two potential costs 
(ascribed identity and manager accessibility). I used existing scales and items to measure 
the network benefits, but adapted and developed new scales to measure the two costs. I 
discuss the scales for the network benefits first below, follow that with a discussion of the 
network costs, and follow that with a confirmatory factor analysis across all four 
constructs. The items for all of these scales may be found in Appendix A. 
Resource and Information Access. At Time 1, subordinates completed a 6-item 
access to resources and information scale from Spreitzer (1996). Sample items include "I 
have access to the strategic information I need to do my job well" and "I have access to 
the resources I need to do my job well." Spreitzer's (1996) work suggests that these 6 
items represent two distinct 3-item factors, one representing information access and one 
representing resource access. I subjected the items to a confirmatory factor analysis, 
discussed below, and confirmed that they represent two distinct factors in my study as 
well. Cronbach's alphas for all individual/subordinate level constructs may be found on 
the diagonal of table 8. 
Perceived Manager Status. At Time 1, employees completed a \2-item perceived 
manager status scale adapted from Eisenberger et al. (2002). Sample items include "The 
organization holds my supervisor in high regard" and "My supervisor influences 
decisions made by upper management." I reduced the number of items in this scale to 6 
by (a) conducting an exploratory factor analysis and (b) identifying those items that had 
the most face validity with the theory constructed earlier, namely that subordinates 
65 
perceive their managers as having the ability to participate in decision making, the ability 
to influence superiors, and the autonomy to make their own decisions . I conducted an 
exploratory factor analysis using a sample of 107 study participants who would not be 
part of the subject pool for the core study. These 107 participants represent 65 front line 
employees in Organization D, the pilot site, and 42 employees in Organizations A, B, and 
C who were the only employees to participate for those given managers18. A promax 
oblique rotation yielded a two factor model with six times loading above .6 on the first 
factor. I used these six items, listed in Appendix A, for the perceived manager status 
scale. 
Ascribed Identity. Under social identity theory (SIT), people make assessments 
regarding the degree to which they and others seem like members of particular 
identifiable groups. In particular, members of a group make determinations as to whether 
they and others seem like in-group members or alternatively out-group members. 
Colloquially, members assess the degree to which an individual is "one of us" or "one of 
them." Individuals use other members' social identity markers—for example, job 
function, demographics, attitudes, and behaviors—to determine the degree to which they 
perceive them to be prototypical—or members—of the in-group, or, alternatively, 
prototypical members of salient out-groups. The degree of perceived membership in one 
group or another is an intervening variable that SIT suggests predicts a number of 
17 All exploratory factor analyses were conducted using Proc Factor in SAS v. 9.2. 
18 The core analyses for the main study in this dissertation use a multi-level modeling framework with 
subordinate employees nested within managers. In this framework, there must be at least two level-1 data 
points nested within each level-2 group (Gelman & Hill, 2007). These 42 individuals were the only 
subordinate employees to participate in the study for these managers making them unsuitable for a multi­
level framework. 
66 
individual level outcomes including member influence, emergent leadership, and in-
group bias (Hogg, 2001). However, while SIT researchers measure or manipulate proto-
typicality and often measure perceived proto-typicality, they don't directly measure 
perceptions of membership or "oneness." In this study, I directly measure this oneness 
and define ascribed identity as the degree to which an in-group member perceives 
another as being "one" with the in-group. 
To measure ascribed identity, I developed 16 potential items which might 
represent this construct. Seven of the items were adapted from measures of group and 
organizational identification by Mael & Ashforth (1992) and Hogg et al. (1998). In the 
original literature, these items measured an individual's self identification with a focal 
group or organization. The adaptation I use in this study captures the extent to which 
others identify the target individual with the target group. To these seven, I added nine 
additional items that reflected perceived similarity or which asked directly the extent to 
which a subordinate identifies the manager with the work group. Sample items are: "I 
identify him or her with [the target group]" and "when I think of [target group], I think of 
my supervisor as one of the members." Subordinates completed these items at time 1, 
evaluating their managers on a l=significantly disagree to 5=significantly agree Likert 
scale. My intention upon developing these items was to select a subset of items to 
represent ascribed identity based on factor analysis (for data reduction) and face validity. 
Using the 107 participant hold out sample described above, I conducted an exploratory 
factor analysis using an oblique promax rotation. This analysis yielded a four factor 
model of which the first factor was four items that captured the essence of being 
67 
perceived as "one of the group." These four items, listed in Appendix A, constitute the 
ascribed identity measure in this study. 
Manager accessibility. I developed 11 items to reflect the degree to which 
subordinates perceived their managers as available and accessible to them. Many of 
these items were adapted from Jansenn's (2001) time constraint scale and some were 
written new for this study. Conceptually, the items should cover two distinct factors: 
general physical availability of the manager and perceptions of the manager's physical 
time constraints. Subordinates completed these items at time 1, evaluating their 
managers on a l=significantly disagree to 5=significantly agree Likert scale. Using the 
same 107 participant hold out sample described above, I conducted an exploratory factor 
analysis using an oblique promax rotation. This EFA yielded the two factors, Manager 
Availability and Manager Time Constraints, as hypothesized and I retained them both in 
the analysis that follows. The items are listed in Appendix A. 
Confirmatory Factor Analysis.19 I subjected all of the intervening variable 
constructs to a confirmatory factor analysis. For this analysis, I used all employees from 
Organizations A, B, and C who completed survey 1 and who were not in the 42 single 
employee to manager dyads referenced above. This sample then was distinct from the 
sample for the EFA and represented the pool from which subjects were drawn for the 
19 Approximately 10% of the records in the subordinate level data sets have items that represent data 
missing completely at random. In order to account for missing data while not resorting to listwise deletion, 
and following Schafer & Graham (2002), I employed multiple imputation procedures. I implemented the 
imputation procedures in SAS 9.2 using Proc MI and Proc MIAnalyze. In particular, all the confirmatory 
factor analyses and multi-level models fit in this study used 5 imputations with results aggregated across 
these 5. I replicated the core multi-level analyses in the study using listwise deletion as well. As expected, 
the pattern of results remained the same, but the loss of statistical power led to some parameters being 
capture as not significant. 
68 
core analyses of the study. There were 427 observations in this analysis. The results of 
this CFA are displayed in Table 6. Following Spreitzer's findings and the exploratory 
factor analyses described above, I modeled the full model, model 1, with six factors: 
resource access, information access, perceived manager status, ascribed identity, manager 
availability and time constraints. Model 2 implements a constrained model in which 
resource access and information access are constrained to one factor. Model 3 constrains 
manager availability and time constraints to one factor. Model 4 constrains manager 
status and ascribed identity to one factor. Model 5 constrains manager status and 
information access to one factor. Model 6 constrains manager status and resource access 
to one factor. Model 7 constrains all items to one factor. Models 2-6 nest within model 1 
and model 7 nests within any of models 2-6. As displayed in table 6, the full 6 factor 
model has acceptable fit, %2 (284, N=427) = 864, (Comparative Fit Index = .91, Root 
Mean Square Error of Approximation = .063, Standardized Root Mean Square Residual = 
.070). And, in comparison to the rest of the models in Table 6, the full model exhibits the 
best model fit with all other models having substantially higher degrees of freedom 
adjusted %2 and RMSEA, and lower CFI and TLI. Thus, for the analyses that follow, I 
use each of the six factors individually. 
Table 8 displays the means, standard deviations, and intercorrelations for the 
subordinate level variables in the study. Cronbach's alpha is located on the diagonal. As 
Table 8 suggests, each of the six benefit or cost variables has an alpha greater than .7. 
TV. 5. c Dependent Variables 
69 
Organizational Commitment. At Time 2, subordinates completed Allen & 
Meyer's (1990) eight-item Affective Organizational Commitment Scale. The scale 
includes items such as "I really feel as if [organization name]'s problems are my own" 
and "[Organization Name] has a great deal of personal meaning for me." Subordinates 
evaluated the items using 5 point Likert scale, ranging from "1"= "strongly disagree" to 
"5" = strongly agree." The full scale can be found in Appendix A. As noted in the 
appendix, I reversed coded four of the eight items. 
Subordinate Task Performance. I measured subordinate task performance using 
two sources. First, at Time 2,1 asked the managers in the study to evaluate their specific 
subordinate employees. The managers completed a three item scale as listed in Appendix 
A. Although many studies have developed manager assessments of subordinate 
performance, I chose to use these three custom items for two reasons. First, in some 
instances, managers were asked to evaluate large numbers of subordinates, requiring a 
short instrument. Second, in order to generalize across 3 sites with potentially different 
cultures and metrics, this study required a reasonably generic approach. 
The second approach to measuring performance involved gathering objective 
performance data for a subset of the participants in the study. Objective archival 
performance measures were available for a specific job category within two of the 
organizations. A portion of the participants in Organizations B and C were front line 
salespeople who sold products directly to physicians, nursing homes and extended care 
facilities. Their compensation was primarily commission driven and, as such, individual 
sales performance was the primary performance metric for these two sub-organizations. 
70 
Specifically, the salespeople were compensated on a formula driven by the gross margin 
(revenue less cost of goods sold) that their customers generated. At the beginning of the 
sales year, the salesperson, his or her sales manager, and the sales manager's boss 
negotiated a baseline or target gross margin level for the upcoming year. Gross margin 
above and beyond the baseline would garner a higher commission, and profit below the 
baseline would garner a lower commission. Sales managers' bonuses were contingent on 
the overall gross margin performance of their sales people. Since each salesperson was 
assigned to a particular geographic sales territory, making sales person performance 
independent from one another, sales managers grew their personal performance by 
maximizing the individual performance of their sales people. The organization provided 
the baseline and actual gross margin generated for an annual period that coincided with 
the end of survey 2. The two organizations sold different mixes of products (given their 
different customer segments) yielding different averages of profit generated per 
salesperson. Therefore, I normalized each data set by dividing by the average profit 
generated in each organization. Actual sales and Baseline sales, then, are ratios which 
are centered at 1. 
Leader Member Exchange (LMX). As with the independent variables, I used 
Liden & Maslyn's (1998) LMX-MDM scale to measure LMX between managers and 
their subordinates. Although I measured LMX from both the managers' and 
subordinates' perspectives, the factor structure and internal reliability of LMX from the 
manager's perspective was not as strong as desired. Thus, I chose to evaluate LMX from 
71 
the subordinate's perspective. I evaluated LMX as an integrated construct. Pno? 
research suggests that the four dimension of the LMX-MDM may represent a secom, 
•vjcr factor of LiviX as a whole (Sparrowe et ai.. 2006). A confirmatory factor analysis 
of these data suggest that this factor structure is a good model fit, %2 (50, N=427) = 265, 
(Comparative Fit Index = .96, Root Mean Square Error of Approximation = .077, 
Standardized Root Mean Square Residual = .037). This measure has high internal 
reliability, (Table 8, alpha = .90), and post hoc analyses suggest that the analyses with the 
separate factors do not yield meaningfully different results. 
Confirmatory Factor Analysis. Table 7 displays the results for subordinate 
assessed dependent variables. The full model has 2 main factors: organizational 
commitment and LMX, where LMX has the four sub-factors of Affect, Loyalty, 
Contribution, and Respect. Models 2 tests the incremental value of the second order 
factor. Models 3-9 test various combinations of constraining factors and Model 10 
models the dependent variables as one. As table 7 displays, the full model with the 
second order LMX factor fits the data well y2 (df= 165, N=427) = 703, (Comparative Fit 
Index = .94, Root Mean Square Error of Approximation = .067, Standardized Root Mean 
Square Residual = .045). Model 2 suggests that the model works with or without the 
second order factor, confirming the adequacy of the integrated scale. 
IV. 5.d Control Variables 
Subordinate level controls 
201 did evaluate the stage 2 and direct effects models using LMX as reported by the manager. These 
models displayed a similar pattern of results to those reported here. 
72 
Demographics. I included control variables for the subordinates' age, gender, 
race, education, tenure with the organization, and tenure with the current manager. 
Subordinates supplied these data via survey at Time 1. Age is measured in years. Gender 
is a categorical variable with l=male and 2=female. The populations in the three sites 
were predominantly white, i.e. 85% of respondents were white. Therefore, race is a 
categorical variable where l=white and 2=non-white. Respondents recorded their level 
of education from among six choices: 1- some high school, 2- high school graduate, 3= 
some college, 4=college graduate, 5=some graduate school, 6=graduate degree. 
Participants also recorded the length of time they had worked in the organization, i.e. 
company tenure, in years. I provided participants with a set of options in one year 
increments as well as four shorter buckets—0-3 months, 3-6 months, 6-9 months, and 9-
12 months. I converted the answers in the smaller buckets to the midpoints in years. For 
example, I coded 0-3 months as .125 years. Using a similar methodology, participants 
recorded the length of time they had worked for the current and focal manager, i.e. 
manager tenure. 
Personality. Prior research documents that individual differences in trait 
personality shapes the individuals' job satisfaction (Judge, Heller, & Mount, 2002), 
organizational commitment (Erdheim, Wang, & Zichar, 2006) and task performance 
(Barrick & Mount, 1991). Thus, I chose to control for individual subordinate personality 
in order to isolate the effects of managers' external relationships on perceived benefits 
and costs and to isolate the effects of the benefits and costs on the dependent variables of 
organizational commitment, LMX, and task performance. In addition, by including 
73 
personality as a control, I account for some potential common source bias in both stage 1 
and stage 2 analyses (Tangirala et al., 2007). At Time 1, participants completed the IPIP 
version (Goldberg, 1992, http://ipip.ori.org) of the Big Five Personality Inventory which 
measures general personality constructs of extroversion, conscientiousness, 
agreeableness, emotional stability, and openness to experience. Each of these constructs 
is measured using 10 items and respondents evaluated themselves on a 5 point Likert 
scale (l="strongly disagree" to 5="strongly agree"). 
Manager level controls 
Demographics. Similar to subordinates, at time 1, managers provided their 
demographic information—age, gender, race, education, and company tenure. These 
variables are measured and coded using the same methodology outlined for subordinates 
above. 
Transformational Leadership. I included the manager's display of 
transformational leadership as a control variable. This is a group or manager level 
control reflecting the extent to which the manager displays transformational leadership 
behaviors. At Time 1, subordinates assessed their managers' display of transformational 
leadership using the 16 items in the inspirational motivation, idealized influence 
attribution, idealized influence behavior, and intellectual stimulation scales of the Multi-
Factor Leadership Questionnaire (Bass & Avolio, 1995) . To arrive at a group level 
21 Measures of Transformational Leadership may also include the individual consideration scale of the 
MLQ. As described in the next footnote, I also explore the contribution of StogdilTs initiating structure 
and consideration factors. Individual Consideration (MLQ) and consideration (Stogdill, 1963) were likely 
to measure the same construct, so I chose not to include the MLQ items in the survey. 
74 
measurement of transformational leadership, I aggregated the scales across subordinates 
within a manager. In this sample, transformational leadership has a mean rwg(j) of .98 
(minimum = .69, maximum = .99, median = .98), suggesting agreement across members 
within a group and justifying aggregating to the manager level (Klein & Kozlowski, 
2000). Transformational leadership has an ICC(l) of .28 (p < .0001) suggesting that 
variance exists between managers on this measure. 
In addition, I controlled for the manager's span of control as measured by his or 
her number of direct reporting employees (span of control). This control was necessary 
because prior research suggests that managerial spans can affect manager/subordinate 
relationships (Coglisler & Schriesheim, 2000) and manager effectiveness (Gittell, 2001). 
I gathered span of control from employee rosters provided by personnel in each 
participating organization. I also controlled for the )ob function of the manager and his or 
her group, allowing for two generic archetypes: sales (function =1) and all other 
(function = 2). Approximately 55% of the sample are sales organizations. Finally, to 
account for the three different organizations, I added dummy variables for Organization 
B and Organization C. 
IV.6 Analytical considerations 
IV. 6. a Nested data structure 
II At time 1, subordinates also evaluated their managers in terms of initiating structure—the extent to 
which the manager provides structure and direction to the subordinate's work, and consideration—the 
extent to which the manager attends to the subordinate's welfare and wellbeing (Stogdill, 1963), as other 
potential leadership style controls. Both were moderately to highly correlated with transformational 
leadership (r=.77 for consideration and r=.59 for initiating structure). Neither provided explanatory power 
above that of transformational leadership, so for simplicity, I include simply transformational leadership in 
the models. 
75 
In this study, the data have a nested structure with individual subordinates nested 
within managers. Constructs regarding the manager exist at the group level of analysis 
whereas constructs about subordinate employees exist at the individual level of analysis. 
In the first stage of the indirect effects model, the hypotheses are cross level in nature 
with manager level effects (for example, external relationships and transformational 
leadership) predicting individual level outcomes (for example, information access or 
perceived manager status). And, although the essence of the hypotheses in the second 
stage of the intervening effects model are individual level hypotheses, these analyses 
continue to control for manager level effects such as demographics, span of control and 
transformational leadership, thus rendering these models cross level as well. 
To account for the nested structure and the cross-level nature of the hypotheses, I 
used random coefficient modeling (RCM)23 in the analyses. RCM allows the researcher 
to test the relationships between group level independent variables and individual level 
dependent variables, while continuing to control for and model individual level factors. 
In particular, I modeled the hypotheses as random intercepts, allowing the absolute 
difference in outcome variables such as information access or organizational commitment 
to have a group or manager level component captured as a difference in intercepts at the 
individual level. This capability is critical because traditional individual-level analyses 
do not control for the nested structure of data and may misrepresent the between-group 
effects (Klein, Dansereau, & Hall, 1994). I grand mean centered the predictor variables, 
which provides computational efficiency and ease of interpretation (Gelman & Hill, 
23 All multilevel models were constructed in SAS 9.2 using Proc Mixed. 
76 
2007; Kreft, de Leeuw & Aiken, 1995). In addition, when implementing cross level 
models, grand mean centering allows the researcher to isolate the effects of group level 
predictors on individual level outcomes, adjusting for the effects of individual level 
predictors (Hofmann & Gavin, 1998). As noted earlier, I used a sample that included 
managers for whom at least two subordinates participated in the study. Multi-level 
analysis can be supported at group sizes as small as two (Gelman & Hill, 2007). The 
inclusion of groups as small as two grows the sample size at the manager or group level 
from 62 to 83. As noted by Hofmann (1997), variance and statistical power at the group 
level are critical for deriving empirical insights in multilevel analyses.24'25 Because 
intercepts may, and are predicted to, vary between managerial groups, all reported 
parameter estimates are unstandardized b's. 
IV. 6. b Homogeneity ofVariance/Covariance Matrices 
In order to achieve the maximum statistical power, particularly at the 
group/manager, I execute one analysis across the data in all three sites. Since I am 
aggregating across groups, I conducted Box's M test in order to assess the degree of 
similarity or homogeneity among the three covariance matrices. The test statistic is M= 
" The choice to include groups of 2 or more, while adding variance at the manager level, also raises issues 
about the validity of transformational leadership as a group level variable. To ensure that this choice was 
not material, I confirmed that the rwg, ICC1, and ICC2 for a two+ member group sample vs. a three+ 
member group sample were not meaningfully different. In addition, I ran a sample of the analytical models 
with three members per group and found few meaningful differences. 
25 The data have an additional level of nesting in that managers are nested within bosses. As the theory 
espoused functions between manager and subordinate, I report the results of two level models in this 
analysis. However, it is possible that there is some variance in intervening or dependent variables 
explained by differences at the boss level. In consideration of this, I did examine a series of three level 
multi-level models controlling for bosses through the use of random intercepts at this level. In no case did 
the results differ substantively between a two level and three level model. For parsimony, I report the two 
level results here. 
77 
131.47 at 95 df, p = .0029. Unequal group sizes may artificially inflate the power of 
Box's M test, so ap of < .001 is warranted for the homogeneity assumption to be 
violated. 
SECTION V: RESULTS 
V.l Correlation Tables 
Table 8 displays the means, standard deviations, and intercorrelations among the 
Level 1 or subordinate level variables in the analysis. Where relevant, internal reliability 
statistics, Cronbach's alpha, are displayed on the diagonal. Similarly, Table 9 displays 
the means, standard deviations, and intercorrelations among the Level 2 or manager level 
variables in the analysis, with Cronbach's alpha on the diagonal. 
Due to the cross level nature of the hypotheses for this study, examining the 
correlation tables does not provide an initial sense as to whether managers' external 
relationships do indeed shape subordinate perceptions and experience. However, an 
initial examination of the pairwise correlations does inform the study design and 
analytical strategy. In addition, it provides some initial insight into the validity of the 
stage 2 hypotheses, the extent to which the benefits and costs of managers' external 
relationships are related to subordinate attitudes, LMX, and performance. Table 8 reveals 
that moderate correlations exist between subordinates' personality and their ratings of 
their own attitudes and views of their managers. In particular, subordinate agreeableness 
displays consistent moderate correlations (e.g. r with information access of .23, r with 
organizational commitment of .21) as does emotional stability (r with information access 
78 
of. 13, r with manager time constraint of .24). These correlations confirm the benefit of 
controlling for subordinate personality, partially as an insulator from common source 
bias. 
Table 8 also reveals strong correlations between many of the intervening variables 
and the subordinate level outcomes. For example, the pairwise correlation between 
manager status and organizational commitment is .34 and the pairwise correlation 
between ascribed identity and LMX is .57. These strong pairwise correlations provide 
initial evidence for the connections in stage 2 of the theoretical model, linking the 
intervening effects of managers' external relationships to subordinate level attitudes, 
performance and LMX. 
Table 9 reveals that two of the external relationship variables, friendship in-
degree and LLX-contribution, are moderately correlated with transformational leadership, 
r=.33 and .30 respectively. This suggests that it is indeed a necessary strategy to control 
for transformational leadership to confirm that the external relationship variables are 
bringing incremental explanatory power to the models. 
Tables 8 and 9 also confirm the need for demographic control variables at various 
points in time. In particular, both tables display differences in the experiences, attitudes, 
and networks of respondents of different genders and race. Table 9 reveals that women 
and minority managers have more sparse peer networks and weaker relationships with 
their bosses. Similarly, Table 8 reveals that women and minority front line subordinates 
report less advantaged work conditions, e.g. resource and information access. 
79 
V.La Issues of Multi-collinearity 
Table 8 reveals several instances of strong correlations among the intervening 
variables. For example the correlation between resource access and information access is 
.59 and the correlation between manager availability and ascribed identity is .66. This 
suggests that multicollinearity exists among these variables. Multicollinearity can result 
in inflated standard errors (Cohen et al., 2003), thus creating problems in parameter 
estimation and interpretation. Similarly, Table 9 reveals issues of multicollinearity 
among the level 2 independent variables as well. For example, friendship in-degree and 
advice in-degree are correlated at r=.52 and LLX-affect and LLX-contribution are 
correlated at r=.64. These correlations may present either challenges or opportunities in 
analytical interpretation. On the one hand, multi-collinearity, while not affecting the 
goodness of fit of a model, can lead to inflated standard errors and instability in 
parameter estimates (Cohen et al., 2003). As I am interested in the effects of specific 
variables in my models, multicollinearity may present a problem. At the same time, 
correlations among independent variables may suggest that the independent variables act 
as suppressors of each other (Mackinnon et al., 2000). A suppression effect occurs in a 
statistical analysis when the inclusion of a third variable, z, in an analysis of the 
predictive effect of x on y accentuates the predictive relationship of x on y (Tzeglov & 
Henik, 1991). The suppression effect may occur because the correlation between z and x, 
i.e. two independent variables, may mask the effect of x on y or because the inclusion of 
z "cleans out" variance in x unrelated to y (Tzeglov & Henik, 1991). 
80 
To more formally explore the possibility of multicollinearity, I constructed OLS 
versions of the models used to test my hypotheses and examined the Variance Inflation 
Factors (VIF) between the variables in question. Although the VIFs between the highly 
correlated variables, e.g. between LLX-affect and LLX-contribution, were the highest in 
the models, none approached 5, a common threshold for concerns of multicollinearity. 
As such, I did not remove any variables from the analysis. 
In the tables that support the analysis for this study, I present the analyses in two 
forms. In the first form, referred to as single models, I enter explanatory variables one at 
a time to the models. This provides the opportunity to understand the effect of a given 
explanatory variable on the dependent variable of choice without the risk of 
multicollinearity. In the second portion of the tables, I enter all of the independent, but 
possibly correlated, variables in what I refer to as full models. To interpret the results, I 
rely primarily on the full models. These models represent a stricter test, in that a 
significant individual effect would need to account for variance after controlling for 
others and would need to overcome any lingering effects from multi-collinearity. The 
single models provide additional information and my aid in interpretation, but the full 
models are used for hypothesis testing. 
V.2 Organization of this section 
The theory and hypotheses presented earlier are organized by intervening 
variables, e.g. resource and information access, perceived manager status, ascribed 
identity, and manager accessibility. I maintain this structure in this section. In each 
81 
subsection that follows, I first examine stage 1—managers' external relationships as 
predictors of intervening variables, the benefits and costs of managers' external 
relationships. I then examine stage 2—interventing effects predicting subordinate 
outcomes. After examining the intervening effects, I examine the direct effects, both 
linear and curvilinear linking managers' external relationships to the chosen subordinate 
outcomes. 
Table 10 displays a summary of the key findings outlined below. Panel A 
displays the results for the stage 1 analyses—managers' external relationships predicting 
the intervening effects of external relationships. The upper portion of each cell displays 
the result for the full model and the lower portion of each cell displays the result for the 
single model. Panel B displays the results for the stage 2 analyses—the intervening 
effects predict outcomes of task performance, organizational commitment and LMX. 
Panel C presents the results for the direct effects analyses—managers' external 
relationships predict performance, commitment, and LMX directly. Figure 8 provides a 
graphical representation of the results. 
V.3 Access to resources and information 
As described in the methods section, access to resources and access to 
information represent two empirically separate though related constructs in this study. 
Therefore, I discuss each individually in the sections that follow. 
26 As described later, the analyses yielded no curvilinear effects, thus providing no support for hypotheses 
14-16. Thus, panel C of table 10 provides the results for the linear predictions. 
82 
Hypothesis 1: The more extensive a manager's network of external 
relationships, the greater will be his or her subordinates' access to 
information and resources. 
Table 11 displays the multi-level models that examine the predictive relationship 
between managers' external relationships and subordinates' perceptions of their access to 
resources. Model 1 displays the results when including only the subordinate and manager 
control variables, including transformational leadership, to predict resource access.2 
Transformational Leadership is a manager level control, aggregated across all 
participating subordinates of a given manager. Including transformational leadership as a 
control is necessary in order to determine whether managers' external relationships 
predict the costs and benefits to subordinates above and beyond the effects of the 
manager's downward leadership style. As displayed in model 1, managers' 
transformational leadership does positively predict subordinate resource access (b= .268, 
p =.032). The primary results testing Hypothesis 1 appear in Models 6-8, the full models. 
Model 6 examines both peer network constructs as predictors of resource access. As 
displayed in Model 6, neither of the peer network variables significantly predicts access 
to resources. Model 7 follows the same structure in examining the effects of LLX on 
Throughout the theory and hypotheses section, I used "extensive" to refer to both the strength of the LLX 
relationship between manager and boss and the degree centrality of the manager within the peer network. 
In this results section, I capture "extensive" through four measures, two (Friendship and Advice In-degree) 
that measure the manager's position in the peer network and two which capture dimensions of the 
manager's LLX relationship with his or her boss. 
28 A underlying premise of this study is that managers' external relationships shape the costs, benefits, and 
subordinate outcomes after accounting for downward leadership dimensions, proxied here as 
transformational leadership. All of the results reported here, then, control for manager level 
transformational leadership. In post hoc analyses, I also examined these models without controlling for 
transformational leadership, in order to assess whether external relationships and transformational 
leadership had similar statistical relationships with the intervening and dependent variables that might in 
essence be measuring the same effect. These analyses reveal few substantive differences. 
83 
subordinate resource access, finding that neither of the LLX constructs predicts 
subordinate resource access. Model 8 displays the full model with all of the peer network 
and LLX variables included as predictors. As displayed in model 8, managers' external 
relationships do not significantly predict subordinate access to resources. For 
informational purposes, Models 2-5, the single models, add one version of manager's 
external relationships at a time to the model, i.e. model 2: advice in degree, model 3: 
friendship in-degree, model 4: LLX-affect, model 5: LLX-contribution. Tables 12-16 
display the same analyses for each of the other intervening variables. The structure of the 
models 1-8 is identical to table 11 for each of these tables. 
Table 12 displays the stage 1 analysis linking managers' external relationships to 
subordinate access to information. Model 1 displays that manager level transformational 
leadership positively predicts information access (b = .30, p = .002). Model 8 displays 
the results of models when all of the manager external relationship variables included and 
highlights that the managers' friendship in degree centrality predicts subordinates access 
to information (b = .019, p = .035). Advice in degree (b = -.017, p = .085) and LLX-
contribution (b = .130,p = .058) marginally predict information access. Examining the 
single models, (models 2-5), we observe that LLX-Contribution is the only variable to 
significantly predict subordinate information access (b = .110, p = .042). This suggests 
the existence of suppression effects between the peer network variables. 
In summary, Hypothesis 1 received partial support from these analyses. Most 
notably, subordinates' access to information is positively predicted by two elements of 
the manager's external network—his or her quantity of peer friendships and the extent to 
84 
which he or she puts forth extra effort on behalf of the boss (LLX-eontribution). 
However, managers' external relationships do not predict subordinate perceptions that 
they have enhanced access to resources. 
Hypothesis 2: The greater subordinate access to information and resources, 
the greater subordinate performance will be. 
Table 17 displays the stage 2 analyses linking the five possible intervening 
variables to subordinate sales performance. As noted in the methods section, this 
analysis is conducted with the subset of subordinates in Organizations B and C who are 
front line salespeople and for whom I collected archival sales performance data. Model 1 
in Table 17 predicts sales performance as a function of both subordinate level and 
manager level controls. The list of subordinate controls includes baseline or target sales 
performance for each subordinate which serves a proxy for territory size/attractiveness 
and prior period sales performance. The set of manager level controls includes 
transformational leadership behaviors on the part of the manager as assessed by 
subordinates. This measure is aggregated to the manager level in these models. Models 
2-7 are the single models, in which I enter the six intervening variables—resource access, 
information access, perceived manager status, ascribed identity, manager availability, and 
manager time constraints—individually. In model 8,1 enter the hypothesized benefits 
together. I model 9 I enter the hypothesized costs together and in model 10, the full 
model, I enter all of the intervening variables at once. Table 18 displays the same 
information for Subordinate Performance (Assessed by Manager). In this table, I do not 
control for prior year sales, but do add controls for company B and job function as 
85 
described in the methods section. Otherwise, this table has the same models/column 
structure as table 17. As displayed in models 8 and 10 of Table 17, neither resource 
access nor information access significantly predicts sales performance. Similarly, as 
displayed in Table 18, neither resource access nor information access significantly 
predicts subordinate performance. Thus, Hypothesis 2 is not supported. 
Hypothesis 3: The greater subordinates' access to information and resources 
is, the greater their levels of organizational commitment will be. 
Table 19 displays the analyses linking the six intervening variables to 
subordinates' level of organizational commitment. As described above model 1 enters all 
of the controls, models 2-7 enter each intervening variable individually, and models 8-10 
integrate across the intervening variables. As displayed in Table 19, in models 8 and 10, 
resource access predicts subordinate organizational commitment (model 10, b = .446, p < 
.0001) but information access does not (model 10, b = .10,/? = .23). When viewed 
individually, in models 2 and 3, both access to resources (model 2, b = .491, p <.0001) 
and access to information (model 3, b=.417,/? <.0001) predict organizational 
commitment. As discussed earlier, the pattern of results under which the two constructs 
predict organizational commitment individually but only resource access predicts when 
integrated suggests that resource access is the more dominant effect. As a result, these 
results provide fairly strong support for Hypothesis 3, that when subordinates have access 
to information and resources, they experience greater commitment to the organization. 
The effects of access to information and resources on LMX 
86 
I did not hypothesize that subordinate access to information and resources would 
be associated with the LMX relationship between manager and subordinate. However, I 
tested these relationships as part of the analysis of LMX as a dependent variable. These 
analyses are displayed in Table 20, which has the same structure as Table 19. As 
displayed in these models, information access does not predict LMX. Models 8 and 10 
also reflect that resource access does not appear to predict LMX. 
In summary, managers' external relationships, as embodied by their peer 
friendships and the extent to which the manager puts forth extra effort on behalf of 
his/her boss, are related to the extent to which subordinates believe that they have 
enhanced organizational information and resources. The more peer relationships and the 
deeper boss relationships the manager has, the more employees feel "in the know" and 
well equipped with organizational knowledge. Yet, the managers' external relationships 
do not appear to predict resource access. Greater information and resource access, in 
turn, are related to employees' organizational commitment, but not, in this analysis, to 
their task performance. These analyses also suggest that when employees perceive that 
they have greater access to resources, they experience a more positive LMX relationship 
with their manager. 
V.4 Perceived Manager Status 
Hypothesis 4: The more extensive a manager's external network, the higher 
status subordinates will perceive the manager to be. 
87 
Table 13 displays the results examining managers' external relationships as 
predictors of subordinate perceptions of manager status. Model 1 examines perceived 
manager status as a function of the subordinate and manager level controls. Notably, 
transformational leadership does strongly positively predict perceived manager status (b 
= .563, p < .0001). In model 8, the full model, both friendship in-degree (b = .022, p = 
.009) and LLX-Contribution (b = .121, p = .019) positively predict perceived manager 
status. The other two explanatory variables do not predict perceived manager status. In 
summary, these results suggest that when managers have extensive peer friendship 
networks and engage in extra effort on behalf of their boss, subordinates perceive them as 
higher status within the organization. These results provide support for Hypothesis 4. 
Hypothesis 5: The higher status subordinates perceive their managers to be, 
the greater the subordinates' organizational commitment will be. 
As described above, Table 19 displays the results for analyses linking the 
intervening costs and benefits to subordinate organizational commitment. As displayed 
in models 10 of table 19, perceived manager status does not predict organizational 
commitment (b= -.045,/? = .60). However, when viewed in the single models, manager 
status does positively predict organizational commitment (b= .298,/? < .0001). The 
combination of these two perspectives suggest that while perceived manager status is 
associated with organizational commitment, resource access is the primary predictor, thus 
providing no support for Hypothesis 5. 
88 
Hypothesis 6: The higher status subordinates perceive their manager to be, 
the higher the LMX relationship will be between the manager and 
subordinate. 
The analyses linking subordinates perceptions of status to the LMX relationship 
between manager and subordinate are displayed in Table 20. As displayed in model 10, 
perceived manager status does not predict LMX (b= .039, p = .640) when controlled for 
by other intervening effects. However, when viewed with the proposed benefits of 
managers' external relationships, perceived manager status strongly predicts LMX (b= 
.241, p = .004) suggesting, again, that there is a positive association between manager 
status and LMX, but that the more significant predictors of LMX are ascribed identity 
and manager availability. In summary, these data provide partial support for Hypothesis 
6, that when subordinates perceive their manager as high status, they will enjoy higher 
levels of LMX with their manager. 
The effects of perceived manager status on sales performance 
I did not hypothesize an association between perceived manager status and task 
performance. However, as displayed in Table 17, model 10, manager status does 
marginally predict sales performance (b = .049, p = .085). As displayed in Table 18, 
manager status does not predict manager rated performance. 
In summary, these analyses suggest that managers' external relationships, as 
embodied by their peer friendships and willingness to engage in extra effort for their 
boss, are related to the extent to which their subordinates perceive them as commanding 
89 
status and influence throughout the organization. This perceived status, in turn, appears 
to motivate tighter LMX relationships between manager and subordinate. 
V.5 Ascribed Identity 
Ascribed identity is the degree to which subordinates perceived the manager as a 
part of the work group, e.g. "one of us." 
Hypothesis 7: The more extensive a manager's external network is, the 
weaker the manager's ascribed subordinate work group identity will be. 
The analyses examining Hypothesis 7 are displayed in Table 14. As depicted in 
Table 14, transformational leadership strongly predicts ascribed identity (b = .774, p < 
.0001), but none of the manager external relationship variables predict the manager's 
ascribed subordinate work group identity. Managers external relationships appear to be 
unrelated to whether subordinates perceive the manager as "one of us" or not. 
Hypothesis 8: The stronger a manager's ascribed work group identity, the 
stronger the LMX relationships between manager and subordinate. 
The analyses linking subordinates assessment of the manager's ascribed (in-
group) identity to the LMX relationship between manager and subordinate are displayed 
in table 20. Model 10 displays that ascribed identity positively predicts LMX (b = .264, p 
< .0001). These results provide strong support for hypothesis 8, that the more 
Given the strong association of transformational leadership and ascribed identity in these models, one 
might suspect that little variance remains for the effects of the four external relationship variables on 
ascribed identity. To test for this, I constructed models to mirror models 2-5 without transformational 
leadership and found no difference in the pattern of results. 
90 
subordinates perceived their manager as part of the work group, e.g. "one of us", the 
greater the bond on an individual basis between subordinate and manager. 
Hypothesis 9: The stronger a manager's aseribed identity, the stronger the 
organizational commitment of the manager's subordinates. 
Table 19 displays the analysis linking subordinate assessments of the manager's 
ascribed (ingroup) identity to his or her subordinates' organizational commitment. As 
reflected in model 10, ascribed identity does not predict subordinate organizational 
commitment when controlled for by the other intervening variables (b = .098, p = .188). 
These results do not support Hypothesis 9. 
The potential effects of ascribed identity on sales performance 
I did not hypothesize an association between ascribed identity and task 
performance. However, as displayed in Table 17, Model 10, there is a significant 
negative relationships between ascribed identity and sales performance (b = -.07, p = 
.002). As displayed in Table 18, the analyses reveal no association between ascribed 
identity and manager assessed performance. 
In summary, managers' external relationships appear to have no effect on 
subordinate's perceptions of the manager's identity as a member of the immediate work 
group. However, perceptions of the manager as integrated with the group, as being "one 
of us" appear to be important predictors of LMX and possibly task performance. These 
results support the notion that the manager's ingroup identity is the other edge of the 
boundary spanning sword. While boundary spanning provides the opportunity to garner 
status throughout the organization (and in the eyes of subordinates), managers must still 
91 
maintain their reputations as members of and aligned with the interests of their 
subordinate work groups. 
V.6 Manager Accessibility 
Hypothesis 10: The more extensive a manager's external network, the lower 
subordinates' access to the manager will be. 
As described in the methods section, I measured manager accessibility through 
two constructs. Manager availability measures the extent to which subordinates believe 
the manager is physically available to them when they need help or input or have a 
concern. Manager time constraints measures the extent to which the subordinates 
believe that managers don't have enough time available to do what is asked of them. 
Table 15 displays the results of analyses predicting manager availability. As 
reflected in Model 8, the full model, none of the external relationship variables predict 
availability. In contrast, this model reveals a marginally significant positive association 
between LLX-affect and availability. This finding runs counter to the hypothesis, 
suggesting that a strong manager to boss relationship is associated with more availability 
for the manager with his or her subordinate employees. Table 16 displays the results of 
analyses predicting manager time constraints and reveals no significant relationships 
between managers' external relationships and their perceived time constraints. 
Hypothesis 11: There will be a curvilinear relationship between 
subordinates' access to their manager and subordinates' performance. 
92 
Subordinates will perform best under conditions of moderate manager 
accessibility and lower at very low or very high accessibility. 
Table 17 provides the results linking the intervening variables to the sales 
performance of the sales people in Organizations B and C. As displayed in table 17, both 
availability (b = .053, p = .039) and time constraints (b= -.047, p = .048) predict 
performance in the hypothesized direction. When managers are more available to their 
subordinates and are less time constrained, sales performance is higher. In addition, 
though not reflected in the table, I also constructed models which added squared terms to 
the analysis of manager availability and manager time constraints, thus testing whether 
the relationship between time constraints and performance was curvilinear. The squared 
term was not significant in either case, lending no support for this hypothesis. Table 18 
provides the results linking the intervening variables to the manager rated performance of 
subordinates. As reflected in Table 18, there are no linear effects, though manager 
availability is marginally significant (b= .214, p = .091). As with sales performance, I 
constructed a version of this model with squared terms for manager availability and 
manager time constraints, but neither was significant. None of the network benefits or 
costs were significant predictors of manager assessed performance on in the single 
models. These analyses provide no support for Hypothesis 11 as written but suggest that 
manager availability and time management are important inputs to the downward 
managerial process. That external roles do not seem to impinge upon managerial 
availability is encouraging though unexpected. 
93 
Hypothesis 12: The higher subordinates perceive access to their manager to 
be, the higher the subordinates' organizational commitment. 
Table 19 displays the analysis linking subordinate assessments of the manager's 
availability and time constraints to the subordinate's organizational commitment. Model 
10 displays that neither availability nor time constraints predict subordinate 
organizational commitment. However, when viewed with the potential costs of external 
relationships, Model 9, manager availability does positively predict organizational 
commitment (b= AS9,p= .024). These results provide partial support for Hypothesis 
12. 
Hypothesis 13: The higher the access subordinates have to their manager, 
the stronger the LMX relationship will be. 
The analyses linking subordinates assessment of the manager's availability and 
time constraints to the LMX relationship between manager and subordinate are displayed 
in table 20. Model 10 in table 20 reflects that manager availability positively predicts 
LMX (b = .235,/? = .001), but that time constraints do not (b= -.082,/? = .238). These 
results provide partial support for Hypothesis 13. 
In summary, with one exception, managers' external relationships do not appear 
related to subordinates' perceptions of the manager's availability or time constraints. The 
exception is that when is viewed as a friend by his or her boss, he or she is more available 
to subordinates. Although contrary to the hypothesis put forth in this study, this finding 
94 
is consistent with the notion that people in high LMX relationships enjoy autonomy from 
their superiors, possible creating time to spend elsewhere. Manager availability looms 
large as a key component of the downward leadership task. The analyses presented here 
suggest that it is strongly related to all of the key subordinate outcomes, positively 
predicting organizational commitment, sales performance, and LMX. In effect, 
managers' external relationships do not impinge upon this critical managerial facet. 
V.7 Direct effects: Managers' external relationships predict subordinate level 
outcomes 
Hypotheses 14-16 addressed the possibility of a direct predictive connection 
between a manager's external relationships and the performance, organizational 
commitment, and LMX relationships of his or her subordinates. Drawing on the costs 
and benefits framework and the hypotheses that underlie the two stage indirect effects 
model, I did not hypothesize any linear effects, but rather predicted that the empirical 
relationship between managers' networks and their subordinates' outcomes would be 
curvilinear. In general, at low levels of external relationships, subordinates would 
"suffer" due to lack of network benefits, but at high levels of external relationships, 
subordinates would also "suffer" due to high levels of cost that result from having 
extensive networks. 
However, the results presented thus far suggest that there is little empirical 
support for the hypotheses that managers' external relationships materially create "costs" 
for subordinates. Therefore, a refined set of direct effects hypotheses would also include 
95 
the linear effects of networks suggesting that managers' external relationships positively 
predict subordinates' performance, organizational commitment, and LMX. Thus, in the 
sections that follow, I examine both the linear and curvilinear effects and related 
hypotheses. Also, to the extent that the analyses reveal direct linear effects, I also 
examine the extent to which these effects are mediated by the intervening effects of 
managers' external relationships. 
As a preview, few of the analyses in the tables to come yield statistically 
significant effects. As a general conclusion, there are few linear or curvilinear direct 
effects, thus supporting the two stage indirect effects model proposed throughout this 
study. Rather than report a long list of non-significant findings, I focus in this section on 
those relationships that do achieve statistical significance. 
V. 7. a. Sales/Task performance 
Hypothesis 14: There is a curvilinear relationship between a manager's 
external network and the performance of his or her subordinates. 
Subordinate performance will be highest at moderate levels of external 
managerial networks and lower at low or high levels of manager external 
networks. 
The analyses connecting managers' external relationships to subordinate sales 
performance are presented in Table 21. The analyses connecting managers' external 
relationships to their assessment of their subordinates' performance are presented in 
Table 22. Model 1 enters only the control variables, including transformational leadership 
96 
and baseline sales. Models 2-3 enter the linear and curvilinear term for advice in-degree. 
Models 4-5 enter the same friendship-in-degree, models 6-7 for LLX-affect, and models 
8-9 for LLX-contribution. Models 10-11 integrate across all peer networks. Models 12-
13 integrate across both conceptualizations of LLX. Models 14-15 integrate across all 
four measures of a manager's external relationships. 
Examining the incremental effects of adding the squared term in Models 3, 5, 7, 9, 
11, 13, and 15 of Table 21,1 find that none of the curvilinear hypotheses are supported, 
thus providing no support for Hypothesis 14 as written. However, when considering 
simply the linear terms, as reflected in models 10, 12, and 14, we find that LLX- affect 
does positively predict sales performance (model 14, b= .081, p = .011). When the boss 
and manager have a strong affective relationship, subordinates return higher levels of 
performance. None of the relationships are supported on Table 22, for manager assessed 
performance. 
What are the mechanisms that explain the connection of LLX-Affect to 
subordinate sales performance? Is this effects mediated by any of the proposed benefits 
or costs of managers' external relationships? To assess the mediated relationships, I 
employ Baron & Kenny's (1986) criteria for mediation. Three criteria must be met for 
mediation. (1) The independent variable must statistically predict the proposed mediator. 
(2) The proposed mediator must significantly predict the dependent variable. (3) When 
the mediator is added to the direct effects model, the statistical relationship between the 
independent variable and dependent variable is reduced. As revealed in Table 17, 
ascribed identity, availability, and time constraints each predict sales performance, 
97 
satisfying criterion 2. Only availability satisfies criterion 1 as it is predicted by LLX-
Affect. I examined criterion 3 with three different model configurations: (a) a fully 
integrated model with all independent and intervening variables entered, (b) all 
independent variables plus manager availability, and (c) only LLX-affect and manager 
availability. In each case, LLX-affect remained a significant predictor of sales 
performance with minimal reduction in effect size or statistical significance. The 
parameters for LLX-Affect were (a) b= .076,p = .0437; (b) b= .091,p = .021; (c) b= 
.052, p = .009. This combination of results suggests that the relationship between LLX-
Affect and sales performance is not mediated or only slightly partially mediated by 
manager availability. 
V.7.b Organizational Commitment 
Hypothesis 15: There is a curvilinear relationship between a manager's 
external network and the organizational commitment of his or her subordinates. 
Subordinate organizational commitment will be highest at moderate levels of 
external managerial networks and lower at low or high levels of manager external 
networks. 
Table 23 displays the analyses linking managers' external relationships to 
subordinate organizational commitment. The models have the same configuration as 
Table 21. As reflected in Table 23, none of the external relationship squared terms 
predict organizational commitment, thus providing no support to Hypothesis 15 as 
written. Further, as displayed in models 10,12 and 14, when reconsidering Hypothesis 
98 
15 as a linear direct effect, the analysis reveals no effects of managers' external 
relationships on organizational commitment. 
V. 7. c LMX between subordinate and manager 
Hypothesis 16: There is a curvilinear relationship between a manager's 
external network and the LMX relationship between manager and subordinate. 
LMX will be highest at moderate levels of external managerial networks and lower 
at low or high levels of manager external networks. 
Table 24 presents the results for the analysis linking managers' external networks 
to LMX. As reflected in this table none of the external relationship variables predict 
LMX on a curvilinear basis, thus providing no support to Hypothesis 16. Similarly, when 
moving to investigate the effects of the linear network terms on LMX, we find no 
significant relationships either. 
V.8 Peers vs. Boss Effects 
The final set of hypotheses explored the issues of whether peer relationships had a 
larger effect on network costs and benefits, subordinate performance, organizational 
commitment, and LMX. 
Hypothesis 17: Managers' peer relationships will have a larger effect on 
managers' accessibility than will the nature of their boss relationships. 
As previously reported, only one of the external relationship variables—LLX-
affect—predicts manager availability, albeit in the direction opposite from that 
99 
hypothesized. And, none of the external relationship variables predict time constraints. 
These finding provide no support for hypothesis 17. 
Hypothesis 18: Managers' peer relationships will have a larger impact on their 
ascribed identities than will boss relationships. 
As previously reported, none of the external relationship variables predict 
ascribed identity. Thus, these findings leave hypothesis 18 unsupported. 
Hypothesis 19: Managers' peer relationships will have a larger impact on 
subordinate job performance than will boss relationships. 
As described above, LLX-Affect predicts sales performance, but none of the peer 
network constructs do. These findings tend to contradict the hypothesis, suggesting that 
the boss relationship has a greater impact on performance than the peer relationships. 
Hypothesis 20: Managers' boss relationships will have a larger impact on 
subordinate organizational commitment than will peer relationships. 
The previously reported results from Table 23 reveal that a manager's peer 
networks do not predict the organizational commitment of his or her subordinates. In 
contrast, the single models in Table 23 suggest the manager's relationship with his or her 
boss, as reflected by LLX-Affect and LLX-Contribution, may be positively associated 
with subordinate organizational commitment. This provides tentative partial support to 
Hypothesis 20. 
Although I did not offer specific hypotheses for peer vs. boss effects for the 
remainder of the intervening (resource access, information access, or status) or dependent 
100 
variables (LMX) in the model, Tables 11-16 and 21-24 provide some insight on the 
relative strengths of boss vs. peer effects here as well. As reflected in Table 11, none of 
the external relationship variables predict resource access, so there is no need to ask the 
question regarding peer vs. boss effects. Model 8 in Table 12 suggests that peer 
networks, reflected in friendship-in-degree, are the primary predictor of information 
access. To examine this further, I examined the range of effect sizes for one and two 
standard deviations of variance for each variable in the full model and plotted the results 
in Figure 9. As displayed in Figure 9, the curve for friendship-in-degree has a steeper 
slope, suggesting a greater effect. Both friendship-in-degree and LLX-contribution 
predict manager status (Table 13, Model 8). Adopting the same approach as described 
for information access, I plot the range of effect sizes for one and two standard deviations 
of the two variables in Figure 10. The plot suggests larger effect sizes for peers over 
bosses, though the difference is quite negligible. Finally, as reflected in Table 24, there 
are no direct effects linking managers' external relationships to the LMX relationship 
between manager and subordinates. 
V.9 Summary of Results 
Table 10 summarizes the results from each of the three stages of the analysis. 
Panel A summarizes the findings related to stage 1—managers' external relationships 
predict network benefits and costs. The upper cell summarizes for the full models and 
the lower cell summarizes for the single models, for informational purposes only. The 
analyses presented here suggest that elements of the manager's external networks are 
101 
associated with boundary spanning benefits for managers and their subordinates. When 
managers have extensive peer friendship networks and are invested in the working 
relationship with their boss, subordinates perceived themselves as having greater 
organizational information and perceive the manager as higher status in the organization. 
However, contrary to predictions, managers' external relationships do not appear to 
create material costs in the eyes of their subordinates. There is only one (of 12 possible) 
significant relationship between the external relationships and potential costs and it does 
not function as a cost. A manager's affective relationship with his or her boss is 
positively associated with his or her availability to subordinates. This particular finding 
is subtly crucial as availability is consistently related to subordinate outcomes. It would 
seem that the strong affective relationship with the boss may result in autonomy for the 
manager resulting in more constructive downward management. 
Turning to Panel B, stage 2, resource access is the dominant predictor of 
subordinate organizational commitment. Consistent with hypotheses ascribed identity 
and availability predict LMX. Surprisingly, information access does not. When 
subordinates experience their manager as part of the work group and available to them, 
they experience a tighter bond to the manager. Three intervening variables—ascribed 
identity, availability, and time constraints—predict sales performance, though ascribed 
identity predicts it in the opposite direction from that which is hypothesized. 
Finally, Panel C reveals that there are few direct effects, suggesting that the 
relationship between a manager's external relationships and the work experience of his or 
her subordinates is an indirect one. Only one of the 8 possible relationships between 
102 
managers' external relationships and their subordinates' experience are significant. It 
seems that the stronger the affective relationship between manager and boss, the greater 
the performance of the managers' subordinates. 
These results suggest several inter-related summary level conclusions. First, 
managers' external relationships are associated with subordinate perceptions of their 
manager, the organization and their performance. Three of the four external relationships 
considered play a role in predicting either more proximal intervening variables and/or 
more distal subordinate outcomes. Both horizontal and vertical relationships are 
significant factors in these associations. Second, these associations are mix of direct and 
indirect effects. In particular, though, most of the connections between manager's 
external relationships and subordinate outcomes rely on the linking mechanisms 
presented here. These results shine a light not only on managers' external relationships, 
but on the intervening variables, the mechanisms that reflect the managers' execution of 
their boundary spanning roles. Adding emphasis to this point, subordinate resource 
access and the manager's ascribed in-group identity are also prominent in predicting 
subordinate outcomes. These two factors also represent potential elements of the 
manager's boundary spanning role, though neither display an association with managers' 
external relationships. 
103 
VI. DISCUSSION 
VI. 1 Overview 
The primary objective of this study was to examine the effects of managers' 
external relationships—the ties and interpersonal relationships they hold beyond their 
immediate work group—on two sets of subordinate effects (a) the subordinates 
perceptions of the manager's boundary spanning role and (b) more distal outcomes, e.g. 
their LMX with their manager and their organizational commitment and performance. 
The principle argument advanced in this study builds upon the work of Mintzberg (1973) 
and Ancona & Caldwell (1992) in framing managers as boundary spanners, connecting 
their subordinate workgroup and its members to the environment beyond the workgroup. 
I argued that managers build external relationships—in particular with their peers and 
their immediate superiors or bosses—and that these relationships yield two critical 
benefits for managers in leading their workgroups. First, drawing on social networks 
theory, I argued that rich external networks provide the manager access to key 
information and resources which he or she may then make available to subordinates. 
Second, drawing on status characteristics theory, I argued that managers who enjoy rich 
external networks are perceived by their subordinates as being high status within the 
broader organization. These two benefits correspond to the two critical external 
components of a manager's role: Serving as a conduit of information between the 
workgroup and its environment (Mintzberg, 1973; Ancona & Caldwell, 1992) and 
representing the group externally in pursuit of resources and spoils (Mintzberg, 1973; 
Pfeffer, 1981). Further, I argued that managers' external relationships shaped these 
104 
benefits above and beyond the effects of their downward or internal management 
activities and behaviors, as reflected by their displays of transformational leadership 
behaviors. 
At the same time, following Adler & Kwon's (2002) observation that social 
capital comes with both advantages and disadvantages, I also hypothesized that these rich 
external relationships may come with costs or downsides for focal managers. Research in 
Social Identity Theory documents that leaders enjoy more power and influence with their 
subordinates when subordinates perceive them as sharing an in-group affiliation with the 
workgroup (Hogg, 2001; Hains et al., 1997; Fielding & Hogg, 1997). But, when leaders 
have rich networks outside of the group, the manager may feel beholden to organization 
members outside of his or her workgroup (Adler & Kwon, 2002; Uzzi, 1997; Krackhardt, 
1999). I theorized that these managers may come to be perceived as distant from their 
subordinates, having a weakened workgroup ascribed identity, with the risk of not being 
aligned with the interests of their subordinates, e.g. not "one of us." If so, the manager's 
external relationships could erode trust and influence for the leader with his or her 
subordinates. 
Finally, drawing on resource allocation theory, I argued that managers' external 
relationships might also create a more tangible and physical cost for them (Becker, 1965, 
Bergeron, 2007). Network theorists suggest that interpersonal relationships require 
tending, investment, and maintenance (Burt 1997; Mayhew & Levinger, 1976). And, 
similarly, a preferred relationship with the boss often comes with extra demands and 
responsibility for the manager (Harris & Kacmar, 2006). These maintenance activities, I 
105 
argued, require the allocation of time that must come at the expense of other activities. 
Thus, I theorized that when managers have dense external relationships they are more 
time constrained and less available to their subordinate employees. 
These four intervening effects, representing key elements of a manager's 
boundary spanning role, provide the links between managers' external relationships and 
key subordinate outcomes of task performance, organizational commitment, and LMX. 
As such, I built theory that explicitly articulates an intervening or indirect effects model, 
suggesting that external relationships predicting the intervening effects which, in turn, 
predicted the subordinate outcomes. At the same time, I argued that the effects might 
counterbalance each other leading to a curvilinear direct effect. Too sparse a network, I 
hypothesized, fails to allow the manager to deliver the boundary spanning role, yielding 
insufficient resource and information access and perceptions of the manager as low status 
within the organization. Conversely, too dense a network creates excessive claims on 
the manager, reducing the in-group connection to subordinates and limiting time and 
physical availability. 
I tested these ideas in a field study involving three services organizations. The 
results presented here suggest that managers' external relationships do appear to function 
as both conduits of resource and signals of the managers' organizational status. When a 
manager has a broad friendship network and/or a rich LLX relationship with his or her 
boss, the manager's subordinates have greater access to information and perceive the 
manager as more powerful and influential throughout the broader company. These two 
effects are consistent with Mintzberg's (1973) conceptualization of the manager's 
106 
external role. Perceived manager status, in turn, predicts LMX. These effects occur even 
after controlling for the manager's display of transformational leadership, suggesting that 
both the managers' internal and external roles provide value for subordinates. At the 
same time, the analyses presented here reveal no evidence of the hypothesized costs or 
risks of managers' external relationships. There is no evidence to suggest that these 
external relationships erode the manager's in-group identity with his or her subordinates 
or materially impinge upon his or her availability to subordinates. In contrast, the 
analyses presented here suggest that a strong LLX relationship between manager and 
boss is positively associated with the manager's availability to subordinates. This is 
encouraging for managers as the analyses reveal the manager availability looms large in 
positively predicting subordinate attitudes, performance, and relationships. The analyses 
also reveal that resource access and ascribed identity are strong predictors of subordinate 
outcomes. While these two factors are not predicted, in this analysis, by manager's 
external relationships, they are additional elements of the manager's boundary spanning 
role and provide guidance to managers for how management of the boundaries, both 
instrumentally and in perception, may fuel the subordinate experience. In general, the 
results highlight the critical role that the intervening processes outlined here may play in 
shaping the subordinate worker experience and in channeling the effects of managers' 
external relationships. In the absence of costs, the analyses do not reveal a curvilinear 
relationship between external relationships and subordinate outcomes. However, the 
results reveal several positive associations between managers' external relationships and 
107 
subordinate outcomes with a mix of direct and indirect effects. I summarize the findings 
and conclusions in the following sections. 
VI.2 The potential benefits of managers' external relationships 
VI. 2. a Stage 1: Manager's external relationships as resource conduits and status 
markers 
My analysis reveals that managers' external relationships—their interpersonal 
relationships beyond their immediate work group—appear to serve as resource conduits 
and status markers for subordinates. As conceptualized in social network theory, the 
managers' relationships function as conduits of resource exchange. When managers are 
central in the peer friendship network and have high quality dyadic relationships with 
their immediate bosses, their subordinate employees experience greater access to relevant 
information. Centrality in friendship networks allows managers to tap into individuals in 
the organization who have relevant task know-how (Hansen, 1999), e.g. best practices, 
and organizational context (Cross & Cummings, 2004; Yukl, 2006). Thus, highly central 
managers are better positioned to keep their subordinates "plugged in." My findings also 
suggest that the key relationships are workplace friendships, reinforcing the notions that 
people first go to others whom they find warm (Casiciaro & Lobo, 2008) and that friends 
often represent the source of sensitive or high stakes information that is most valuable to 
organization members (Hansen, 1999; Mehra et al., 2006; Ibarra, 1992). That 
interpersonal relationships, in general, and networks, more specifically, function as 
conduits of information and resource exchange is at the heart of social network theory 
108 
(Freeman, 1979; Wasserman & Faust, 1994; Brass, 1984). However, this premise is 
seldom tested directly, but rather is assumed as part of broader hypotheses where 
information access is implicitly a mediator. 
Equally as critical is the upward relationship with the manager's boss. In these 
results, when managers put for extra effort for their boss, subordinates perceive 
themselves as having enhanced access to information. This suggests that the LLX 
relationship—the relationship between manager and boss—functions as one of social 
exchange. The manager's efforts provide a benefit to the boss, who reciprocates by 
welcoming the manager into the boss's inner circle and making him or her privy to 
selected information (Dienesch & Liden, 1986). This finding is consistent with the main 
thrust of the theories of both Mintzberg (1973) and Ancona & Caldwell (1992), who 
suggest that a primary role of a manager or leader is to be the point of information 
exchange between a work group and the group's external environment. 
Curiously, although both peer networks and LLX enhance subordinate access to 
information, neither is associated, in this analysis, with subordinates' access to resources. 
This is not surprising for peer networks as peers do not control the resources that allow 
managers and their teams to perform. Rather, peers, as suggested here, are potential 
sources of information. In contrast, the boss should be a critical source of resources that 
allow subordinates to perform their tasks. Within organizations, more senior managers 
and executives control the flow of funds and priority for equipment, technology, training, 
and other resources that might enhance a worker's experience or performance (Cross and 
Cummings, 2004; Yukl, 2006). Yet, in this study, managers' upward relationships with 
109 
their bosses do not appear to have an impact on subordinate perceptions of resource 
access. A likely explanation for these results is that they are limited by the setting and 
sample in this study. This study examines front line employees and their managers in 
large, well articulated, functional organizations. The employees are salespeople, 
customer service representatives, and accounts receivable processors. The potential 
resources in question—technology, equipment, information services, training, etc.—may 
be significant enough that allocation decisions may be made centrally and/or by a more 
senior member of the organization. In general, front line managers have more control 
and influence over the people and interpersonal dynamics of the organization than they 
do the resource allocations (Yukl, 2006). As such, front line manager's external 
relationships may have limited effect on resource availability, yet resource availability 
(ore perceptions thereof) may continue to affect subordinate attitudes. A more robust test 
of the resource access hypothesis may include managers higher in the organization with 
more implicit influence over resource allocation decisions. 
The same two dimensions of the manager's external relationships—peer 
friendship centrality and LLX-contribution—also predict subordinate perceptions of their 
manager's organizational status. This finding is a natural outgrowth of LMX theory 
under which the tight relationship between manager and boss places the manager in the 
boss's in-group or inner circle (Duchon, Green, & Taber, 1986). Subordinates perceive 
this and ascribe greater status to their manager. In a similar fashion, centrality in the peer 
friendship network also confers status on the focal manager. Centrality among one's 
peers may connote that the focal manager is accepted by them and that the manager has 
110 
the potential to exert influence throughout this particular group (Brass, 1984). 
Subordinates, these results suggest, see their manager as enjoying the camaraderie of his 
or her peers and ascribe to him or her higher likelihood of being part of this power 
structure of this level in the organizational hierarchy. The manager's relationships seem 
to function as an additional set of attained status characteristics (Blau & Duncan, 1976). 
Beyond the instrumental value, e.g. information, that external relationships provide, they 
act as signals to the subordinates of the manager's intra-organizational power and 
influence. 
The analyses of external relationships as resource conduits and status 
characteristics are also intriguing because of two non-findings. First, although peer 
friendships are strongly positively associated with information access and status, the 
analyses do not reveal strong associations for advice relationships. On the surface, this is 
counterintuitive, as one would expect that managers who engage with each other in the 
exchange of advice should be in the position to access key information for their 
subordinates. Certainly, prior research documents that individuals with rich advice 
networks are in a position to deliver better performance (e.g. Sparrowe et al., 2001; 
Baldwin et al., 1997) and greater influence through information access and control 
(Brass, 1984). And, prior research suggests that when a manager is a frequent source of 
advice and counsel for others it serves as a marker of organizational status (Venkatarimi 
et al., 2010; Krackhardt, 1990; Sparrowe & Liden, 2005). 
To be clear, that friendships are stronger predictors than advice relationships of 
information access or status perceptions is not surprising. As mentioned earlier, prior 
111 
research suggests that friendships may be the source of the most valuable, high stakes 
information (Hansen 1999; Mehra et al., 2006; Ibarra 1992), thus creating the possibility 
that advice relationships, while plentiful, may not be viewed as powerful sources of 
information. And, friendships are discretionary and, in principle, not tied to the existing 
work, suggesting that they are a more enduring marker of status among horizontal peers. 
More perplexing is that advice networks are not statistically significant in their own right 
in predicting information access or status. One possible explanation is that advice 
relationships among managers may not be visible to subordinates. Status perceptions, I 
argue, are derived when subordinates may form an opinion based on observed behaviors. 
Friendships, in contrast, may be embodied by who managers spend time with and thus are 
more visible to subordinates. Methodologically, I measured friendships in this study by 
asking with whom participants would socialize outside of work. This approach has the 
potential to make managerial friendships salient and visible to subordinates. Finally, it is 
conceivable that subordinates have their own work and technical related advice networks 
such that managers' networks are not incrementally valuable to them. However, in 
contrast, the high stakes information passed between (more) senior level members who 
are in the know may not be otherwise available to subordinates. Thus, it could be exactly 
that information that passes through managerial friends. 
The second interesting non-finding is that the affective relationship between 
manager and boss (LLX-Affect) does not predict the identified benefits in the same 
manner that peer friendships or LLX-Contribution do. One would think that being a 
friend of the boss would also place the manager in the boss's in-group, opening channels 
112 
of information and creating the aura of high status in the eyes of subordinates. The 
analysis suggests, then, that the mechanisms through which the two types of external 
relationships (peer vs. boss) function are substantially different. A manager's peer 
friendships are affective in nature and exist, I suspect, as a resource that is available to the 
manager, even in a latent state. In contrast, the LLX relationship as displayed in this 
study is more instrumental, rooted in the delivery of effort and work and, thus, likely 
functioning through more active and conscious social exchange. 
VI. 2. b. Stage 2: The effects of status, information, and resources 
The analyses presented here suggest that subordinate perceptions of the manager's 
status may be a key determinant for a manager in leading and directing his or her 
subordinates. When managers enjoy high status perceptions, their subordinates 
experience a greater LMX relationship with the manager and return higher performance. 
As framed by Minztberg (1973) and Pfeffer (1981), part of the manager's external role is 
to represent the group externally, to negotiate for favors and to cast its performance and 
value creation in the most favorable manner possible. High status allows managers do 
this by commanding the attention of others (Pfeffer, 1981). Further, Expectation States 
Theory suggests that regardless of the managers "true" power, when subordinates 
perceive them as high status, they will expect greater influence and results (Ridgeway & 
Berger, 1986). Thus, when subordinates believe they are working for a high status 
manager, they have confidence that he or she can access organizational resources and 
spoils at the appropriate times (Graen et al., 1977; Sparrowe & Liden, 2005). These 
113 
spoils might include job related resources, compensation, or assignments and promotions. 
And, when subordinates believe that their manager commands this level of influence on 
key decisions, they are motivated to put forth higher levels of effort in order to ingratiate 
themselves with the manager in hopes of the manager using his or her influence to gain 
spoils and benefits for the subordinate. 
Subordinates may also derive their own sense of status, and the status of the 
group, from working for a high status manager. The manager's status may reflect on the 
work group and its members (Sparrowe & Liden, 2005). Thus, the manager's status may 
transfer to the subordinate who may derive self esteem (Cialdini et al., 1976) or enjoy 
higher status perceptions of themselves (Kilduff & Krackhardt, 1994) by being connected 
to a high status manager. When individuals perceive themselves as being in the high 
status group, they are motivated to work harder in order to preserve their status 
differential (Van Knippenberg, 2000). 
On the other hand, the results also reveal a less prominent role for information 
access in predicting key subordinate outcomes. Information access does not predict any 
of the distal outcomes in the full models and only displays a single association to 
organizational commitment. This is a potentially critical finding suggesting that the 
managers' external relationships may serve more as a status signal than as a conduit of 
resource. While the analyses here suggest that information does flow through managers' 
relationships, they also suggest that the primary benefit to subordinates comes from the 
status attainment that the relationships reflect rather than from the resources that flow 
through the relationships. This distinction is a subtle but important contribution of this 
114 
study. Few, if any studies explicitly explore the proposed mediators of network effects 
and fewer still compare one potential mediator versus another. These analyses, thus far, 
present a picture of status rather than information and resource access as a more 
significant and relevant outgrowth of managerial networks. 
Resource access is strongly associated with subordinate outcomes in this study, 
and, at higher levels than those for information access. In particular resource access is 
strongly positively related to subordinate organizational commitment. Resource access 
may enhance commitment by allowing subordinates to feel that they are well positioned 
to succeed in their roles. The analyses presented here suggest that resource access 
dominates all other intervening effects (including information access) in predicting 
commitment. The analyses also suggest that there is a mild relationship between 
subordinate resource access and LMX; that when subordinates believe they have 
adequate resources, they engage in tighter relationships with their manager suggesting 
that they attribute the enhanced resources to their relationship with their manager. 
However, this empirical relationship does not hold in the presence of ascribed identity 
and availability. This combination of findings is intriguing as it suggests that resources, a 
decidedly externally controlled factor, are related to subordinate attitudes and 
relationships. This finding is consistent with research in perceived organizational support 
(e.g. Eisenberger et al., 1986) which suggests that when employees perceive high levels 
of organizational support, they are more committed to the organization. Yet, in these 
115 
analyses, the manager's external relationships appear to have little impact on resources. 
This leaves open the question as to whether managers, even in these settings, could have 
an impact on resources or not. 
Of significant note, resource and information access do not predict performance in 
these analyses. This is surprising given the wealth of theorizing on this topic in prior 
research (e.g. Mehra et al., 2006; Sparrowe et al., 2001). Researchers speculate that 
highly central individuals or groups gain access to information and resources to that 
group which in turn spurs performance. However, these researchers have not explicitly 
tested this mediating factor. Rather, they use it instead as a point of logic to link 
networks to individual and team performance, and find the emprirical relationship 
between networks and performance (e.g. Mehra et al., 2006; Sparrowe et al., 2001; 
Balkundi & Harrison, 2006). While the logic seems strong, my results here call it into 
question. 
VI.3.The potential costs of manager's external relationships 
VI. 3. a Stage 1: Manager's external relationships risks to identity and time 
While highlighting managers' external ties as a potential source of information 
and status, the analyses conducted here do not suggest that external relationships create 
counterbalancing costs for managers. In particular, the analyses do not support the 
notions that extensive external managerial relationships either erode the manager's 
identity with the subordinate workgroup or create substantial time constraints that render 
30 In addition, the proportion of manager level variance (ICC1) is lowest for resource access among all of 
the intervening variables. 
116 
managers unavailable to subordinates. There are no significant negative relationships 
between managers' external relationships and the potential costs of reduced in-group 
identity {ascribed identity), manager availability, or manager time constraints. Yet, as 
highlighted in the results section and discussed below, both ascribed identity and 
manager availability are strong predictors of subordinate organizational commitment and 
performance and of the LMX relationship between the manager and the subordinate. 
As previously noted, there is little prior research exploring the intervening effects 
of intra-organizational networks. Rather, researchers consider the intervening effects 
when making predictions regarding their ultimate dependent variables (e.g. Balkundi & 
Harrison, 2006). When cited, potential downsides of network relationships invariably 
play a secondary role to the theorized benefits. Consistent with this theoretical 
positioning, empirical research to date fails to find a negative direct effect between 
network centrality or rich LLX/LMX relationships and preferred individual and group 
outcomes, suggesting that, indeed, the costs of networks are subordinate to the benefits in 
most cases. It seems, therefore, consistent with prior theorizing, that these costs, while 
theoretically possible, do not manifest themselves in ways that are particularly salient, 
particularly to one's subordinate employees. 
VI. 3. b. Alternative Explanations 
Before concluding that managers' external relationships do not create materially 
costs fro them or their subordinates, we must also consider alternative theoretical or 
empirical explanations. I offer four. 
117 
Vl.S.b.i: Alternative Explanation One: External relationships enhance rather 
than detract from identity, availability, or time constraints 
First, it may be that managers' external relationships may actually improve their 
identity, availability, and time dynamics. Indeed, in the preceding analyses, I found one 
empirical relationship that operates in the alternative direction, e.g. managers' external 
relationships positively predict the theorized costs, a positive association between LLX-
Affect and manager availability. The analyses suggest that when the manager enjoys a 
strong affective/friendship relationship with his or her boss, the manager is even more 
available to his or her subordinates. This result highlights the complexity of the dyadic 
relationship between supervisor and subordinate. While being in the inner circle may 
bring more demands on the subordinate's time (Harris & Kacmar, 2006), strong LMX 
relationships are rooted in trust (Graen & Uhl-bien, 1995). As such subordinates often 
enjoy autonomy in their day to day operations (Gomez & Rosen, 2001). The affective 
bond between manager and boss, then, may provide the manager confidence that he or 
she is looked upon favorably by the boss, that his/her future is bright, and that the 
channels of communication are open when he or she needs the boss. In turn, this may 
free up time for the manager up to be more physically, mentally, and emotionally 
available for his or her subordinates. 
VI 3. b. ii Alternative Explanation 2: Implicit Leadership Theories 
A subordinate employee may form an overall or general impression of his or her 
manager that tends to shape or color more specific assessments that the subordinate may 
118 
hold of the manager. If the subordinate generally feels positively (negatively) toward the 
manager, then most assessments he or she makes of the manager will be positive 
(negative). This phenomenon is consistent with Lord and colleagues' concept of Implicit 
Leadership Theories or ILT (e.g. Lord, Foti, & DeVader, 1984; Cronshaw & Lord, 1987, 
Phillips &, Lord, 1986). Under ILT, individuals hold personal cognitive representations 
or schema of what constitutes a leader and leadership. These schema include attributes 
and behaviors of potential and actual leaders, such as intelligence, charisma, verbal skills, 
organizational skills, etc. When perceiving someone in a leadership role, individuals 
assess the target relative to the perceivers' own leadership schema and arrive at a general 
impression of that person, essentially answering the question "do I see this person as a 
leader?" Lord's research documents that when people perceive a particular individual as 
a leader, i.e. when he or she fits the perceiver's schema, the perceiver attributes other 
positive elements of leadership to him or her. 
The results in the study support the possibility that subordinates operate using 
ILTs. Specifically, the data displayed in Table 8, the simple correlations, reveal a 
consistent view of the manager by subordinates. Most specifically, the correlation 
between manager status and ascribed identity is r = .57, reflecting a strong likelihood that 
subordinates simultaneously view the manager as commanding status throughout the 
broader organization while still enjoying a strong in-group identity. Although it is 
possible, and certainly desirable, that manager enjoys these reputations simultaneously, it 
is equally plausible to expect them to be negatively correlated or, at minimum, 
uncorrelated. That they are strongly positively correlated provides evidence that 
119 
subordinates in this study evaluate their manager under some form of generally formed 
impression. 
I further examine the possibility of this ILT effect in two ways. The first 
approach involves inserting a variable into the predictive models that reflects subordinate 
impressions of the manager's general leadership skill. I conduct a version of this test in 
my core analyses by including transformational leadership as a control variable. 
Transformational leadership may be a proxy in these data for a general positive tendency 
toward leaders by their subordinates. As noted in the methods section, in this data set, 
transformational leadership correlates at r=.59 with initiating structure and r=.ll with 
consideration behaviors. These correlations are consistent with meta-analytic research 
that shows a strong association between transformational leadership and a variety of other 
leadership behaviors and attributions (Judge and Piccolo, 2004). In addition, prior 
research documents that transformational leaders may enjoy rich positive relationships 
with their subordinates (Wang, Law, Hackett, Wang, & Chen, 2005) or rich intra-
organizational networks beyond their workgroups (Bono & Anderson, 2005). As 
reported earlier, all of the analyses reported in this study are controlled by 
transformational leadership with most analyses revealing a strong association between 
managers' transformational leadership behaviors, as measured by subordinates, and the 
intervening and dependent variables of this study, providing additional confirmation of 
the ILT effect. Viewed through this lens, the results presented thus far such suggest that 
the ILT effect may be quite strong such that even after controlling for transformational 
120 
leadership, the sign on the effects of external managerial relationships on ascribed 
identity remains positive. 
The second approach to exploring ILT attempts to isolate the potential negative 
effects of networks on ascribed identity, manager availability and time constraints by 
controlling for the empirically proven benefits, e.g. status and information access. To 
explore this, I extended models 2-5 in tables 14-16 to include information access and 
manager status as predictor variables. If the parameters on managers' external 
relationships predicting ascribed identity or time constraints are negative under this 
approach, it would suggest that (a) there is a strong ILT effect, but (b) after successfully 
controlling for the ILT effect, managers' external relationships do, indeed, predict a 
downside risk or cost. Across these analyses, one parameter estimate did change to 
significantly negative. After controlling for information access and status, LLX-
Contribution negatively predicts ascribed identity (b= -.144, p = .048), suggesting that 
when managers put forth extra effort on behalf of their boss, their subordinates view them 
as less a part of the subordinate work group. In contrast, the analysis of manager 
availability revealed an even stronger positive association between LLX-Affect and 
availability (b — .197, p = .018), reinforcing the finding that when managers have strong 
affective relationships with their bosses, they perceived as more available by their 
subordinates. These results provide evidence of the presence of ILTs among survey 
participants and do provide limited support for the notion that ascribed identity is weaker 
when the manager has more extensive external relationships. 
121 
VI.3.b.iii. Alternative explanation three: Managers' general inclination to 
relationship building 
A third alternative explanation is that the positive relationship (or non-negative 
relationship) between managers' networks and the theorized network costs is the result of 
a hidden variable, an attribute of the manager which leads to a correlation of his/her 
external relationship breadth with the general relationship that he or she has with 
subordinates. For example, managers may simply have good interpersonal skills or 
attributes, perhaps represented by personality attributes, that simultaneously lead to 
strong networks (Klein et al., 2004), strong relationships with subordinates (Nahrgang, 
Morgeson, & Hies, 2009), or performance as a leader (Judge et al., 2002). In effect, if a 
manager is skilled at building interpersonal relationships in general, he or she might have 
strong external networks and strong internal relationships, leading to positive empirical 
relationships between external relationships and subordinate assessments of the manager. 
The Big Five Personality factors can represent a set of third variables that might be 
correlated with an individual's propensity to create ties in general (Klein et al., 2004; 
Totterdall, Holman & Hukin, 2008), displays of transformational leadership (Judge & 
Bono, 2000), and LMX (Nahrang et al., 2009). For example, managers who are high in 
extroversion or emotional stability may simultaneously (a) have rich networks, (b) be 
viewed as transformational leaders, and (c) be viewed generally positively by their 
subordinates. 
At time 1,1 asked managers to complete the Big Five Personality Inventory. As 
displayed in Table 25, manager personality, as represented by the Big Five personality 
122 
inventory, is not generally correlated with either the manager external relationship 
variables or transformational leadership. In addition, in post hoc analyses, I constructed 
a version of the stage 1 models (e.g. managers' external relationships predict network 
benefits and costs) intended to isolate and highlight the effects of managers' personality 
on subordinate assessments of the mediating variables. These models, reported in Table 
26, predict the network benefits and costs as a function of the subordinate and manager 
level controls (except for transformational leadership) and the manager's personality. 
Table 26 reports the parameter estimates for the effects of the manager's personality on 
each of the theorized network benefits or costs. As reflected in this table, the manager's 
personality is not, by and large, a significant predictor of subordinate perceptions of the 
network benefits and costs. These supplemental analyses do not support the theory of a 
hidden manager level variable as reflected by the manager's personality. 
VL3.b.iv. Alternative explanation four: Lack of a salient out-group 
The theory that suggests that managers with rich external relationships may suffer 
weaker ingroup identities is built upon Social Identity Theory (Tajfel & Turner, 1986). 
Social Identity Theory is a theory of intergroup conflict and competition in which groups 
vie for status and resources and strive, at times, to preserve and accentuate the boundaries 
and distinctiveness between each other. Part of the logic that underlies the theory of 
ascribed identities espoused here is that the boundaries between the work group and other 
groups are salient to organization members and that membership in one group detracts, to 
ol I excluded transformational leadership in order to independently assess the association of managers' 
personality with the intervening variables. 
123 
some degree, from membership in another. In extreme cases, the boundaries between the 
groups are highlighted by tension or conflict between them. For example, in two studies 
in which seemingly desirable leadership behaviors triggered negative out-group 
categorizations, the managerial out-groups were viewed negatively by front line 
subordinates (Shamir et al., 1998; Mehra et al., 2006). The lack of a negative relationship 
in the current study may reflect a lack of salient boundaries or conflict between the 
subordinate work groups in the study and the out-group represented by higher level 
management. I have no evidence from the research sites to suggest this conflict or 
tension exists. 
VI. 3.c. The effects of ascribed identity, manager availability, and time constraints on 
subordinate outcomes 
That managers' external relationships do not appear to erode or be negatively 
related to ascribed identity, manager availability or time constraints is an important 
finding, as my analyses show that they are, to varying degrees, strong predictors of 
subordinate performance and commitment and the LMX relationship between manager 
and subordinate. 
My analyses suggest that ascribed identity—the extent to which subordinates 
perceive their manager as part of the workgroup—does positively predict LMX. This 
findings are consistent with and represent a strong test of Social Identity Theory of 
Leadership (e.g. Hogg, 2001), in which prototypical members are perceived as more 
effective and aligned leaders than those who are not. These findings make an additional 
124 
contribution to SIT theory in that SIT researchers do not frequently measure the 
mediating variable, ascribed identity. These findings suggest that managers, then, must 
straddle the boundary line between the workgroup and the remainder of the organization. 
On the one hand, they must be somewhat separate from the work group, making 
decisions that affect all in the group and providing leadership and inspiration (Antonakis 
& Atwater, 2002). And, as my earlier results suggest, they must command enough 
differential attention to be perceived as high status. On the other hand, they must 
continue to be perceived as part of the group, working "for us" rather than "for them" 
(Haslam et al., 2001). Ascribed identity is an construct internal to the work group, but is 
very much part of the discussion of the manager's boundary spanning role. In straddling 
the line between the work group and the rest of the organization, the results suggest that 
successful managers will achieve in-group solidarity AND external status. 
Similarly, manager availability looms large in predicting subordinate outcomes. 
In the current analyses, manager availability positively predicts all of subordinate 
commitment, performance, and LMX. In essence, the ability of the manager to be 
physically present for the subordinates represents a key managerial lever. LMX 
relationships are built on trust (Graen & Uhl-bien, 1995) which require time and 
availability to create. In addition, people who are more available and accessible are more 
frequently targets for requests for help and assistance (Hofmann, Lei, & Grant, 2009). 
For managers who are available, this opens up an avenue for broader LMX relationships 
and greater managerial direction related to performance. 
125 
The analyses presented here suggest that a manager's time constraints do predict 
subordinate performance, but are not associated with either of subordinate commitment 
or the LMX relationship between manager and subordinate. Prior research suggests 
competing hypotheses for the effects of manager time and availability, particularly on 
LMX. On the one hand, managers need time and availability in order to create rich 
relationships with their subordinates (Coglisler & Schreischeim, 2000). Yet, on the other 
hand, when managers experience time constraints, they are forced to provide autonomy to 
subordinates (Kinnicki & Vecchio, 1994) leading to greater levels of LMX. Further 
research is required to unpack the dynamics of managers' time availability. 
VI.4 The direct effects of managers' external relationships on the LMX relationship 
with subordinates, subordinate organizational commitment and organizational 
performance 
In the theory section of this study, I suggested that the benefits and costs of 
managers' external relationships would partially counterbalance each other, with benefits 
increasing at lower levels of relationships and costs materializing with the most extensive 
relationships. The net effect, I hypothesized, would be a curvilinear relationship between 
managers' external relationships and subordinate organizational commitment and 
performance and the LMX relationship between manager and subordinate. However, in 
light of the lack of cost side effects reflected in these analyses, we should be surprised to 
find this curvilinear effect and, indeed, I do not. The analyses presented in this study 
provide no support for a curvilinear relationship. 
126 
Given the existence of network benefits, then, it is plausible to explore the 
possibility that managers' external relationships are positively associated with 
subordinate commitment, performance and LMX. However, in only one instance do the 
results provide support for the notion that managers' external relationships directly 
positively predict subordinate outcomes. The analyses suggest that strong LLX 
relationships between manager and boss result in enhanced subordinate sales 
performance. When the manager and boss enjoy an affective relationship, the analyses 
suggest, subordinates will return greater performance. Athough LLX-Affect predicts 
manager availability, this direct effect is only partially mediated by availability. 
IV.5 An indirect effects model 
The limited number of direct empirical effects linking managers' external 
relationships to LMX and subordinate commitment and performance suggest that the 
model articulated here is an indirect effects model. An indirect effect is one in which the 
independent variable does not directly predict the dependent variable, but, rather, 
influences the dependent variable through its effect on a linking mechanism or 
intervening variable (Mathieu & Taylor, 2006). For example, in this study, a manager's 
centrality in the peer friendship network has an indirect effect on subordinate's 
organizational commitment through the linking mechanism of perceived manager status. 
When managers are central in the friendship network of their peers, the subordinates 
perceive them as high status within the organization. And, when subordinates perceive 
their managers as high status within the organization, they (the subordinates) experience 
127 
higher levels of LMX. Thus, the manager's centrality has an indirect effect on 
subordinates' LMX. LLX-contribution similarly indirectly predicts LMX. 
What then does this tell us? The critical insight here is a subtle shift in theoretical 
and empirical emphasis from manager's external relationships to managers' boundary 
spanning roles. Rather than seeing the network costs and benefits as mediators or 
intervening variables that explain the link between managers' networks and subordinate 
outcomes, this study has implicitly explored the antecedents and outcomes of managers' 
boundary spanning roles. Managers function as boundary spanners, straddling the line 
between their subordinate workgroup and the environment external to workgroup. As 
boundary spanners, managers have decidedly external roles, e.g. acting as conduits of 
information and resources and developing reputations for status throughout their 
organizations. At the same time, by virtue of being on the boundary, the manager must 
also continue to manage his or her ability to be effective within the group. In drawing 
attention to the manager's maintenance of his or her role on the boundary, this study, 
then, explores two related questions. First, how does the manager's execution of the 
boundary spanning role affect subordinates, their experience and their performance? 
Second how do managers' external relationships affect the managers' delivery of their 
boundary management roles? 
The results presented here highlight the notion that subordinates are or may be 
affected by the managers' role position on the boundary between their workgroup and the 
rest of the organization. The extent to which subordinates perceive their managers as 
commanding status beyond the work group is associated with their commitment, 
128 
performance, and LMX. At the same time, to the extent that a manager has control over 
or influence on the flow of information and the allocation of resources from outside to 
inside the group, subordinates are also sensitive to these functions as well. On the other 
hand, subordinates continue to thirst for managers who conjure a reputation as being 
aligned with the interests of the workgroup itself. When managers succeed at this, 
subordinates may be more committed and experience greater LMX. As result, managers 
must strike a balance between the two sides of the boundary spanning role. As table 10 
highlights, however, no one boundary factor is singularly responsible for the subordinate 
outcomes. The challenge for the manager is to determine how to manage these three 
elements of his or her role. Finally, the results presented here continue to highlight the 
strong effects of the more traditional downward, purely internal perspective on 
management and leadership. As displayed in the results of this study, both 
transformational leadership and managerial availability loom large in predicting key 
subordinate outcomes. 
Within this framing, the analyses presented here suggest that the extent to which 
manager's build and make use of external relationships may shape their ability to deliver 
on the boundary spanning role. When managers have rich friendship networks and strong 
exchange relationships with their boss, they are able to provide key information to their 
subordinates and achieve a reputation for high organizational status. As suggested by 
Expectation States Theory, status is likely both a marker of the boundary spanning role 
having been successfully delivered in the past and an assessment of the manager's 
potential to represent the group in the future. At the same time, these analyses suggest 
129 
that managers' external relationships do not impinge upon their ability to manage their 
internal reputations, e.g. ascribed identity, or deliver on their internal roles. In fact, the 
analyses presented here suggest that external relationships, in particular those with the 
manager's direct superior, may create autonomy for the manager which he or she may 
parlay into greater presence with and availability for his or her subordinate employees. 
VI.6. Boss vs. Peer Effects 
Do relationships with the boss matter more than those with peers, vice versa, or 
not? The analyses presented here suggest that both boss and peer relationships are 
associated with subordinate access to critical information and the subordinate's views of 
the manager's status. However one type of external relationships does not appear to be 
more prominent than the other. As reflected in Figures 9 and 10, information access and 
status perceptions are roughly equally sensitive to both types of relationships. So, 
managers may make use of both peers and bosses for information and status management 
purposes, with the effects seeming additive and complementary. The relationship with 
the boss does appear to dominate when considering the direct relationships to 
organizational commitment and performance. While LLX is associated with subordinate 
organizational commitment and performance, peer networks do not. It seems likely that 
the boss relationship is the most visible to the subordinate and that the boss may have 
more ability than peers to take actions that bolster the manager's status and, perhaps, 
information access. In general, the advice one would give to managers then is to build 
130 
and manage constructive relationships with the boss and with peers. That said, 
confronted with a choice, the relationship with the boss is key. 
VI.7 The Role of Transformational Leadership 
Burns (1978) originally conceptualized transformational leadership as a style of 
leadership that orients the follower toward inspiring long term goals that transcend the 
individual. As such, transformational leadership was originally thought of as a desirable 
set of behaviors that were relevant in specific situations, particularly those involving 
large scale organizational change (Yukl, 2006). However, empirical research over the 
past 20 years bears out that transformational leadership is a strong predictor of a variety 
of more common, desirable outcomes, such as subordinate job satisfaction, motivation, 
satisfaction with the leader, and group level performance (Judge & Piccolo, 2004). 
Further, while empirically distinct, transformational leadership behaviors tend to 
correlate with other downward leadership behaviors, such as transactional leadership and 
initiating structure (Judge & Piccolo, 2004). In addition, research suggests that when 
leaders engage in transformational leadership, they achieve greater centrality in 
organizational networks (Bono and Anderson, 2005). 
The inclusion of transformational leadership, then, serves two purposes in this 
study. First, it serves as a general proxy for the manager's downward leadership 
behaviors. The results presented here reveal strong associations between the manager's 
display of transformational leadership and resource access, information access, manager 
status, ascribed identity, manager availability, organizational commitment and LMX. 
131 
These results re-affirm the role that downward leadership behaviors play in shaping the 
subordinate experience. In addition, subordinate assessments of transformational 
leadership may be good proxies of the general impression that a subordinate holds of the 
manager or a representation of the manager's fit with the subordinate's leadership 
schema. 
Second, given the strong associations between transformational leadership and the 
variety of subordinate level outcomes, a strong test of the impact of external relationships 
requires controlling for these internal behaviors, as proxied by transformational 
leadership. As described earlier, all of the analyses in this study were controlled for 
manager level transformational leadership. The analyses suggest that managers' external 
relationships do indeed predict boundary spanning benefits and that the benefits predict 
the outcomes, all after accounting for the impact of transformational leadership. Thus, 
we can conclude that (a) the effects of external relationships are distinct from those of 
downward leadership behaviors and (b) network benefits, such as information access and 
status, are distinct effects on subordinate outcomes from those of downward leadership 
behaviors. 
VL8 Some supplemental findings: boss level networks and mangers' difficult 
relationships 
All three research sites gave me permission to collect data that extended beyond 
the scope of the initial theory section of this dissertation. In particular, I extended the 
network data gathering in two ways. First, rather than restrict the network roster of 
132 
potential ties to managers' horizontal peers, I defined the manager's network to include 
all the bosses in the study, i.e. the supervisors at the next higher level in the hierarchy. I 
also asked the bosses to participate in the network study as well. Thus, in addition to 
horizontal ties (for advice and friendship) and the specific dyadic relationship between 
manager and boss, these data allowed me to ask questions about the broad set of ties a 
manager might have to the next echelon. This next echelon could be useful as they are 
likely to (a) more broadly control resources (Cross & Cummings, 2004), (b) have access 
to more strategic and environmental information (Yukl, 2006), and (c) more directly 
reflect the manager's status within the organization (Berger et al., 1972). Similarly, more 
extensive ties to the upper echelon could contribute to an erosion of the manager's 
ascribed in-group identity, that the more one spends time with and is associated with the 
next echelon of management, the less one is perceived as just one of the work group. 
Second, the research sites allowed me to add a type of interpersonal relationship: 
difficult relationships32 between individuals, both peers and bosses. Difficult 
relationships involve "feelings of discomfort or dislike and may lead to negative 
assessments between individuals and groups (Labianca & Brass, 2006)." When people 
have difficult relationships with each other, they may engage in negative or 
counterproductive behaviors toward each other. Managers in difficult relationships may 
avoid each other, closing off, for those dyads, the flow of information. (Labianca & 
Brass, 2006). At the most extreme, people involved in negative relationships may 
,21 gathered data on difficult relationships by presenting the full roster of names and asking "please check 
the box if you have a difficult relationship with this person." 
133 
actively hinder or undermine each other (Duffy, Ganster, & Pagon, 2002; Sparrowe et al., 
2001). In many organizational settings, managers may not be able to avoid those with 
whom they have difficult relationships, but these interactions likely take a different tone, 
one that is bounded and transactional. For example, Sparrowe et al., (2001) found that, 
within teams, individuals with large numbers of hindrance ties performed worse and that 
teams with overall large numbers of hindrance ties suffered performance aggregate 
shortfalls. Negative or difficult relationships are intriguing because they exhibit negative 
asymmetry, the phenomenon under which negative relationships, may have greater 
effects on individual perceptions than commensurate positive relationships (Labianca & 
Brass, 2006). Where friendships may facilitate managers' information flow and status 
evaluations, difficult relationships may be disproportionate impediments to achieving 
these benefits. 
My analyses using these additional network relationships suggest that both are 
relevant to the present discussion. To be specific, I found that a manager's upward 
difficult relationships also shaped status perceptions but in a negative direction. When 
managers have a preponderance of upward difficult relationships, e.g. don't get along 
with the boss's peers, subordinates hold a lower view of the manager's status. Difficult 
relationships (or at least the reporting of difficult relationships) tend to be rare in 
organizations (Labianca & Brass, 2006), in this study occurring at about 5% the 
frequency of positive ties. Thus, the message here is that a small number of fractured 
relationships with the upper echelons in the organization can be especially challenging 
for one's reputation management, in this case with subordinates. I did not find that 
134 
difficult peer relationships had an impact on either status or information/resource access 
and this was not surprising. It seems likely that the positive and proactive relationships 
among peers will carry the day as it is their volume that opens up resource channels and 
creates status impressions. However, it was perplexing to find that upward friendships 
did not predict perceived manager status. Consistent with the results reported thus far 
regarding horizontal networks, I did not find any positive associations between upward 
advice networks and the intervening variables, nor did I find any direct connections 
between upward or difficult managerial networks and subordinate outcomes. Rather, the 
direct connections, as previously reported, seem to exist from LLX to organizational 
commitment and performance. 
Finally, at Time 2,1 also gathered an additional dependent variable, subordinates' 
performance of helping behaviors, both within and external to the work group. Helping 
is "promotive behavior that emphasizes small acts of consideration," and "is cooperative 
behavior that is noncontroversial." (Van Dyne & Lepine, 1998, p. 109). In including 
helping behaviors, I theorized that one of the benefits of managers' external 
relationships—information access—would shape subordinate helping behaviors. 
Individuals make an expectancy based calculation about potential helping behaviors 
(Morrison & Phelps, 1999), assessing whether their actions will create benefits for their 
targets. Greater organizational information access shapes this expectancy calculation, I 
" Subordinates completed a six item helping scale adapted from Van Dyne & Lepine (1998). Participants 
assessed how frequently they engaged in the list of helping behaviors on a 5 point Likert scale ranging from 
"1"= "never or not at all" to "5" = "very frequently." Sample items included "I provide assistance to 
people outside of my work group so that they can get their work done" and "I help people outside of my 
work group solve work related problems." 
135 
theorized, in two ways. First, better informed employees view themselves as more 
competent, which in turn allows them to see that they, indeed, have value to bring to the 
other party (Parker, Williams, & Turner, 2006). Second, the better informed member has 
a greater understanding of how his or her resources may be useful to the other party. 
Well informed members, then, may expect that that their helping behaviors are more 
likely to pay off. The supplemental analyses support this theory, with information access 
(b = .33, p <01), but not perceived status, positively predicting helping behaviors. When 
subordinates are better armed with information, they can see a path to productively 
helping and engage in those behaviors. 
VI. 8 Summary of findings and contributions 
Summarizing, this study makes three contributions to the literatures on leadership 
and social networks. First, as framed by Mintzberg (1973) and others (Aconca & 
Caldwell, 1992; Sayles, 1965; Likert, 1961; Graen, 1976), managers' roles include an 
external component in which they manage the boundary between their subordinate 
employees and the rest of the organization. Where leadership research typically assesses 
the downward leadership behaviors and styles of leaders, this study examines the roles 
managers play at the boundary of their groups and the effect these roles have on the 
subordinate experience. By accessing and synthesizing information beyond the 
workgroup, managers provide critical context for their subordinates, putting their work 
and contribution in context, ultimately enhancing subordinates' connection to the broader 
organization. Managers also have the potential to access critical resources for their 
136 
subordinates. The results from this study make clear that when subordinates believe they 
have the necessary resources to do their jobs, they are more committed to the 
organization and experience stronger bonds to their managers. And, managers, in pursuit 
of their external role, develop reputations for status that are of value in the management 
of their subordinate employees. The results from this study highlight that when 
subordinates see their managers as commanding status and influence, they (the 
subordinates) are more committed to the organization, enjoy a better relationship with the 
manager, and, ultimately, deliver better task performance. 
At the same time, this study highlights that boundary spanning roles are just that, 
at the boundary between their work group and others. Managers do indeed straddle this 
boundary, and, as such, the management of one's internal identity remains as important 
as one's external activities. As suggested by social identity theory, the LMX relationship 
between manager and subordinate is quite contingent on the degree to which subordinates 
perceive the manager as aligned with the workgroup and as a member of the same. Thus 
a manager must carefully manage both sides of his or her boundary spanning role, 
accessing information and resources externally, commanding status and influence 
externally, while remaining perceived as a member of the immediate team. 
And, this study re-affirms managers' internal roles and the place of the boundary 
spanning role. First, boundary spanning roles are a complement to, not substitutes for 
purely internal roles. This study highlights the power of transformational leadership 
behaviors and manager availability as tools and levers of managerial effectiveness. In 
addition, by including downward leadership behaviors in the study, the external 
137 
perspective is held to a rigorous test. This study, then, paints an increasingly complex 
picture of the demands placed upon a manager. While reaffirming the importance of 
traditionally explored downward leadership dimensions, it highlights the potential value 
of the manager's execution of the boundary spanning role, both outside and within the 
workgroup. 
Second, the results from this study highlight the prominent role that managers' 
external relationships—the interpersonal relationships beyond their workgroup—play in 
facilitating these boundary spanning roles. In particular, this study highlights the 
relationships managers may have with their direct bosses and with horizontal peers. The 
theory and analyses presented here suggest that both of these types of relationships are 
necessary to capture the boundary spanning benefits. These working relationships appear 
to have a flavor of social exchange, in which managers step up and provide extra effort 
on behalf of the boss, while, in return, the boss brings the manager into his or her inner 
circle, exposing him or her to key organizational information and lending the manager 
some of his or her organizational status. Managers also enjoy these "network" benefits 
when they have rich horizontal networks of friendships among peers. At the same time, 
the results from this study lead us to downplay concerns about the potential costs or risks 
of managers' external relationships. Indeed, managers' external relationships do not 
seem to interfere with their internal roles, showing limited effect on their identity as a 
group member or their time constraints. In fact, my analyses suggest some benefits to the 
internal role that come from a rich relationship with one's direct superior. When 
managers have strong affective relationships with their bosses, they are perceived as 
138 
more available to their subordinates, which, in turn, may facilitate subordinate 
performance. 
Finally, this study extends the networks literature by examining the intervening 
effects that link networks and LMX to key outcomes. In the networks literature, 
intervening effects such as information access or status are often referred to as part of 
researchers' logic, but seldom directly analyzed. Similarly, mention is made of potential 
costs, but definitive exploration is often deferred. In this study, I explicitly theorize about 
and measure these intervening effects. As such, the study sheds light on the manner in 
which networks provide benefits and the degree to which they create costs. My findings 
point toward two significant findings. First, while much prior research emphasizes the 
resource conduit effects of networks, this study highlights the more prominent role that 
networks may place as status markers. Second, in assessing three different potential 
dimensions of the costs of external networks and finding them lacking, this study 
provides a more definitive view that the costs are not major factors in our assessments of 
social networks. 
VI. 9. Limitations and extensions 
VI. 9. a Limitations 
Although I gathered data in multiple time periods, the study is essentially a cross 
sectional study. Thus, although the theory points to effects operating in a particular 
direction, I cannot make a strong empirical claim of causality, leaving open the 
possibility of reverse causality. For example, subordinates' access to information and/or 
139 
perceptions of their manager's status could be reflections of sources of value that the 
manager brings to the organization which in turn make him or her a more attractive 
network partner particularly to his or her peers. Similarly, when subordinates enjoy a 
strong LMX relationship with their manager, they may naturally ascribe a stronger in-
group identity to him or her. Finally, the association between LLX-Affect and 
subordinate performance may also operate in the reverse direction from that 
hypothesized. Bosses may be motivated to build strong relationships with those 
subordinate managers whose employees deliver high performance. As cross sectional 
study, these results cannot rule out the possible of reverse causality in these areas. This is 
a limitation shared by similar studies (e.g. Mehra et al., 2006; Venkataramani et al., 
2010). Future research should include a true longitudinal design with three waves in 
order to fully test the intervening effects model presented here (Mathieu & Taylor, 2007). 
In addition, some of the open issues of reverse causuality may be resolved through testing 
some of the specific effects in an experimental setting. Also, I note that while there are 
many intriguing significant results concentrated in particular parts of the theoretical 
model, there are also substantial areas of non-findings. The volume of tests conducted 
here raises the possibility that some of the results may due to random chance. 
In addition, I do not capture the network of relationships among subordinates 
(Venkatramani et al., 2010) or the centrality of the manager in the subordinate work 
group (Mehra et al., 2006). The primary reason for this omission was a desire to manage 
survey length with my research sites. I committed to an aggregate survey length and time 
to complete and chose to make a rich exploration of intervening factors and dependent 
140 
variables, the topic of the study, in exchange for forgoing the examining of the networks 
within the work group. While it may have served as an additional control variable in the 
analyses, and may very well predict a subordinate's organizational commitment or 
turnover intentions (Mitchell, Holtom, Lee, Sablynski, & Erez, 2001) or information 
access, subordinate network structure seemed unlikely to predict three of the four 
intervening variables which described either their views of their manager or the outcomes 
of the role the manager played. It may be the case, however, that assessments of the 
manager and LMX between manager and subordinate are shaped by the manager's work 
group centrality. Certainly, this is a prediction of Simmel (1908 [1955]) and proponents 
of the social identity of leadership (Hogg, 2001). Further, we know that team level 
viability and performance are enhanced with a highly central leader (Balkundi & 
Harrison, 2006). I believe that I have proxied this effect by including transformational 
leadership as a control and through conducting additional analyses with the managers' 
personality as a control. 
Finally, although I executed the empirical study in multiple settings, the study 
may still suffer from boundary limitations or range restriction. In particular, I failed to 
find a negative effect of external relationships on ascribed identity. In two prior studies, 
Shamir et al. (1998) and Mehra et al. (2006), seemingly desirable leadership behaviors or 
external relationships were negatively correlated with subordinate perceptions of the 
leader. However, in each of these studies, substantial conflict or tension existed between 
the subordinates and the echelon of management two or more levels above them. I have 
no reason to believe that this level of conflict exists within the three research sites in this 
141 
study. Under Social Identity Theory, the identification processes are stronger when 
group differences are more salient. Thus, my settings may not have enough group 
salience to identify the ascribed identity effect. 
VI. 9. b Potential extensions 
The study presented here is but a first step in the exploration of managers' 
external relationships and roles, and thus several possible extensions seem appropriate. 
First, this study examined the horizontal and direct vertical relationships of front line 
managers in large corporate organizations with clear hierarchical organization structures. 
Each of these factors presents a potential boundary condition to be tested and explored in 
future studies. For example, how might the dynamics shift for higher level managers, 
such as VP level officers in the same types of companies? As described earlier, it is at 
this level that managers may have a more dramatic effect on resource allocations. Or, 
how might these dynamics change for the senior executives of smaller, more 
entrepreneurial companies, where the relevant networks may be truly external to the 
companies? Finally, we might ask how the dynamics of managers' networks change 
when the organization is more fluid, when managerial reporting roles may change 
frequently, such as in a professional services firm, or when hierarchies are more 
permeable such that subordinates have substantial external networks of their own. 
Underlying this study is the premise that managers serve as broker between their 
subordinates and the rest of the organization. In network parlance, managers occupy 
structural holes between their subordinates and other organization members. But, what 
142 
happens in organizations where that is not so? For example, if subordinates are well 
connected externally themselves, does this provide the opportunity for managers to shift 
their focus with their subordinates from one of boundary spanning to one of coaching and 
development? Or does it place an even higher premium on the manager's role in 
representing the group externally? 
One of the criticisms of network research is that it is more descriptive and static 
than it is causal and dynamic (Watts, 2003). Somehow managers' networks are 
correlated with outcomes, but how? I take the first step here by explicitly exploring the 
intervening variables. Yet, we are still left with several open questions about how 
managers do and could approach their external relationships. For example, do these 
relationships growing organically or do managers take a proactive stance toward them? 
How do managers differ in their use of and manipulation of their networks? Do they 
strive to connect others between whom they are currently brokers or do they maintain 
those holes for themselves (Obstfeld, 2005)? In the context of this study, this is about 
asking whether managers connect their subordinates with critical alters or keep 
themselves in the pathway as the key point of connection. Further, how do managers 
differ in their perceptions of the "value" of their networks? Do some understate the 
possible in their networks and what are the costs of this? 
By focusing on certain intervening variables and outcomes, I also implicitly open 
the door to others. My study highlights the strong association between a manager's 
reputation as one of the workgroup and the organizational commitment of his or her 
subordinates as well as the LMX relationship between manager and subordinate. But, 
143 
what of his or her reputation of being part of the management structure of the 
organization. Might being perceived as "one of them," distinct from "one of us," have a 
detrimental effect? Or might subordinates want a manager who successfully straddles the 
line between the two? Similarly, in a cross sectional study, it was difficult to explore the 
career outcomes associated with working for a particular manager, yet it seems likely that 
this is one of the key benefits of working for a well networked manager. And, what are 
the affective or mood related effects for both managers and subordinates? And, what role 
do subordinates' perceptions of their managers' networks play in this model? In 
particular, might network perceptions, more than actual network positions, shape 
subordinate status and identity assessments? 
While examining the manager's networks and relationships, this study does not 
explore the situation from the manager's perspective, choosing instead to examine 
subordinate level reactions and outcomes. Yet, the manager, of course, looms large in 
these discussions. How does the manager experience his or her set of network 
relationships, both external and internal to the workgroup? And, similarly, how does he 
or she perceive the distinction between internal and external roles? How do these 
differences shape the manner in which the manager conducts him or herself, building 
relationships, utilizing them, and managing the trade-offs between internal and external? 
Finally, this study has explored manager's external networks and their impact on 
subordinates. But what of the opposite direction? How do managers' peers and bosses 
perceive their relationships with subordinates? If the manager has tight relationships with 
subordinates or is central in subordinate networks, do superiors perceive that positively or 
144 
negatively? And, finally, what of a manager's mentoring relationships with other junior 
members who may not be his or her direct subordinates? 
VI. 10. Practical Implications 
This study provides substantial guidance to practicing managers and human 
resource professionals within organizations. Much of the advice that scholars and other 
counselors provide to managers emphasizes the activities that occur within the 
workgroup, between leaders and individual members or between leaders and the group as 
a whole. "Leadership" is conceptualized as the set of activities, conversations, and 
interpersonal interactions that occur between leaders and their followers, between 
managers and subordinates (e.g Kouzes & Posner, 2008; Robbins, 2003). In contrast, this 
study highlights the notion that the manager plays a key role in managing the boundary 
between his or her subordinates and their external environment. Managers can enhance 
the performance and attitudes of their subordinates by ensuring that they bring into the 
group relevant information and resources. To some extent, this is part of the message 
that managers receive, but it is often secondary. A cursory review of the practitioner 
literature on management and leadership finds that the boundary spanning activities of 
managers takes on a far less prominent role than the downward supervisory and 
leadership activities. Thus, my study contributes to the advice we give managers and the 
competencies required for successful management. Similarly, this study provides clear 
evidence that subordinates value the intra-organizational status of their managers and, on 
balance, prefer to work for those who are high status. That one's status may be a 
145 
managerial tool in and of itself is not something that has been considered in the 
practitioner literature and, in fact, may be discouraged as self-serving. In contrast, this 
study suggests that subordinate constructions of their manager's status are a critical lever 
in subordinates' attitudes and performance. Thus, managers must carefully bring their 
attention to managing their organizational reputation. But, while prior literature would 
suggest that reputation is a tool of career management, this study suggests that it is a 
critical lever of employee attitudes. The major message to managers is to look outward 
while looking inward as a method to managing, leading, and directing the work group. 
The study offers a second set of recommendations for practicing managers. 
Simply put, building and maintaining the right mix of external relationships is key to 
delivering on managers' boundary spanning roles. Managers must establish trusting, 
engaged relationships with their bosses and be prepared to go the extra mile for them. 
And, they must build and maintain rich networks of friendships with their peers. As a 
manager, one must become part of the fabric of the organization. When managers 
accomplish this, they are able to access information and build the reputations for status so 
critical to the assessments of their subordinates. In the past, commentators have 
suggested to any member of an organization that he or she must build, manage, and make 
use of external networks, but this advice has been positioned as a career management 
tool. To wit, you must build networks to get ahead, to get the promotion, to get the next 
job (e.g. Darling, 2005). While not denying these benefits—indeed, they too are 
supported in the scholarly literature (Granovetter, 1973; Seibert et al., 2001; Podolny & 
Baron, 1997)—the insight presented here is that these same networks are critical to being 
146 
a more effective manager of one's subordinates. Thus, the two activities become one. 
Managing one's career and managing one's subordinates are both enhanced through 
managing external networks. 
At the same time, the study reinforces the powerful impact of various aspects of 
the manager's downward or internal behavior. Leadership style remains important to 
subordinate perceptions and outcomes as does the manager's ability to be perceived as 
aligned with subordinates and their interests and to be available and open to their 
inquiries and requests for input and assistance. Managing networks and boundary roles 
represents an additional set of duties for a manager, not an alternative, thus making the 
manager's role that much more complex, demanding, and difficult. Fortunately, my 
study, as with others, does not find significant costs or downsides to adding the external 
role. Rather, it provides mild support for the notion that managing well up and out may 
have benefits across the board for one's internal role. 
Finally, these insights regarding managers' external roles may become additional 
inputs into organizations' management development processes. External relationship 
management may become an additional entry into company competency models and 
performance evaluations. And, with their addition to the development menu, they may 
become fodder for coaching, development, and training opportunities for managers. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
This dissertation has examined the boundary spanning roles of managers within 
organizations and the external relationships that managers make use of to execute on 
147 
these roles. The theory and empirical results support the notion that the manner in which 
managers enact their boundary spanning roles may have substantial impacts on the 
instrumental and socio-emotional outcomes for the subordinate employees. Similarly, the 
theory and empirical results highlight the role that external relationships have in shaping 
the boundary spanning roles. While initially framed decades ago (Mintzberg, 1973; 
Sayles, 1964), research that examines managers' boundary spanning roles is relatively 
sparse. In addition to the specific contributions described above, my hope is that this 
study spurs further exploration of this critical role of organizational managers. 
148 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Adler, P. S., & Kwon, S. 2002. Social capital: Prospects for a new concept. Academy of 
Management Review, 21 {!): 17-40. 
Allen, N. J., & Meyer, J. P. 1990. The measurement and antecedents of affective, 
continuance and normative commitment to the organization. Journal of 
Occupational Psychology, 63(1): 1-18. 
Ancona, D. G., & Caldwell, D. F. 1992. Bridging the boundary: External activity and 
performance in organizational teams. Administrative Science Quarterly, 37(4): 
634-665. 
Anderson, B., Berger, J., Cohen, B. P., & Zelditch Jr., M. 1966. Status classes in 
organizations. Administrative Science Quarterly, 11(2): 264-283. 
Antonakis, J., & Atwater, L. 2002. Leader distance: A review and a proposed theory. 
Leadership Quarterly, 13(6): 673. 
Ashforth, B. E., Harrison, S. H., & Corley, K. G. 2008. Identification in organizations: 
An examination of four fundamental questions. Journal of Management, 34(3): 
325-374. 
Ashforth, B. E., & Humphrey, R. H. 1995. Labeling processes in the organization: 
Constructing the individual. Research in Organizational Behavior, 17: 413. 
Ashforth, B. E., & Mael, F. 1989. Social identity theory and the organization. Academy 
of Management Review, 14(1): 20-39. 
Baldwin, T. T., Bedell, M. D., & Johnson, J. 1997. The social fabric of a team-based 
M.B.A. program: Network effects on student satisfaction and.. Academy of 
Management Journal, 40(6): 1369. 
Balkundi, P., & Harrison, D. A. 2006. Ties, leaders, and time in teams: Strong inference 
about network structure's effects on team viability and performance. Academy of 
Management Journal, 49(1): 49-68. 
Bandura, A. 1986. Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive theory. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Baron, R., & Kenny, D. A. 1986. The moderator-mediator variable distinction in social 
psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. 
Journal of personality and social psychology, 51 (6): 1173-1182. 
Barrick, M. R., & Mount, M. K. 1991. The big five personality dimensions and job 
performance: A meta-analysis. Personnel Psychology, 44(1): 1-26. 
149 
Baruch, Y., & Holtom, B. C. 2008. Survey response rate levels and trends in 
organizational research. Human Relations, 61(8): 1139-1160. 
Bass, B. M. 1990. Bass and StogdilVs hanbook of leadership: Theory, research, and 
managerial implications. New York: Free Press. 
Bass, B., & Avolio, B. 1995. Multifactor leadership questionnaire (3rd ed.) 
MindGarden, Inc. 
Becker, G. S. 1965. A theory of the allocation of time. Economic Journal, 75(299): 493-
517. 
Berger, J., Cohen, B. P., & Zelditch Jr., M. 1972. Status characteristics and social 
interaction. American Sociological Review, 37(3): 241-255. 
Bergeron, D. M. 2007. The potential paradox of organizational citizenship behavior: 
Good citizens at what cost? Academy of Management Review, 32(4): 1078-1095. 
Blau, P. M. 1962. Patterns of choice in interpersonal relationships. American 
Sociological Review, 27(1): 41-55. 
Blau, P. M. 1964. Power and exchange in social life. New York, NY: John Wiley and 
Sons. 
Blau, P. M., & Duncan, O. D. 1967. The american occupational structure. New York, 
NY: John Wiley & Sons. 
Bonacich, P. 1987. Power and centrality: A family of measures. American Journal of 
Sociology, 94: 1170-1182. 
Bono, J. E., & Anderson, M. H. 2005. The advice and influence networks of 
transformational leaders. Journal of Applied Psychology, 90(6): 1306-1314. 
Borgatti, S. P., Everett, M. G., & Freeman, L. C. 2002. Ucinetfor windows: Software for 
social network analysis. Harvard, MA: Analytic Technologies. 
Bowen, D. E., & Lawler III, E. E. 1995. Empowering service employees. Sloan 
management review, 36(4): 73-84. 
Brass, D. J. 1984. Being in the right place: A structural analysis of individual influence in 
an organization. Administrative Science Quarterly, 29(4): 518. 
Brass, D. J., Galaskiewicz, J., Greve, H. R., & Wenpin Tsai. 2004. Taking stock of 
networks and organizations: A multilevel perspective. Academy of Management 
Journal, 47(6): 795-817. 
150 
Brinberg, D., & Castell, P. 1982. A resource exchange theory approach to interpersonal 
interactions: A test of Foa's theory. Journal of personality and social psychology, 
43(2): 260-269. 
Burns, J. M. 1978. Leadership. New York: Harper & Row. 
Burt, R. 1992. Structural holes: The social structure of competition (First ed.). 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Burt, R. S. 1997. The contingent value of social capital. Administrative Science 
Quarterly, 42(2): 339-365. 
Burt, R. S. 2001. Attachment, decay, and social network. Journal of Organizational 
Behavior, 22(6): 619-643. 
Casciaro, T., & Lobo, M. S. 2008. When competence is irrelevant: The role of 
interpersonal affect in task-related ties. Administrative Science Quarterly, 53(4): 
655-684. 
Chiaburu, D. S., & Harrison, D. A. 2008. Do peers make the place? Conceptual synthesis 
and meta-analysis of coworker effects on perceptions, attitudes, OCBs, and 
performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 93(5): 1082-1103. 
Cialdini, R. B., Borden, R. J., Thome, A., Walker, M., Freeman, S., & Sloan, L. R. 1976. 
Basking in relected glory: Three (football) field studies. Journal of personality 
and social psychology, 34(3): 366-375. 
Cogliser, C. C, & Schriesheim, C. A. 2000. Exploring work unit context and leader-
member exchange: A multi-level perspective. Journal of Organizational 
Behavior, 21(5): 487. 
Cohen, J., Cohen, P., West, S. G., & Aitken, L. S. 2003. Applied multiple 
Regression/Correlation analysis for the behavioral sciences (3rd ed.). Mahwah, 
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Coleman, J. S. 1988. Social capital in the creation of human capital. American Journal 
of Sociology, 94: s95-sl20. 
Coleman, J. S. 1990. Foundations of social theory. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press. 
Crisp, R. J., & Hewstone, M. 2001. Multiple categorization and implicit intergroup bias: 
Differential category dominance and the positive-negative asymmetry effect. 
European Journal of Social Psychology, 31(1): 45-62. 
151 
Cronshaw, S. F., & Lord, R. G. 1987. Effects of categorization, attribution, and encoding 
processes on leadership perceptions. Journal of Applied Psychology, 72(1): 97-
106. 
Cross, R., & Cummings, J. N. 2004. Tie and network correlates of individual 
performance in knowledge-intensive work. Academy of Management Journal, 
47(6): 928-937. 
Dansereau Jr., F., Graen, G., & Haga, W. J. 1975. A vertical dyad linkage approach to 
leadership within formal organizations . A longitudinal investigation of the role 
making process. Organizational Behavior & Human Performance, 13(1): 46-78. 
Darling, D. 2005. Networking for career success: 24 lessons for getting to know the 
right people (1st ed.). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill. 
Davis, B. (Ed). 1996. Successful manger's handbook: Development tools for today's 
managers (3rd ed.). Minneapolis, MN: Personnel Decisions Inc. 
DeCoster, D. T., & Fertakis, J. P. 1968. Budget-induced pressure and its relationship to 
supervisory behavior. Journal of Accounting Research, 6(2): 237-246. 
Dienesch, R. M., & Liden, R. C. 1986. Leader-member exchange model of leadership: A 
critique and further development. Academy of Management Review, 11 (3): 618-
634. 
Drago, R., & Garvey, G. T. 1998. Incentives for helping on the job: Theory and evidence. 
Journal of Labor Economics, 16(1): 1. 
Duchon, D., Green, S. G., & Taber, T. D. 1986. Vertical dyad linkage: A longitudinal 
assessment of antecedents, measures, and consequences. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 71(1): 56-60. 
Duck, J. M., & Fielding, K. S. 1999. Leaders and subgroups: One of us or one of them? 
Group Processes & Intergroup Relations, 2(3): 203. 
Duffy, M. K., Ganster, D. C, & Pagon, M. 2002. Social undermining in the workplace. 
Academy of Management Journal, 45(2): 331-351. 
Dutton, J. E., Dukerich, J. M., & Harquail, C. V. 1994. Organizational images and 
member identification. Administrative Science Quarterly, 39(2): 239-263. 
Eden, D. 2001. Means efficacy: External sources of general and specific subjective 
efficacy, work motivation in the context of a globalizing economy. In M. Erez, U. 
Kleinbeck, & H. Thierry (Ed.), Work motivation in the context of a globalizing 
economy: 73-85. Mahway, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers. 
152 
Edmondson, A. 1999. Psychological safety and learning behavior in work teams. 
Administrative Science Quarterly, 44(2): 350-383. 
Eisenberger, R., Huntington, R., Hutchison, S., & Sowa, D. 1986. Perceived 
organizational support. Journal of Applied Psychology, 71(3): 500-507. 
Eisenberger, R., Stinglhamer, F., Vandenberghe, C, Sucharski, I. L., & Rhoades, L. 
2002. Perceived supervisor support: Contributions to perceived organizational 
support and employee retention. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87(3): 565-573. 
Ellemers, N., van Knippenberg, A., de Vries, N., & Wilke, H. 1988. Social identification 
and permeability of group boundaries. European Journal of Social Psychology, 
18(6): 497-513. 
Ensher, E. A., Thomas, C, & Murphy, S. E. 2001. Comparison of traditional, step-
ahead, and peer mentoring on ProtEgEs' support, satisfaction, and perceptions of 
career success: A social exchange perspective. Journal of Business & 
Psychology, 15(3): 419-438. 
Erdheim, J., Wang, M., & Zickar, M. J. 2006. Linking the big five personality constructs 
to organizational commitment. Personality & Individual Differences, 41(5): 959-
970. 
Ferris, G. R., & Mitchell, T. R. 1987. The components of social influence and their 
importance for human resources research. In K. M. Rowland & G. R. Ferris (Ed.), 
Research in personnel and human resources management, vol. 5: 103-128. 
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press. 
Fiedler, F. E. 1967. A theory of leadership effectiveness. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Fielding, K. S., & Hogg, M. A. 1997. Social identity, self-categorization, and leadership: 
A field study of small interactive groups. Group Dynamics: Theory, Research, 
andPractice, 1(1): 39-51. 
Fiske, S. T., & Taylor, S. E. 1991. Social cognitionMcGraw Hill Education. 
Foa, U. G., & Foa, E. B. 1974. Societal structures of the mind. Springfield, 111: Charles 
C. Thomas. 
Freeman, L. C. 1979. Centrality in social networks: Conceptual clarification. Social 
Networks, 1:215-239. 
French, J. R. P., & Raven, B. 1959. The bases of social power. In D. Cartwright (Ed.), 
Studies in social power. 150-167. Ann Arbor: Research Center for Group 
Dynamics, Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan. 
153 
Gaertner, S. L., et al. 1999. Across cultural divides: The value of a superordinate identity. 
In M. D. Prentice D. (Ed.), Cultural divides: Understanding and overcoming 
group conflict: 173-212. New York, NY: Russell Sage Foundation. 
Gelman, A., & Hill, J. 2007. Data analysis using regression and 
Multilevel/Hierarchical models. New York, New: Cambridge University Press. 
Gerstner, C. R., & Day, D. V. 1997. Meta-analytic review of leader-member exchange 
theory: Correlates and construct issues. Journal of Applied Psychology, 82(6): 
827-844. 
Gist, M. E., & Mitchell, T. B. 1992. Self-efficacy: A theoretical analysis of its 
determinants and malleability. Academy of Management Review, 17(2): 183-211. 
Gittell, J. H. 2001. Supervisory span, relational coordination and flight departure 
performance: A reassessment of postbureaucracy theory. Organization Science, 
12(4): 468-483. 
Goldberg, L. R. 1992. The development of markers for the big five factor structure. 
Psychological assessment, 4: 26-42. 
Gomez, C, & Rosen, B. 2001. The leader-member exchange as a link between 
managerial trust and employee empowerment. Group & Organization 
Management, 26(1): 53-69. 
Gould, R. V. 2002. The origins of status hierarchies: A formal theory and empirical test. 
American Journal of Sociology, 107(5): 1143. 
Gouldner, A. W. 1960. The norm of reciprocity: A preliminary statement. American 
Sociological Review, 25(2): 161-178. 
Graen, G. B., & Uhl-bien, M. 1995. Relationship based approach to leadership: 
Development of leader member exchange (LMX) theory of leadership over 25 
years: Applying a multi-level, multi-domain approach. Leadership Quarterly, 
6(2): 219-247. 
Graen, G. B. 1976. Role making processes within complex organizations. In M. D. 
Dunnette (Ed.), Handbook ofindustrial and organizational psychology: 1201-
1245. Chicago: RandMcNally. 
Graen, G. B., & Cashman, J. F. 1975. A role-making model of leadership in formal 
organizations: A development approach. In J. G. Hunt & L. L. Larson (Ed.), 
Leadership frontiers: 143-165. Kent, OH: Kent State University Press. 
154 
Graen, G. B., & Scandura, T. A. 1987. Toward a psychology of dyadic organizing. 
Research in Organizational Behavior, 9: 175. 
Graen, G., Cashman, J. F., Ginsburg, S., & Schiemann, W. 1977. Effects of linking-pin 
quality on the quality of working life of lower participants. Administrative 
Science Quarterly, 22(3): 491. 
Graen, G., & Novak, M. A. 1982. The effects of leader-member exchange and job design 
on productivity and satisfaction: Testing a dual attachment model. Organizational 
Behavior & Human Performance, 30(1): 109-131. 
Granovetter, M. S. 1973. The strength of weak ties. American Journal of Sociology, 
78(6): 1360-1380. 
Greguras, G. J., & Ford, J. M. 2006. An examination of the multidimensionality of 
supervisor and subordinate perceptions of leader-member exchange. Journal of 
Occupational & Organizational Psychology, 79(3): 433-465. 
Griffeth, R. W., Horn, P. W., & Gaertner, S. 2000. A meta-analysis of antecedents and 
correlates of employee turnover: Update, moderator tests, and research 
implications for the next millennium. Journal of Management, 26(3): 463-488. 
Hackman, J. R. 1987. The design of work teams. In J. Lorsch (Ed.), Handbook of 
organizational behavior: 315-342. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Hackman, J. R., & Oldham, G. R. 1976. Motivation through the design of work: Test of a 
theory. Organizational Behavior & Human Performance, 16(2): 250-279. 
Hamilton, D. L. 2007. Understanding the complexities of group perception: Broadening 
the domain. European Journal of Social Psychology, 37(6): 1077-1101. 
Hansen, M. T. 1999. The search-transfer problem: The role of weak ties in sharing 
knowledge across organization subunits. Administrative Science Quarterly, 
44(1): 82. 
Harris, K. J., & Kacmar, K. M. 2006. Too much of a good thing: The curvilinear effect of 
leader-member exchange on stress. Journal of Social Psychology, 146(1): 65-84. 
Harrison, D. A., Newman, D. A., & Roth, P. L. 2006. How important are job attitudes? 
Meta-analytic comparisons of integrative behavioral outcomes and time 
sequences. Academy of Management Journal, 49(2): 305-325. 
Haslam, S. A., & Platow, M. J. 2001. The link between leadership and followership: How 
affirming social identity translates vision into action. Personality and social 
psychology bulletin, 27(11): 1469-1479. 
155 
Haslam, S. A., Platow, M. J., Turner, J. C, Reynolds, K. J., Megarty, C, Oakes, P. J., 
Johnson, S., Ryan, M. K., & Veenstra, K. 2001. Social identity and the romance 
of leadership: The importance of being seen to be 'doing it for us'. Group 
Processes & Intergroup Relations, 4(3): 191. 
Hill, S. E. K., Bahniuk, M. H., Dobos, J., & Rouner, D. 1989. Mentoring and other 
communication support in the academic setting. Group & Organization Studies, 
14(3): 355-368. 
Hofmann, D. A., Lei, Z., & Grant, A. D. 2009. Seeking help in the shadow of doubt: The 
sensemaking processes underlying how nurses decide whom to ask for advice. 
Journal of Applied Psychology, 94(5): 1261-1274. 
Hofmann, D. A., & Gavin, M. B. 1998. Centering decisions for hierarchical linear 
models: Implications for research in organizations. Journal of Management, 24: 
623-641. 
Hofmann, D. A. 1997. An overview of the logic and rationale of hierarchical linear 
models. Journal of Management, 23(6): 723-744. 
Hogg, M. A. 2001. A social identity theory of leadership. Personality & Social 
Psychology Review, 5(3): 184-200. 
T4V\rrnr \A A T-Iainc Q C* fir AVTciorvn T 1 QQ5? Trlor»ft'fir»a+ir\n atirl if»prl<»-ro1-|i-t% in email 
llUtt, 1Y1. 1 I., A AUAAAi3? \^f . V-'.j *-JC XVAtiOV/AA, A. iy/U. lUVllUXlVUUWli 14.AAU. IWUUVIOIUL' AAA OAAAH-AA 
groups: Salience, frame of reference, and leader stereotypicality effects on leader 
evaluations. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 75(5): 1248-1263. 
House, R. J. 1977. A 1976 theory of charismatic leadership. In J. G. Hunt & L. L. Larsen 
(Ed.), Leadership: The cutting edge: 189-207. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois 
University Press. 
Ibarra, H. 1992. Homophily and differential returns: Sex differences in network structure 
and access in an advertising firm. Administrative Science Quarterly, 37(3): 422-
447. 
Ibarra, H. 1993. Personal networks of women and minorities in management: A 
conceptual framework. Academy of Management Review, 18(1): 56. 
Ibarra, H., & Andrews, S. B. 1993. Power, social influence, and sense making: Effects of 
network centrality and proximity on employee perceptions. Administrative 
Science Quarterly, 38(2): 277-303. 
Janssen, O. 2001. Fairness perceptions as a moderator in the curvilinear relationships 
between job demands, and job performance and job satisfaction. Academy of 
Management Journal, 44(5): 1039-1050. 
156 
Judge, T. A., Heller, D., & Mount, M. K. 2002. Five-factor model of personality and job 
satisfaction: A meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87(3): 530-541. 
Judge, T. A., Hies, R., Bono, J. E., & Gerhardt, M. W. 2002. Personality and leadership: 
A qualitative and quantitative review. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87(4): 
765-780. 
Judge, T. A., & Piccolo, R. F. 2004. Transformational and transactional leadership: A 
meta-analytic test of their relative validity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89(5): 
755-768. 
Judge, T. A., Piccolo, R. F., & Hies, R. 2004. The forgotten ones? the validity of 
consideration and initiating structure in leadership research. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 89(1): 36-51. 
Kanter, R. M. 1986. The new workforce meets the changing workplace: Strains, 
dilemmas, and contradictions in attempts to implement participative and 
entrepreneurial management. Human resource management, 25(4): 515-537. 
Katz, D., & Kahn, R. 1978. The social psychology of organizations (2nd ed.). Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley and Sons. 
Kenny, D. A., & Zaccaro, S. J. 1983. An estimate of variance due to traits in leadership. 
Journal of Applied Psychology, 68(4): 678-685. 
Kilduff, M., & Krackhardt, D. 1994. Bringing the individual back in: A structural 
analysis of the internal market for reputation in organizations. Academy of 
Management Journal, 37(1): 87-108. 
Kinicki, A. J., & Vecchio, R. P. 1994. Influences on the quality of supervisor-
subordinate relations: The role of time- pressure, organizational commitment, and 
locus of control. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 15(1): 75-82. 
Klein, K. J., Dansereau, F., & Hall, R. J. 1994. Levels issues in theory development, data 
collection, and analysis. Academy of Management Review, 19: 195-229. 
Klein, K. J., Beng-Chong Lim, Saltz, J. L., & Mayer, D. M. 2004. How do they get there? 
an examination of the antecedents of centrality in team networks. Academy of 
Management Journal, 47(6): 952-963. 
Klein, K. J., & Kozlowski, S. W. J. 2000. From micro to meso: Critical steps in 
conceptualizing and conducting multilevel research. Organizational Research 
Methods, 3(3): 211. 
157 
Kotter, J. P. 1999. John P. Kotter on what leaders really do. Boston, MA: Harvard 
Business School Press. 
Kouzes, J. M., & Posner, B. Z. 2008. The leadership challenge (4th ed.). San Francisco, 
CA: Jossey-Bass. 
Krackhardt, D. 1999. The ties that torture: Simmelian tie analysis in organizations. In S. 
B. Bacharach, S. B. Andrews, & D. Knoke (Ed.), Research in the sociology of 
organizations, vol. 16: 183-210. Stamford, CT: JAI Press. 
Krackhardt, D. 1990. Assessing the political landscape: Structure, cognition, and power 
in organizations. Administrative Science Quarterly, 35(2): 342-369. 
Kreft, I. G. G., de Leeuw, J., & Aiken, L. S. 1995. The effect of different forms of 
centering in hierarchical linear models. Multivariate Behavioral Research, 30(1): 
1. 
Kulik, C. T., Roberson, L., & Perry, E. L. 2007. The multiple-category problem: 
Category activation and inhibition in the hiring process. Academy of 
Management Review, 32(2): 529-548. 
Labianca, G. (., & Brass, D. J. 2006. Exploring the social ledger: Negative relationships 
and negative asymmetry in social networks in organizations. Academy of 
Management Review, 31(3): 596-614. 
Labianca, G., Brass, D. J., & Gray, B. 1998. Social networks and perceptions of 
intergroup conflict: The role of negative relationships and third parties. Academy 
of Management Journal, 41(1): 55-67. 
Lawler III, E. 1992. The ultimate advantage. San Francisco, CA: Jossey Bass. 
Liden, R. C, & Maslyn, J. M. 1998. Multidimensionality of leader-member exchange: 
An empirical assessment through scale development. Journal of Management, 
24(1): 43-72. 
Liden, R. C, Wayne, S. J., & Stilwell, D. 1993. A longitudinal study on the early 
development of leader — member exchanges. Journal of Applied Psychology, 
78(4): 662-674. 
Likert, R. 1961. New patterns of management. New York, NY: McGraw Hill. 
Lincoln, J. R., & Miller, J. 1979. Work and friendship ties in organizations: A 
comparative analysis of relational networks. Administrative Science Quarterly, 
24(2): 181. 
158 
Lord, R. G., Foti, R. J., & De Vader, C. L. 1984. A test of leadership categorization 
theory: Internal structure, information processing,.. Organizational Behavior & 
Human Performance, 34(3): 343. 
MacKinnon, D. P., Krull, J. L., & Lockwood, C. M. 2000. Equivalence of the mediation, 
confounding, and suppression effect. Prevention Science, 1(4): 173-181. 
Mael, F., & Ashforth, B. E. 1992. Alumni and their alma mater: A partial test of the 
reformulated model of organizational identification. Journal of Organizational 
Behavior, 13(2): 103-123. 
Manev, I. M., & Stevenson, W. B. 2001. Balancing ties: Boundary spanning and 
influence in the organization's extended network of communication. Journal of 
Business Communication, 38(2): 183-205. 
March, J. G., & Simon, H. A. 1958. Organizations. New York: Wiley. 
Mathieu, J. E., & Zajac, D. M. 1990. A review and meta-analysis of the antecedents, 
correlates, and consequences of organizational.. Psychological bulletin, 108(2): 
171. 
Mathieu, J. E., & Taylor, S. R. 2006. Clarifying conditions and decision points for 
mediational type inferences in organizational behavior. Journal of 
Organizational Behavior, 27(8): 1031-1056. 
Mayhew, B., & Levinger, R. L. 1976. Size and the density of interaction in human 
aggregates. American Journal of Sociology, 82(1): 86-110. 
McFarland, D., & Pals, H. 2005. Motives and contexts of identity change: A case for 
network effects. Social psychology quarterly, 68(4): 289-315. 
Mehra, A., Dixon, A. L., Brass, D. J., & Robertson, B. 2006. The social network ties of 
group leaders: Implications for group performance and leader reputation. 
Organization Science, 17(1): 64-79. 
Mehra, A., Kilduff, M., & Brass, D. J. 2001. The social networks of high and low self-
monitors: Implications for workplace performance. Administrative Science 
Quarterly, 46(1): 121-146. 
Meyer, J. P., Stanley, D. J., Herscovitch, L., & Topolnytsky, L. 2002. Affective, 
continuance, and normative commitment to the organization: A meta-analysis of 
antecedents, correlates, and consequences Journal of Vocational Behavior, 
61(1): 20-52. 
159 
Meyer, J. P., & Allen, N. J. 1984. Testing the 'side-bet theory' of organizational 
commitment: Some methodological considerations. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 69(3): 372-378. 
Mintzberg, H. 1973. The nature of managerial work. New York: Harper and Row. 
Mitchell, T. R., Holtom, B. C, Lee, T. W., Sablynski, C. J., & Erez, M. 2001. Why 
people stay: Using job embeddedness to predict voluntary turnover. Academy of 
Management Journal, 44(6): 1102-1121. 
Morrison, E. W., & Phelps, C. C. 1999. Taking charge at work: Extrarole efforts to 
initiate workplace change. Academy of Management Journal, 42(4): 403-419. 
Mowday, R., Steers, R., & Porter, L. W. 1979. The measurement of organizational 
commitment. Journal of vocational behavior, 14(2): 224-247. 
Nahrgang, J. D., Morgeson, F. P., & Hies, R. 2009. The development of leader-member 
pyrhanaps- Fvnlnn'ncr hnw nprsonalitv anrt nprfnrmanrp infhipnrp leadpr anrl ~^: -©--• *—--tr——£,—-•• r~~ j ~—^-**„~„ ——i » —„— 
member relationships over time. Organizational Behavior & Human Decision 
Processes, 108(2): 256-266. 
Obstfeld, D. 2005. Social networks, the tertius iungens orientation, and involvement in 
innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly, 50(1): 100-130. 
O'Reilly III, C. A., Chatman, J., & Caldwell, D. F. 1991. People and organizational 
culture: A profile comparison approach to assessing person-organization fit. 
Academy of Management Journal, 34(3): 487-516. 
Organ, D. W. 1988. Organizational citizenship behavior : The good soldier syndrome. 
Lexington, Mass.: Lexington Books. 
Parker, S. K., Williams, H. M., & Turner, N. 2006. Modeling the antecedents of proactive 
behavior at work. Journal of Applied Psychology, 91(3): 636-652. 
Perry-Smith, J. 2006. Social yet creative: The role of social relationships in facilitating 
individual creativity. Academy of Management Journal, 49(1): 85-101. 
Pfeffer, J. 1981. Management as symbolic action: The creation & maintenance of 
organizational paradigms. Research in Organizational Behavior, 3: 1-53. 
Phillips, J. S., & Lord, R. G. 1986. Notes on the practical and theoretical consequences of 
implicit leadership theories for the future of leadership measurement. Journal of 
Management, 12(1): 31. 
Podolny, J. M. 2001. Networks as the pipes and prisms of the market. American Journal 
of Sociology, 107(1): 33-60. 
1UU 
Podolny, J. M., & Baron, J. N. 1997. Resources and relationships: Social networks and 
mobility in the workplace. American Sociological Review, 62(5): 673-693. 
Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Jeong-Yeon Lee, & Podsakoff, N. P. 2003. Common 
method biases in behavioral research: A critical review of the literature and 
recommended remedies. Journal of Applied Psychology, 88(5): 879. 
Rhoades, L., & Eisenberger, R. 2002. Perceived organizational support: A review of the 
literature. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87(4): 698-714. 
Ridgeway, C. L., & Berger, J. 1986. Expectations, legitimation, and dominance behavior 
in task groups. American Sociological Review, 51(5): 603-617. 
Robbins, S. F. 2003. The truth about managingpeople...and nothing but the truth. 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Rogelberg, S. G., & Stanton, J. M. 2007. Understanding and dealing with organizational 
survey non-response. Organizational Research Methods, 10(2): 195-209. 
Sayles, L. R. 1964. Managerial behavior: Administration in complex organizations. 
New York: McGraw Hill. 
Scandura, T. A., & Schriesheim, C. A. 1994. Leader-member exchange and supervisor 
career mentoring as complementary constructs in leadership research. Academy of 
Management Journal, 37(6): 1588-1602. 
Schafer, J. L., & Graham, J. W. 2002. Missing data: Our view of the state of the art. 
Psychological Methods, 7(2): 147-177. 
Seers, A. 1989. Team-member exchange quality: A new construct for role-making 
research. Organizational Behavior & Human Decision Processes, 43(1): 118. 
Seibert, S. E., Kraimer, M. L., & Liden, R. C. 2001. A social capital theory of career 
success. Academy of Management Journal, 44(2): 219-237. 
Settles, I. H., Sellers, R. M., & Damas Jr., A. 2002. One role of two? the function of 
psychological separation in role conflict. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87(3): 
574-582. 
Shamir, B., Zakay, E., Breinin, E., & Popper, M. 1998. Correlates of charismatic leader 
behavior in military units: Subordinates' attitudes, unit characteristics, and 
superiors' appraisals of leader performance. Academy of Management Journal, 
41(4): 387-409. 
Sherif, M. 1967. Group conflict and cooperation. London: Routeledge and Kegan Paul. 
161 
Sobel, M. E. 1982. Asymptotic confidence intervals for indirect effects in structural 
equation models. Sociological Methodology: 290. 
Solinger, O. N., Van Olffen, W., & Roe, R. A. 2008. Beyond the three-component model 
of organizational commitment. Journal of Applied Psychology, 93(1): 70-83. 
Sparrowe, R. T., & Liden, R. C. 1997. Process and structure in leader-member exchange. 
Academy of Management Review, 22(2): 522-552. 
Sparrowe, R. T., & Liden, R. C. 2005. Two routes to influence: Integrating leader-
member exchange and social network perspectives. Administrative Science 
Quarterly, 50(4): 505-535. 
Sparrowe, R. T., Liden, R. C, Wayne, S. J., & Kraimer, M. L. 2001. Social networks and 
the performance of individuals and groups. Academy of Management Journal, 
44(2): 316-325. 
Sparrowe, R. T., Soetjipto, B. W., & Kraimer, M. L. 2006. Do leaders' influence tactics 
relate to members' helping behavior? it depends on the quality of the relationship. 
Academy of Management Journal, 49(6): 1194-1208. 
Spreitzer, G. M. 1996. Social structural characteristics of psychological empowerment. 
Academy of Management Journal, 39(2): 483-504. 
Stangor, C, Lynch, L., Duan, C, & Glass, B. 1992. Categorization of individuals on the 
basis of multiple social features. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 
62(2): 207-218. 
Stogdill, R. M. 1963. Manual for the leader-behavior description questionnaire-form 
XII. Columbus, OH: Ohio State University, Bureau of Business Research, 
College of Commerce and Administration. 
Stogdill, R. M. 1974. Handbook of leadership: A survey of theory and research. New 
York: Free Press. 
Szulanski, G. 1996. Exploring internal stickiness: Impediments to the transfer of best 
practice within the firm. Strategic Management Journal, 17: 27-43. 
Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. C. 1986. The social identity theory of intergroup behavior. In S. 
Worchell & W. G. Austin (Ed.), The psychology of intergroup relations: 7-24. 
Chicago: Nelson Hall Publishers. 
Tangirala, S., Green, S. G., & Ramanujam, R. 2007. In the shadow of the boss's boss: 
Effects of supervisors' upward exchange relationships on employees. Journal of 
Applied Psychology, 92(2): 309-320. 
162 
Taylor, S. E. 1991. Asymmetrical effects of positive and negative events: The 
mobilization-minimization hypothesis. Psychological bulletin, 110(1): 67. 
Terry, D. J., Carey, C. J., & Callan, V. J. 2001. Employee adjustment to an organizational 
merger: An intergroup perspective. Personality and Social Psychological 
Bulletin, 27(3): 267-280. 
Tsai, W., & Ghoshal, S. 1998. Social capital and value creation: The role of intrafirm 
networks. Academy of Management Journal, 41(4): 464-476. 
Tushman, M. L., & Katz, R. 1980. External communication and project performance; 
An investigation into the role ofgatekeepersAcademy of Management, 
Tushman, M. L., & Scanlan, T. J. 1981. Boundary spanning individuals: Their role in 
information transfer and their antecedents. Academy of Management Journal, 
24(2): 289-305. 
Tyler, T. R., & Blader, S. L. 2000. Cooperation in groups: Procedural justice, social 
identity, and behavioral engagement. New York, NY: Psychological Press. 
Tzelgov, J., & Henik, A. 1991. Suppression situations in psychological research: 
Definitions, implications, and applications. Psychological bulletin, 109(3): 524. 
Uzzi, B. 1997. Social structure and competition in interfirm networks: The paradox of 
embeddedness. Administrative Science Quarterly, 42(1): 35-67. 
Van Dyne, L., & LePine, J. A. 1998. Helping and voice extra-role behaviors: Evidence of 
construct and predictive validity. Academy of Management Journal, 41(1): 108-
119. 
van Knippenberg, A., & Ellemers, N. 1993. Strategies in intergroup relations. In M. A. 
Hogg & D. Abrams (Ed.), Group motivation: Social psychological perspectives: 
17-23. London, UK: Harvester Wheatsheaf. 
van Knippenberg, D. 2000. Work motivation and performance: A social identity 
perspective. Applied Psychology: An International Review, 49(3): 357. 
Venkataramani, V., Green, S. G., & Schleicher, D. J. 2010. Well-connected leaders: The 
impact of leaders' social network ties on LMX and members' work attitudes. 
Journal of Applied Psychology, 95(6): 1071-1084. 
Wageman, R. 1995. Interdependence and group effectiveness. Administrative Science 
Quarterly, 40(1): 145-180. 
Wang, H., Law, K. S., Hackert, R. D., Duanxu Wang, & Zhen Xiong Chen. 2005. 
Leader-member exchange as a mediator of the relationship between 
163 
transformational leadership and followers' performance and organizational 
citizenship behavior. Academy of Management Journal, 48(3): 420-432. 
Wasserman, S., & Faust, K. 1994. Social network analysis: Methods and applications. 
New York: Cambridge University Press. 
Watts, D. J. 2003. Six degrees: The science of a connected age. New York: W. W. 
Norton. 
Whetten, D. A. 1978. Coping with incompatible expectations: An integrated view of role 
conflict. Administrative Science Quarterly, 23(2): 254-271. 
Wolff, K. H., & Reinhard, B. (Eds.). 1955. Georg simmel: Conflict and the web of 
group-affiliations. New York: The Free Press. 
Yukl, G. A. 2006. Leadership in organizations (6th ed.). Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: 
Prentice-Hall, Inc. 
164 
Table 1: Summary of Sample and Survey Response 
Organization A 
Subordinates 
Managers 
Bosses 
Organization B 
Subordinates 
Managers 
Bosses 
Organization C 
Subordinates 
Managers 
Bosses 
Total 
Subordinates 
Managers 
Bosses Invited to 
Participate 
378 
48 
16 
898 
91 
34 
376 
53 
20 
1652 
192 
70 Survey 1 
Participants 
176 
41 
13 
197 
73 
29 
158 
42 
17 
531 
156 
59 Response 
Rate 
47% 
85% 
81% 
22% 
80% 
85% 
42% 
79% 
85% 
32% 
81% 
84% Survey 2 
Participants 
137 
29 
14 
445 
53 
30 
197 
36 
16 
779 
118 
60 Response 
Rate 
36% 
60% 
88%o 
50% 
58% 
88% 
52% 
68% 
80% 
47% 
61% 
86% S 
Stage 1 
Analysis 
84 
24 
12 
136 
38 
13 
74 
21 
8 
294 
83 
33 ample Size 
Stage 2 
Analysis 
62 
20 
13 
107 
32 
11 
56 
17 
7 
225 
69 
31 Stage 3 
Analysis 
54 
17 
11 
107 
32 
11 
56 
17 
7 
217 
66 
29 
165 
Table 2: Sample DiflFerences-Pilot Site vs. Study Sites 
Sample Means 
Study 
Pilot Site Sample Difference T-stat P value 
Resource Access 
Information Access 
Manager Status 
Ascribed Identity 
Manager Availability 
Manager Time Constraints 
Organizational Commitment 
LMX 3.72 
3.96 
3.62 
3.74 
3.97 
2.60 
3.44 
3.90 3.80 
4.10 
3.55 
3.82 
3.92 
2.69 
3.82 
3.91 -0.08 
0.15 
0.07 
-0.08 
0.05 
-0.09 
-0.37 
-0.01 0.84 
1.78 
0.93 
0.86 
0.53 
1.19 
3.47 
-0.10 0.400 
0.075 
0.350 
0.390 
0.600 
0.230 
O.001 
0.917 
166 
Table 3: Summary of Data Collection Strategy 
Survey 1 Survey 2 
Subordinates 
Managers 
Bosses Big Five Personality Inventory 
Demographics (Age, Gender, Race, Eduction) 
Tenure with Company and Manager 
Transformational Leadership 
Resource Access 
Information Access 
Perceived Manager Status 
Ascribed Identity 
Manager Availability 
Time Constraints 
Demographics (Age, Gender, Race, Eduction) 
Tenure with Company 
Advice Network 
Friendship Network 
LLX (Between Boss and Manager) Organizational Commitment 
LMX (Between Manager and Subordinate) 
Assessment of Subordinate Performance 
167 
Table 4: Summary of Peer Networks 
Organization A 
Advice Friendship 
Participating 41 41 
Managers 
Mean ties 4.6 5.0 
Density (%) 11.2% 12.1% 
Indegree 
Standard Deviation 1.97 2.78 
Centralization (%) 8.6% 15.5% 
Minimum Ties 1 0 
Maximum Ties 8 11 
Outdegree 
Standard Deviation 4.31 4.90 
Centralization (%) 31.7% 30.9% 
Minimum Ties 0 0 
Maximum Ties 17 17 Organization B Organization C 
Advice Friendship Advice Friendship 
74 74 42 42 
6.9 
9.3% 
5.16 
23.7% 
0 
24 
6.88 
48.7% 
0 
42 12.1 
16.3% 
7.43 
20.6% 
0 
27 
10.48 
41.5% 
0 
42 7.7 
18.2% 
3.55 
18.3% 
1 
15 
6.32 
43.8% 
0 
25 7.4 
17.6% 
3.28 
16.4% 
0 
14 
7.72 
73.8% 
0 
37 
168 
Table 5: Confirmatory Factor Analysis of Leader Leader Exchange (LLX) Scales, Boss Assessed 
Model Description 
1 Hypothesized Model: Four Factors—LLX-
Affect, LLX-Loyalty, LLX-Contribution, 
LLX-Respeet as four distinct factors Jl 
103 df 
48 Ay2/df Ax2/df 
p value CFI 
0.96 TLI 
0.95 SRMR 
0.041 RMSEA 
0.086 RMSEA 
Confidence Interval 
0.063 0.109 
2 Alternative: Affect and Loyalty 
constrained as one factor 
3 Alternative: Affect and Contribution 
constrained as one factor 
4 Alternative: Affect and Respect 
constrained as one factor 
5 Alternative: Loyalty and Contribution 
constrained as one factor 
6 Alternative: Loyalty and Respect 
constrainted as one factor 
7 Alternaitve: Contribution and Respect 
constrainted as one factor 
8 One factor model 202 
288 
266 
303 
303 
197 
500 51 
51 
51 
51 
51 
51 
54 33 
62 
54 
67 
67 
31 
66 <0001 
<.0001 
<.0001 
<.0001 
<.0001 
<,0001 
<.0001 0.89 
0.83 
0.84 
0.82 
0 82 
0.89 
0.68 0.86 
0.78 
0.80 
0.76 
0.76 
0.86 
0.60 0.059 
0.099 
0.087 
0.094 
0.080 
0.052 
0.104 0.139 
0.175 
0.166 
0.180 
0.180 
0.137 
0.232 0.119 
0.155 
0.147 
0.160 
0.161 
0.117 
0.214 0.160 
0.194 
0.186 
0.199 
0.200 
0.157 
0.251 
Note: N = 66, CFI = Comparative Fit Index, TLI = Tucker Lewis Index, SRMR = Standardized Root Mean Square Res idual, 
RMSEA = Root Mean Square Error of Appro ximtion 
Note: Pairwise Pearson Correlations are: Affect with Loyalty, .73; Affect with Contribution, .64; Affect with Respect,.56; 
Loyalty with Contribution, .69; Loyalty with Respect, .55; Contribution with Respect, .75 
169 
Table 6: Confirmatory Factor Analysis of Intervening Variables 
Model Description 
1 Hypothesized Model: Six Factors: Resource 
Access, Information Access, Perceived 
Manager Status, Ascribed Identity (AID), 
Manager Availability, Time Constraints 
2 Alternative: Resource access and information 
access constrained as one factor 
3 Alternative: Manager availability and Time 
Constraints constrained as one factor 
4 Alternative: Perceived Status and Ascribed 
Identity constrained as one factor 
5 Alternative: Perceived Status and Information 
Access constrained as one factor 
6 Alternative: Perceived Status and Resource 
Access constrained as one factor 
7 Alternative: Ascribed Identity and Manager 
Availability constrained as one factor 
8 One factor model Ax2/df 
& df Ay2/df P value CFI TLI RMSEA 
SRMR RMSEA Confidence Interval 
842 284 0.913 0.900 0.070 0.07 0.06 0.07 
1020 
1324 
1532 
1181 
1318 
1393 
3270 289 
289 
289 
289 
289 
289 
299 36 
96 
138 
68 
95 
110 
162 <0001 
<.0001 
<.0001 
<.0001 
<.0001 
<.0001 
<.0001 0.886 
0.838 
0.806 
0.861 
0.839 
0.827 
0.536 0.872 
0.818 
0.782 
0.843 
0.819 
0.806 
0.495 0.070 
0.090 
0.089 
0.080 
0.088 
0.079 
0.124 0.08 
0.09 
0.10 
0.09 
0.09 
0.10 
0.15 0.07 
0.09 
0.10 . 
0.08 
0.09 
0.09 
0.15 0.08 
0.10 
0.11 
0.09 
0.10 
0.10 
0.16 
Note: N = 427, CFI = Comparative Fit Index , TLI = Tucker Lewis Index, SMSR= Standardized Root Mean Square Residual, 
RMSEA =Root Mean Square Error of Approximtion 
170 
Table 7: Corifirmatory Factor Analysis of Subordinate Assessed Dependent Variables 
Model Description 
1 Hypothesized Model: Two main factors 
(Organizational Commitment (OC) and 
Leader Member Exchange (LMX)). LMX 
is a second order factor which represents 
four first order factors: LMX-Affect, 
LMX-Loyalty, LMX-Contribution, LMX-
2 5 factor 1st order model, no second order 
LMX 
3 Alternative: OC and LMX constrained as 
one factor 
4 Alternative: LMX-Affect andLMX-
Respect constrained as one factor 
5 Alternative: LMX-Loyalty andLMX-
Respect constrained as one factor 
6 Alternative: LMX-Loyalty and LMX-
Affect constrained as one factor 
7 Alternative: LMX-Affect and LMX-
Contribution constrained as one factor 
8 Alternative: LMX-Loyalty and LMX-
Contribution constrained as one factor 
9 Alternative: LMX-Contribution and 
LMX-Respect constrained as one factor 
10 All LMX constrained as one factor 
11 One factor model Ax2Mf RMSEA 
j2 df Ax2/df p value CFI TLI SRMR RMSEA Confidence Interval 
703 165 0.941 0.932 0.046 0.067 0.062 0.073 
693 
1640 
1249 
1170 
1110 
1082 
1093 
1078 
1899 
3329 160 
167 
166 
166 
166 
166 
166 
166 
169 
170 2 
469 
546 
467 
407 
379 
390 
375 
299 
525 0.07 
<.0001 
<.0001 
<.0001 
<.0001 
<.0001 
<.0001 
<.0001 
<.0001 
<.0001 0.942 
0.839 
0.881 
0.890 
0.897 
0.900 
0.898 
0.900 
0.810 
0.954 0.931 
0.816 
0.864 
0.874 
0.882 
0.885 
0.884 
0.886 
0.787 
0.613 0.045 
0.134 
0.048 
0.054 
0.052 . 
0.058 
0.058 
0.059 
0.061 
0.119 0.068 
0.111 
0.095 
0.092 
0.089 
0.088 
0.088 
0.119 
0.161 0.063 
0.106 
0.091 
0.087 
0.083 
0.084 
0.083 
0.083 
0.115 
0.156 0.073 
0.116 
0.100 
0.097 
0.093 
0.094 
0.093 
0.093 
0.124 
0.166 
Note: N = 427, CFI = Comparative Fit Index , TLI = Tucker Lewis Index, RMSEA = Root Mean Square Error of Approximtion 
RMSEA = Root Mean Square Error of Approximtion 
171 
Table 8: Level 1/Subordinate Level Means, Standard Deviations, and Pearson Correlations 
1 Age 
2 Gender (l=Male, 2=Female) 
3 Race(l=White,2=Other) 
4 Education 
5 Company tenure 
6 Manager tenure 
7 Agreeableness 
8 Conscientiousness 
9 Emotional Stability 
10 Extroversion 
11 Openness 
12 Resource Access 
13 Information Access 
14 Manager Status 
15 Ascribed Identity 
16 Manager Availability 
17 Time Constraint 
18 Organizational Commitment 
19 LMX 
20 Baseline Sales 
21 Actual Sales 
22 Performance (Mgr. Rated) Mean 
43.57 
1.44 
1.15 
3.50 
11.44 
3.12 
3.95 
4.04 
3.95 
3.42 
3.60 
3.81 
4.14 
3.74 
3.94 
3.75 
2.46 
3.84 
3.90 
1.05 
1.03 
3.86 S.D. 
12.24 
0.49 
0.33 
0.91 
7.80 
3.05 
0.48 
0.50 
0.58 
0.52 
0.52 
0.76 
0.62 
0.61 
0.80 
0.75 
0.62 
0.70 
0.67 
0.63 
0.59 
0.79 1 
0.05 
-0.15 
-0.17 
0.53 
0.07 
-0.07 
-0.12 
0.09 
-0.13 
-0.27 
0.02 
-0.08 
-0.10 
0.05 
-0.05 
0.05 
0.06 
0.04 
0.12 
0.08 
0.02 2 
0.24 
-0.35 
-0.05 
0.05 
0.04 
0.20 
0.03 
-0.18 
-0.15 
-0.15 
-0.16 
-0.03 
-0.13 
-0.18 
0.18 
-0.16 
-0.03 
-0.21 
-0.20 
0.05 3 
-0.06 
-0.11 
0.02 
-0.06 
0.04 
0.15 
-0.10 
0.17 
-0.10 
-0.18 
-0.10 
-0.26 
-0.07 
0.26 
-0.26 
-0.07 
-0.11 
-0.12 
-0.05 Pearson 
4 
-0.18 
-0.08 
0.00 
-0.08 
-0.04 
0.14 
0.19 
0.09 
0.01 
0.01 
-0.03 
-0.01 
-0.12 
-0.05 
-0.04 
-0.05 
-0.05 
-0.01 5 
0.13 
-0.02 
0.00 
0.12 
-0.05 
-0.26 
0.00 
-0.04 
-0.13 
-0.02 
0.00 
0.04 
0.06 
-0.06 
0.26 
0.22 
0.13 Correlations 
6 7 
-0.09 (.70) 
0.12 
-0.01 
-0.20 
-0.09 
0.06 
0.04 
0.01 
0.04 
0.00 
0.03 
-0.01 
-0.09 
0.06 
0.05 
-0.17 0.20 I 
0.13 
0.33 
0.27 
0.23 
0.23 
0.23 
0.20 
0.21 
-0.12 
0.21 
0.25 
-0.06 
-0.04 
0.01 8 
:.so) 
0.27 I 
0.11 
0.25 
0.04 
0.07 
-0.03 
-0.12 
0.02 
0.17 
-0.04 
-0.14 
0.12 
0.12 
0.04 9 
(.83) 10 
0.10 (.72) 
0.02 
0.17 
0.13 
0.11 
0.04 
0.16 
0.24 
0.03 
0.08 
-0.03 
-0.01 
0.06 0.41 i 
0.13 
0.17 
0.22 
0.26 
0.21 
-0.22 
0.19 
0.23 
0.03 
0.03 
0.00 11 
(.74) 11 
0.03 (.79) 
0.11 
0.09 
-0.03 
0.03 
-0.20 
-0.03 
0.06 
0.01 
0.04 
-0.05 0.59 
0.44 
0.25 
0.40 
0.01 
0.57 
0.23 
0.07 
0.10 
0.00 
Correlations greater than |.13| are significant at/? <.05 
Samples range from 150 to 294 
Cronbach's alpha on the diagonal 
172 
Table 8: Level 1/Subordinate Level Means, Standard Deviations, and Pearson Correlations (continued) 
1 Age 
2 Gender (l=Male, 2=Female) 
3 Race (l=White, 2-Other) 
4 Education 
5 Company tenure 
6 Manager tenure 
7 Agreeableness 
8 Conscientiousness 
9 Emotional Stability 
10 Extroversion 
11 Openness 
12 Resource Access 
13 Information Access 
14 Manager Status 
15 Ascribed Identity 
16 Manager Availability 
17 Time Constraint 
18 Organizational Commitment 
19 LMX 
20 Baseline Sales 
21 Actual Sales 
22 Performance (Mgr. Rated) Mean 
43.57 
1.44 
1.15 
3.50 
11.44 
3.12 
3.95 
4.04 
3.95 
3.42 
3.60 
3.81 
4.14 
3.74 
3.94 
3.75 
2.46 
3.84 
3.90 
1.05 
1.03 
3.86 S.D. 
12.24 
0.49 
0.33 
0.91 
7.80 
3.05 
0.48 
0.50 
0.58 
0.52 
0.52 
0.76 11 
0.62 (.82) 
0.61 
0.80 
0.75 
0.62 
0.70 
0.67 
0.63 
0.59 
0.79 Pearson Correlations 
14 IS 16 12 IS 19 
0.46(.87) _ 
0.25 
0.32 
-0.14 
0.46 
0.19 
-0.04 
-0.02 
0.00 0.57 (.91) 
0.49 0.66r(.88) 
-0.17 -0.22 -0.11 *(.78) 
0.34 0.33 0.31 -0.12F(.87) 
0.42 0.57 0.52 -0.18 0.40 "(.90) 
-0.08 -0.09 0.11 0.06 0.09 -0.07 
-0.04 -0.08 0.16 0.04 0.10 -0.04 
-0.09 -0.01 0.11 -0.07 0.03 0.28 20 
0.97 
0.18 21 22 
0.28r(.87) 
Correlations greater than |.13| are significant atp <.05 
Samples range from 150 to 294 
Cronbach's alpha on the diagonal 
173 
Table 9: Level 2/Manager Level Variables Means, Standard Deviations and Pearson Corrieations 
Variable 
1 Organization B 
2 Organization C 
3 Function (Sales=l,Other=2) 
4 Span of Control 
5 Age 
6 Gender (Male=l,Female=2) 
7 Race (White=l, Other=2) 
8 Education 
9 Company Tenure 
10 Transformational Leadership 
11 Advice In-Degree 
12 Friendship In-Degree 
13 LLX-Affect 
14 LLX-Contribution Mean 
0.48 
0.26 
1.44 
12.74 
40.13 
1.32 
1.15 
3.86 
10.57 
3.61 
11.42 
14.97 
3.88 
3.78 S.D. 
0.50 
0.44 
0.50 
5.73 
11.40 
0.44 
0.33 
0.94 
7.13 
0.49 
6.14 
6.68 
0.70 
0.85 1 
-0.57 
-0.43 
-0.09 
-0.24 
-0.33 
-0.39 
0.37 
-0.12 
0.12 
-0.31 
0.21 
0.43 
0.41 2 
-0.10 
-0.42 
0.23 
0.05 
0.05 
-0.21 
0.11 
0.10 
0.54 
0.16 
-0.31 
-0.25 3 
0.09 
0.14 
0.50 
0.36 
-0.29 
0.05 
-0.20 
-0.03 
-0.45 
-0.19 
-0.21 4 
-0.04 
-0.02 
0.02 
0.05 
-0.14 
-0.11 
-0.08 
0.07 
0.11 
0.26 5 
0.04 
0.13 
-0.11 
0.34 
-0.29 
0.05 
-0.14 
-0.23 
-0.26 Pearson 
6 
0.36 
-0.29 
0.14 
0.10 
0.08 
-0.19 
-0.21 
-0.13 1 
-0.11 
0.11 
0.00 
0.06 
-0.19 
-0.11 
-0.12 Corrc 
8 
-0.17 
-0.06 
-0.04 
0.10 
0.11 
0.00 stations 
2 10 
-0.24 096) 
0.06 0.14 
-0.09 0.33 
-0.17 0.02 
-0.27 0.30 11 12 13 14 
0.52 
-0.03 0.30 (.86) 
0.00 0.33 0.64 090) 
Cronbach alphas for aggregated scales are reported on the diagonals 
Correlations greater than |.25| are significant at/? <.05 
Sample size is 83 
Note: Network variables are normalized within organizations and are expressed as percentages of possible ties 
174 
Table 10, Panel A: Stage 1 summary 
Advice In-
Degree 
Friendship In-
Degree 
LLX-Affect 
LLX-
Contribution Intervenin 
Resource 
Access 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns Information 
Access 
-.017+ 
Ns 
.019* 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
.130+ 
.110* Perceived 
Status 
Ns 
.012+ 
.022*** 
.018** 
-.118+ 
Ns 
.127* 
.100* g Variables 
Ascribed 
Identity 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns Availability 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
.139+ 
.128* 
Ns 
Ns Time 
Constraints 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Note: Upper number in each cell represents the full model; the lower number represents the single models 
+p<.\ 
*p<.05 
**p<.0\ 
***;?<.001 
175 
Table 10, Panel B: Stage 2 summary 
Resource 
Access 
Information 
Access 
Perceived 
Status 
Ascribed 
Identity 
Availability 
Time 
Constraints Dependent Variables 
Organizational 
Commitment 
.446*** 
.491*** 
Ns 
417*** 
Ns 
.298*** 
Ns 
.145* 
Ns 
.222** 
Ns 
Ns Task 
Performance 
(archival) 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
.049+ 
Ns 
. 07** 
Ns 
.053* 
Ns 
-.047* 
NS Task 
Performance 
(Mgr Report) 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
.214+ 
.200+ 
Ns 
Ns LMX 
Ns 
.167** 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
.289*** 
.264*** 
4^ i*** 
235*** 
396*** 
Ns 
Ns 
Note: Upper number in each cell represents the full model; the lower number represents the single models 
+p<A 
*p<.05 
**p<.01 
***p<.001 
176 
Table 10, Panel C: Stage 3 Summary (Linear Effects only) 
Advice In 
Friendship in 
LLX-Affect 
LLX-
Contribution Dependent Variables 
Organizational 
Commitment 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
.171* 
Ns 
.191* Task 
Performance 
(archival) 
.008+ 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
.081* 
.051* 
Ns 
Ns Task 
Performance 
(Mgr Report) 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns LMX 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Ns 
Note: Upper number in each cell represents the full model; the lower number represents the single models 
+p<.l 
*p<.05 
**/7<.01 
***;?<.001 
177 
Table 11: Managers' External Relationships Predict Resource Access 
Intercept 
Subordinate Controls 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Manager tenure 
Company tenure 
Agreeableness 
Conscientiousness 
Emotional Stability 
Extroversion 
Openness 
Manager Controls 
Organization B 
Organization C 
Function 
Span of Control 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company Tenure 
Transformational Leadership 
Managers' External Relationships 
Advice In-Degree 
Friendship In-Degree 
LLX-Affect 
LLX-Contribution 
Number of Subordinates 
Number of Managers 
Goodness of Fit: -2 Log Likelihood 
Goodness of Fit: AIC i 
3.671 *** 
-0.004 
-0.148 
-0.068 
0.063 
0.000 
0.004 
0.305 ** 
0.021 
0.200 * 
0.072 
-0.192 + 
0.110 
0.175 
0.041 
0.000 
0.000 
0.089 
-0.093 
0.046 
0.016 
0.268 * 
294 
83 
717 
721 —T" " 
3.629 *** 
-0.004 
-0.152 
-0.077 
0.065 
0.000 
0.004 
0.308 ** 
0.019 
0.203 * 
0.078 
-0.195 + 
0.123 
0.254 
0.060 
0.003 
-0.001 
0.095 
-0.098 
0.055 
0.018 + 
0,266 * 
-0.008 
294 
83 
724 
728 3 
3.670 *** 
-0.004 
-0.149 
-0.066 
0.062 
0.000 
0.004 
0.305 ** 
0.02! 
0.201 * 
0.073 
-0.192 + 
0.112 
0.175 
0.042 
0.000 
0.000 
0.090 
-0.094 
0.047 
0.016 
0.268 * 
0.000 
294 
83 
725 
729 4 
3.686 *** 
-0.004 
-0.151 
-0.068 
0.061 
0.000 
0.004 
0.303 ** 
0.024 
0.199 * 
0.076 
-0.194 + 
0.079 
0.160 
0.035 
0.000 
0.00J 
0.100 
-0.096 
0.050 
0.016 
0.275 * 
0.048 
294 
83 
720 
724 ~? ' " 
3.751 *** 
-0.004 
-0.162 
-0.065 
0.055 
-0.001 
0.003 
0.287 ** 
0.037 
0.201 * 
0,094 
-0.204 + 
-0.013 
0.092 
0.040 
-0.005 
0.002 
0.067 
-0.104 
0.054 
0.017 + 
0.238 + 
0.116 
294 
83 
718 
722 6 
3.627 *** 
-0.004 
-0.150 
-0.077 
0.064 
0.000 
0.003 
0.310 ** 
0.023 
0.204 ** 
0.080 
-0.199 + 
0.104 
0.256 
0.087 
0.002 
-0.001 
0.087 
-0.093 
0.060 
0,019 + 
0.257 * 
-0.012 
0.006 
294 
83 
731 
735 —7 
3.750 *** 
-0.004 
-0.162 
-0.061 
0.055 
-0.001 
0.003 
0.286 ** 
0.036 
0.202 * 
0.096 
-0.204 + 
-0.004 
0.091 
0.047 
-0.005 
0.001 
0.053 
-0.106 
0.052 
0.017 + 
0.225 + 
-0.049 
0.140 
294 
83 
721 
725 ~I 
3.707 *** 
-0.004 
-0.164 
-0.069 
0.057 
-0.001 
0.003 
0.291 ** 
0.035 
0.205 ** 
0.102 
-0.209 + 
0.002 
0.169 
0.075 
-0.003 
0.000 
0.059 
-0.109 
0.063 
0.020 + 
0.223 + 
-0.009 
0.002 
-0.039 
0.132 
294 
83 
734 
738 
+p <.l, "p <.05, ' .1)1, """p <.01 
178 
Table 12: Managers' External Relationships Predict Information Access 
Intercept 
Subordinate Controls 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Manager tenure 
Company tenure 
Agreeableness 
Conscientiousness 
Emotional Stability 
Extroversion 
Openness 
Manager Controls 
Organization B 
Organisation C 
Function 
Span ot Control 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Fducation 
Company Tenure 
Transformational Leadership 
Managers' External Relationships 
Advice In-Degree 
Friendship In-Degree 
LLX-Attect 
LLX-Contribution 
Number of Subordinates 
Number ot Managers 
Goodness oi Fit -2 Log Likelihood 
Goodness otFit AIC r 4 [[-J *** 
-0 003 
-0 073 
-0 139 
-0 051 
0 002 
-0 001 
0 181 * 
0 050 
0 149 * 
-0 036 
0 035 
-0 022 
0 013 
-0 051 
-0 007 
-0 003 
-0 144 
-0 108 
-0 002 
-0 005 
0 303 ** 
294 
83 
599 
603 —3— •" 
4 082 *** 
-0 003 
-0 077 
-0 146 
-0 048 
0 002 
-0 002 
0 184 * 
0 048 
0 152 * 
-0 031 
0 032 
-0 011 
0 079 
-0 035 
-0 005 
-0 004 
-0 139 
-0 111 
0 006 
-0 003 
0 301 ** 
-0 007 
294 
83 
606 
610 ~T — 4 152 *** 
-0 003 
-0 062 
-0 138 
-0 056 
0 003 
-0 002 
0 181 * 
0 061 
0 147 * 
-0 041 
0 032 
-0 075 
-0 054 
-0 016 
-0 010 
-0 003 
-0 167 
-0 092 
-0 001 
-0 006 
0 289 ** 
0011 
294 
83 
604 
608 4 
4 128 *** 
-0 003 
-0 076 
-0 139 
-0 052 
0 002 
-0 001 
0 179 * 
0 052 
0 148 * 
-0 034 
0 033 
-0 045 
0 002 
-0 055 
-0 007 
-0 002 
-0 136 
-0 110 
0 001 
-0 005 
0 308 ** 
0 034 
294 
83 
602 
606 5 
4 195 *** 
-0 003 
-0 086 
-0 139 
-0 058 
0 001 
-0 002 
0 162 * 
0 067 
0 148 * 
-0 014 
0 025 
-0 144 
-0 068 
-0 051 
-0 012 
-0 001 
-0 164 
-0 120 
0 007 
-0 003 
0 274 ** 
0 113 * 
294 
83 
598 
602 6 
4 080 *** 
-0 003 
-0 061 
-0 164 
-0 053 
0 004 
-0 003 
0 190 * 
0 066 
0 153 * 
-0 029 
0 022 
0 090 
0 084 
0 059 
-0 007 
-0 004 
-0 171 
0 087 
0 020 
-0 001 
0 271 ** 
-0 020 * 
0 021 * 
294 
83 
608 
612 7" 
4 195 *** 
-0 002 
-0 087 
-0 134 
-0 059 
0 001 
-0 002 
0 160 * 
0 066 
0 151 * 
-0 012 
0 023 
-0 132 
-0 069 
-0 043 
-0 012 
-0 003 
-0 184 
-0120 
0 004 
0 003 
0 255 * 
-0 066 
0146 * 
294 
83 
601 
605 —r 
4 148 *** 
-0 003 
-0 073 
-0 156 
-0 060 
0 003 
0 004 
0 172 * 
0 078 
0 155 * 
-0 009 
0 013 
-0 164 
0 006 
0 060 
0 012 
-0 004 
0 212 + 
-0 097 
0 020 
0 000 
0 226 * 
0 017 + 
0 019 * 
0 086 
0 130 + 
294 
83 
611 
615 
+p < l,*p < 05, **p < 01, •""p < 01 
179 
Table 13: Managers' External Relationships Predict Perceived Manager Status 
Intercept 
Subordinate Controls 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Manager tenure 
Company tenure 
Agreeableness 
Conscientiousness 
Emotional Stability 
Extroversion 
Openness 
Manager Controls 
Organization B 
Organization C 
Function 
Span of Control 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company Tenure 
Transformational Leadership 
Managers' External Relationships 
Advice In-Degree 
Friendship In-Degree 
LLX-Affect 
LLX-Contribution 
Number of Subordinates 
Number of Managers 
Goodness of Fit: -2 Log Likelihood 
Goodness of Fit: AIC I 
3.662 *** 
-0.002 
0.046 
-0.018 
-0.011 
0.010 
-0.005 
0.159 * 
0.070 
0.150 ** 
-0.018 
-0.045 
0.128 
-0.070 
-0.089 
0.000 
-0.002 
0.060 
-0.039 
0.012 
0.009 
0.667 *** 
294 
83 
525 
529 2 
3.724 *** 
-0.002 
0.052 
-0.001 
-0.016 
0.010 
-0.004 
0.153 * 
0.073 
0.145 * 
-0.027 
-0.040 
0.110 
-0.189 
-0.118 
-0.004 
-0.001 
0.051 
-0.034 
-0.002 
0.005 
0.672 *** 
0.012 + 
294 
83 
530 
534 3 
3.725 *** 
-0.002 
0.065 
-0.012 
-0.017 
0.013 
-0.005 
0.166 * 
0.097 
0.145 ** 
-0.025 
-0.058 
0.033 
-0.196 
-0.023 
-0.006 
0.000 
0.018 
-0.013 
0.008 
0.007 
0.642 *** 
0.021 *** 
294 
83 
522 
526 4 
3.672 *** 
-0.002 
0.043 
-0.019 
-0.012 
0.010 
-0.005 
0.157 * 
0.073 
0.149 ** 
-0.015 
-0.046 
0.107 
-0.081 
-0.094 
-0.001 
-0.002 
0.067 
-0.041 
0.014 
0.010 
0.672 *** 
0.030 
294 
83 
529 
533 5 
3.731 *** 
-0.002 
0.030 
-0.016 
-0.018 
0.010 
-0.006 
0.142 * 
0.087 
0.149 ** 
0.006 
-0.057 
0.022 
-0.142 
-0.089 
-0.004 
-0.001 
0.044 
-0.052 
0.019 
0.011 + 
0.641 *** 
0.100 * 
294 
83 
525 
529 6 
3.718 *** 
-0.002 
0.065 
-0.015 
-0.017 
0.013 
-0.005 
0.166 * 
0.097 
0.146 ** 
-0.024 
-0.060 
0.032 
-0.183 
-0.016 
-0.006 
-0.001 
0.018 
-0.012 
0.011 
0.008 
0.640 *** 
-0.002 
0.022 ** 
294 
83 
529 
533 7 
3.730 *** 
-0.002 
0.031 
-0.013 
-0.018 
0.009 
-0.006 
0.140 * 
0.086 
0.152 ** 
0.007 
-0.058 
0.032 
-0.142 
-0.082 
-0.005 
-0.002 
0.026 
-0.051 
0.017 
0.011 + 
0.624 *** 
-0.058 
0.129 * 
294 
83 
528 
532 8 
3.775 *** 
-0.002 
0.055 
-0.004 
-0.024 
0.011 
-0.006 
0.148 * 
0.109 
0.151 ** 
-0.005 
-0.070 
-0.022 
-0.253 
-0.006 
-0.010 
-0.001 
-0.032 
-0.018 
0.008 
0.008 
0.588 *** 
0.000 
0.022 *** 
-0.118 + 
0.127 * 
294 
83 
532 
536 
+ p <.l, * p <.05,**p <.01,***/> <.01 
180 
Table 14: Managers' External Relationships Predict Ascribed Identity 
Intercept 
Subordinate Controls 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Manager tenure 
Company tenure 
Agreeableness 
Conscientiousness 
Emotional Stability 
Extroversion 
Openness 
Manager Controls 
Organization B 
Organization C 
Function 
Span of Control 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company Tenure 
Transformational Leadership 
Managers' External Relationships 
Advice In-Degree 
Friendship In-Degree 
LLX-Affect 
LLX-Contnbution 
Number of Subordinates 
Number of Managers 
Goodness of Fit: -2 Log Likelihood 
Goodness of Fit: A1C T 
3.729 *** 
0.001 
-0.045 
-0.097 
-0.077 
0.010 
-0.007 
0.169 + 
-0.080 
0.087 
0.160 + 
-0.165 + 
0.255 
0.315 + 
0.068 
0.011 
0.006 ** 
-0.043 
-0.155 
-0.025 
0.013 + 
0.890 *** 
294 
83 
654 
658 "~T ™ 
3.708 *** 
0.001 
-0.048 
-0.104 
-0.076 
0.010 
-0.008 
0.171 + 
-0.081 
0.089 
0.163 + 
-0.167 + 
0.261 
0.355 + 
0.078 
0.012 
0.006 ** 
-0.039 
-0.156 
-0.021 
0.015 + 
0.889 *** 
-0.004 
294 
83 
662 
666 3 
3.740 *** 
0.001 
-0.043 
-0.096 
-0.080 
0.010 
-0.008 
0.170 + 
-0.077 
0.088 
0.159 + 
-0.168 + 
0.238 
0.293 
0.079 
0.010 
0.007 
-0.050 
-0.148 
-0.025 
0.013 
0.886 *** 
0.004 
294 
83 
662 
666 4 
3.712 *** 
0.001 
-0.042 
-0.096 
-0.076 
0.010 
-0.007 
0.172 * 
-0.085 
0.089 
0.155 + 
-0.163 
0.290 + 
0.332 * 
0.075 
0.012 
0.005 
-0.054 
-0.151 
-0.030 
0.013 
0.883 *** 
-0.049 
294 
83 
657 
661 5 
3.687 *** 
0.001 
-0.036 
-0.099 
-0.072 
0.011 
-0.007 
0.181 * 
-0.091 
0.087 
0.144 
-0.157 
0.319 + 
0.359 * 
0.069 
0.013 
0.005 
-0.033 
-0.148 
-0.031 
0.012 
0.907 *** 
-0.061 
294 
83 
657 
661 i 
3.706 *** 
0.001 
-0.043 
-0.107 
-0.078 
0.011 
-0.008 
0.174 * 
-0.075 
0.091 
0.165 + 
-0.175 + 
0.235 + 
0.357 + 
0.112 
0.011 
0.006 
-0.051 
-0.146 
-0.015 
0.015 
0.877 *** 
-0.009 
0.008 
294 
83 
669 
673 "•"•7 
3.688 *** 
0.001 
-0.037 
-0.099 
-0.072 
0.011 
-0.007 
0.181 * 
-0.091 
0.087 
0.145 
-0.158 
0.321 
0.358 
0.071 
0.013 
0.005 ** 
-0.037 
-0.147 
-0.032 
0.012 
0.904 *** 
-0.012 
-0.055 
294 
83 
660 
664 T 3.656 *** 
0.001 
-0.028 
-0.109 
-0.073 
0.012 
-0.008 
0.189 * 
-0.085 
0.092 
0.147 
-0.167 + 
0.308 + 
0.406 * 
0.129 
0.014 
0.004 * 
-0.053 
-0.133 
-0.022 
0.014 
0.886 *** 
-0.010 
0.011 
-0.025 
-0.064 
294 
83 
674 
678 
+ p <.l, "p < M, **p <.(J1, '**p <.01 
181 
Table 15: Managers' External Relationships Predict Manager Availability 
Intercept 
Subordinate Controls 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Manager tenure 
Company tenure 
Agreeableness 
Conscientiousness 
Emotional Stability 
Extroversion 
Openness 
Manager Controls 
Organization B 
Organization C 
Function 
Span of Control 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company Tenure 
Transformational Leadership 
Managers External Relationships 
Advice In-Degree 
Friendship In-Degree 
LLX-Atfect 
LLX-Contnbution 
Number ot Subordinates 
Number of Managers 
Goodness ot Fit -2 Log Likelihood 
Goodness ol F it AFC 1 
3706 *** 
-0 010 * 
-0 270 * 
-0 059 
-0 008 
0 008 
0 012 + 
0 257 ** 
0 116 
0 168 * 
0 094 
-0 120 
0 058 
0 007 
0 099 
-0 001 
0 007 
0 035 
0 010 
0 016 
0 018 * 
0 728 *** 
294 
83 
633 
637 2 
3 667 *** 
-0 010 * 
-0 274 * 
-0 071 
-0 005 
0 008 
0011 + 
0 261 ** 
0114 
0 171 * 
0 101 
-0 123 
0 071 
0 083 
0117 
0 001 
0 006 
0 042 
0 007 
0 024 
0 020 * 
0 724 *** 
-0 008 
294 
83 
639 
643 3 
3 7)4 *** 
-0 010 * 
-0 267 * 
-0 057 
-0 010 
0 008 
0011 + 
0 258 ** 
0 118 
0 168 * 
0 093 
-0 122 
0 047 
-0 009 
0 106 
-0 002 
0 008 
0 029 
0 014 
0 016 
0017 * 
0 725 *** 
0 003 
294 
83 
640 
644 4 
3 752 *** 
-0 010 * 
-0 280 * 
-0 062 
-0 013 
0 008 
0011 + 
0 249 ** 
0 130 
0 161 * 
0 107 
-0 126 
-0 035 
-0 041 
0 080 
-0 003 
0011 * 
0 065 
0 001 
0 029 
0 019 * 
0 748 *** 
0 128 * 
294 
83 
632 
635 5 
3 754 *** 
-0 010 * 
-0 281 * 
-0 057 
-0 014 
0 007 
0011 + 
0 243 ** 
0 128 
0 169 * 
0 112 
-0 129 
-0 015 
-0 043 
0 097 
-0 004 
0 009 
0 025 
0 002 
0 022 
0 019 * 
0 709 *** 
0 070 
294 
83 
635 
639 6 
3 664 *** 
-0 010 * 
-0 268 ** 
-0 075 
-0 008 
0 009 
0010 
0 265 *** 
0 123 
0 173 * 
0 103 
-0 131 
0 041 
0 087 
0 155 
0 000 
0 006 
0 028 
0018 
0 031 
0 021 * 
0711 *** 
-0 013 
0 009 
294 
83 
646 
650 7 
3 754 *** 
-0 010 * 
-0 280 ** 
-0 062 
-0 014 
0 008 
0011 + 
0 248 *** 
0 130 
0 162 * 
0108 
-0 126 
-0 038 
-0 043 
0 081 
-0 003 
0011 * 
0 064 
0 000 
0 029 
0019 * 
0 746 *** 
0 125 
0 005 
294 
83 
636 
639 8 
3 695 *** 
-0 010 * 
-0 283 ** 
-0 082 
-0 010 
0 009 
0 010 
0 256 ** 
0 131 
0 167 * 
0 117 
-0 133 
-0 030 
0 069 
0 120 
0 000 
0 010 + 
0 074 
0 002 
0 044 
0 023 ** 
0 741 *** 
-0 013 
0 003 
0 139 + 
-0 007 
294 
83 
649 
652 
+ p < 1, "p < 05, '"p < 01, """p < 01 
182 
Table 16: Managers' External Relationships Predict Manager Time Constraints 
Intercept 
Subordinate Controls 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Manager tenure 
Company tenure 
Agreeableness 
Conscientiousness 
Emotional Stability 
Extroversion 
Openness 
Manager Controls 
Organization B 
Organization C 
Function 
Span of Control 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company Tenure 
Transformational Leadership 
Managers' External Relationships 
Advice In-Degree 
Friendship In-Degree 
LLX-Affect 
LLX-Contnbution 
Number of Subordinates 
Number of Managers 
Goodness of Fit: -2 Log Likelihood 
Goodness of Fit: AIC T 
2.736 *** 
0.001 
0.003 
0.323 *** 
-0.023 
0.000 
-0.006 
-0.065 
0.140 + 
0.158 * 
-0.064 
-0.209 * 
-0.345 * 
-0.318 + 
-0.172 
-0.011 
0.006 
0.045 
-0.027 
-0.013 
0.000 
-0.183 + 
294 
83 
594 
598 —T" "' " 2 722 *** 
0.001 
0.002 
0.321 *** 
-0.022 
0.000 
-0.006 
-0.063 
0.138 + 
0.159 * 
-0.063 
-0.209 * 
-0.340 * 
-0.292 
-0.166 
-0.010 
0.006 
0.047 
-0.029 
-0,011 
0.000 
-0.184 + 
-0.003 
294 
83 
602 
606 ~1 2.713 *** 
0.000 
-0.003 
0.320 ** 
-0.019 
0.000 
-0.005 
-0.065 
0.133 + 
0.158 * 
-0.062 
-0.205 * 
-0.310 + 
-0.273 
-0.196 
-0.008 
0.006 
0.060 
-0.037 
-0.014 
0.000 
-0.173 + 
-0.008 
294 
83 
601 
605 1 — " 2 749 *** 
0.001 
0.001 
0.322 ** 
-0.024 
0.000 
-0.006 
-0.066 
0.142 + 
0.157 * 
-0.061 
-0.210 * 
-0.373 + 
-0.332 
-0.178 
-0.011 
0.008 
0.054 
-0.030 
-0.010 
0.000 
-0.177 + 
0.041 
294 
83 
597 
601 —T 2.729 *** 
0.001 
0.005 
0.324 ** 
-0.023 
0.000 
-0.006 
-0.063 
0.137 + 
0.158 * 
-0.067 
-0.206 * 
-0.335 + 
-0.312 
-0.172 
-0.010 
0.006 
0.047 
-0.027 
-0.014 
-0.001 
-0.181 + 
-0.008 
294 
83 
598 
602 F ~ 2.724 *** 
0.001 
-0.002 
0.325 ** 
-0.020 
0.000 
-0.005 
-0.066 
0.131 + 
0.157 * 
-0.065 
-0.202 * 
-0.306 + 
-0.294 
-0.209 
-0.009 
0.006 
0.061 
-0.039 
-0.018 
-0.001 
-0.171 + 
0.003 
-0.009 
294 
83 
608 
612 7 
2.729 *** 
0.001 
0.005 
0.321 ** 
-0.022 
0.001 
-0.005 
-0.061 
0.137 + 
0.156 * 
-0.068 
-0.206 * 
-0.346 + 
-0.310 
-0.182 
-0.010 
0.008 
0.069 
-0.027 
-0.011 
-0.001 
-0.162 
0.071 
-0.044 
294 
83 
600 
604 -•" T 
2.718 *** 
0.000 
-0.005 
0.320 ** 
-0.019 
0.000 
-0.005 
-0.064 
0.130 + 
0.155 * 
-0.065 
-0.202 * 
-0.319 + 
-0.278 
-0.227 
-0.008 
0.008 
0.094 
-0.043 
-0.012 
0.000 
-0.143 
0.003 
-0.011 
0.098 
-0.040 
294 
83 
614 
618 
+p <.l, "p <.U5, ** p <.U1, ***p <.IH 
183 
Table 17: Network Benefits and Costs Predict Sales Performance 
Intercept 
Subordinate Controls 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company tenure 
Manager tenure 
Agreeableness 
Conscientiousness 
Emotional Stability 
Extroversion 
Openness 
Baseline Sales 
Manager Controls 
Organization B 
Span of Control 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company Tenure 
Transformational Leadership 
Network Benefits and Costs 
Resource Access 
Information Access 
Perceived Manager Status 
Ascribed Identity 
Manager Availability 
Manager Time Constraint 
Number of Subordinates 
Number of Managers 
Goodness of Fit -2 Log Likelihood 
Goodness of Fit AIC "' T 
1 057 *** 
-0 001 
-0 013 
0 005 
-0 001 
-0 004 * 
-0 003 
0 035 
0 010 
0 038 + 
-0 037 
-0 002 
0 917 *** 
-0 063 
-0 004 
0 005 * 
-0 068 
0 016 
-0 016 
-0 004 
0 050 
150 
42 
-40 
-36 1 
1 057 *** 
-0 001 
-0 013 
0 006 
-0 001 
-0 004 * 
-0 003 
0 036 
0010 
0 039 + 
-0 037 
-0 002 
0 918 *** 
-0 063 
-0 004 
0 005 * 
-0 068 
0 015 
-0 016 
-0 004 
0 050 
-0 001 
150 
42 
-34 
-30 T" 
1 057 *** 
-0 001 
-0 013 
0 005 
-0 001 
-0 004 * 
-0 003 
0 035 
0 010 
0 038 + 
-0 037 
-0 003 
0 917 *** 
-0 063 
-0 004 
0 005 * 
-0 067 
0 017 
-0 016 
-0 004 
0 049 
0 002 
150 
42 
-34 
-30 i 1 059 *** 
-0 001 
-0 030 
-0 007 
-0 004 
-0 004 * 
-0 005 
0 038 
0 005 
0 036 
-0 033 
-0 012 
0 912 *** 
-0 070 
-0 005 
0 005 ** 
-0 075 
0 029 
-0 016 
-0 004 
0 026 
0 031 
150 
42 
-55 
-51 • 3 " ' 
1 062 *** 
-0 002 
-0 020 
-0 014 
-0 002 
-0 005 * 
-0 004 
0 047 + 
0 006 
0 047 * 
-0 026 
-0 015 
0 911 *** 
-0 075 
-0 004 
0 005 ** 
-0 081 + 
0 028 
-0 021 
-0 004 
0 069 
-0 027 
150 
42 
-55 
-51 
+ p < l,*p < 05, "p < 01, rp < 01 
184 
Table 17: Network Benefits and Costs Predict Sales Performance (continued) 
Intercept 
Subordinate Controls 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company tenure 
Manager tenure 
Agreeableness 
Conscientiousness 
Emotional Stability 
Extroversion 
Openness 
Baseline Sales 
Manager Controls 
Organization B 
Span of Control 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company Tenure 
Transformational Leadership 
Network Benefits and Costs 
Resource Access 
Intormation Access 
Perceived Manager Status 
Ascribed Identity 
Manager Availability 
Manager Time Constraint 
Number of Subordinates 
Number of Managers 
Goodness ot Fit -2 Log Likelihood 
Goodness of Fit AIC 6 
1 059 *** 
-0 001 
-0 022 
0 015 
-0 003 
-0 005 * 
-0 004 
0 038 
0 008 
0 040 
-0 037 + 
-0 010 
0 911 *** 
-0 064 
-0 004 
0 005 ** 
-0 072 
0 033 
-0 016 
-0 004 
0 032 
0 017 
150 
42 
-54 
-50 T 
1 063 *** 
-0 001 
-0 027 
0 048 
-0 003 
-0 005 ** 
-0 004 
0 043 
0 012 
0 052 * 
-0 037 
-0 017 
n Q19 *** 
-0 071 
-0 005 
0 005 ** 
-0 083 + 
0 014 
-0 016 
-0 004 
0 039 
-0 036 
150 
42 
-56 
-52 "1 1 058 *** 
-0 001 
-0 034 
0 000 
-0 003 
-0 004 * 
-0 005 
0 043 
0 006 
0 039 + 
-0 034 
-0 010 
0913 *** 
-0 069 
-0 005 
0 005 * 
-0 079 
0 022 
-0 017 
-0 004 
0 027 
-0 008 
-0 007 
0 035 
150 
42 
-45 
-41 i 1 057 *** 
-0 001 
-0 019 
0 031 
-0 006 
-0 006 ** 
-0 004 
0 035 
0 006 
0 049 * 
-0 036 
-0 024 
0 908 *** 
-0 048 
-0 003 
0 005 ** 
-0 080 + 
0 026 
-0 014 
-0 004 
0 042 
-0 056 * 
0 053 * 
-0 049 * 
150 
42 
-51 
-47 10 
1051 *** 
-0 001 
-0 032 
0 003 
-0 007 
-0 005 ** 
-0 004 
0 037 
0 001 
0 045 * 
-0 033 
-0 023 
0 905 *** 
-0 043 
-0 004 
0 005 ** 
-0 086 * 
0011 
-0 014 
-0 004 
0 033 
-0 010 
-0 019 
0 049 + 
-0 071 ** 
0 053 * 
-0 047 * 
150 
42 
-38 
-34 
+ p < l,"p < 05, "p < 01, "*/? < 01 
185 
Table 18: Network Benefits and Costs Predict Subordinate Performance 
Manager Assessed 
Intercept 
Subordinate Controls 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company tenure 
Manager tenure 
Agreeableness 
Conscientiousness 
Emotional Stability 
Extroversion 
Openness 
Manager Controls 
Organization B 
Organization C 
Function 
Span of Control 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company Tenure 
Transformational Leadership 
Network Benefits and Costs 
Resource Access 
Information Access 
Manager Status 
Ascribed Identity 
Manager Availability 
Manager Time Constraint 
Number of Subordinates 
Number of Managers 
Goodness of Fit -2 Log Likelihood 
Goodness of Fit AIC 1 
3 976 *** 
-0 001 
-0 023 
-0 062 
0 070 
0 011 
-0 034 
-0 064 
0 139 
-0 092 
-0 031 
-0 057 
-0 067 
-0 292 
0 101 
0 001 
-0 004 
0 107 
-0 422 
0 000 
0 005 
0114 
186 
52 
487 
491 5 ' ' " 
3 975 *** 
-0 001 
-0 025 
-0 062 
0 071 
0011 
-0 034 
-0 062 
0 139 
-0 091 
-0 030 
-0 057 
-0 065 
-0 291 
0 103 
0 001 
-0 004 
0 106 
-0 421 
0 000 
0 005 
0 116 
-0 007 
186 
52 
490 
494 T— " 
3 996 *** 
-0 001 
-0 013 
-0 034 
0 073 
0011 
-0 035 
-0 081 
0 146 
-0 109 
-0 020 
-0 072 
-0 085 
-0 329 
0 100 
0 000 
-0 003 
0 123 
-0 464 
0 000 
0 005 
0 094 
0 095 
186 
52 
489 
493 —i -
3 972 *** 
-0 001 
-0 041 
-0 064 
0 068 
0 010 
-0 034 
-0 057 
0 137 
-0 096 
-0 018 
-0 068 
-0 043 
-0 286 
0 119 
0 002 
-0 002 
0 108 
-0 407 
-0 002 
0 003 
0 135 
0 003 
186 
52 
490 
494 2 
4 003 
-0 002 
-0 044 
-0 060 
0 081 
0011 
-0 036 
-0 068 
0 156 
-0 110 
-0 025 
-0 060 
-0 071 
-0 341 
0 120 
0 002 
-0 001 
0 123 
-0 387 
0 002 
0 001 
0 070 
0 105 
186 
52 
489 
493 
186 
Table 18: Network Benefits and Costs Predict Subordinate Performance 
Manager Assessed (continued) 
Intercept 
Subordinate Controls 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company tenure 
Manager tenure 
Agreeableness 
Conscientiousness 
Emotional Stability 
Extroversion 
Openness 
Manager Controls 
Organization B 
Organization C 
Function 
Span of Control 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company Tenure 
Transtormational Leadership 
Network Benefits and Costs 
Resource Access 
Information Access 
Manager Status 
Ascribed Identity 
Manager Availability 
Manager Time Constraint 
Number of Subordinates 
Number of Managers 
Goodness of Fit -2 Log Likelihood 
Goodness of Fit AIC 6 
3 983 *** 
0 000 
0 012 
-0 076 
0 069 
0 007 
-0 039 
-0 099 
0 116 
-0 139 
-0 045 
-0 044 
-0 031 
-0 291 
0 084 
0 006 
0 001 
0 155 
-0 446 
0 004 
-0 002 
0 016 
0 200 + 
186 
52 
486 
490 7 
3 991 *** 
-0 001 
-0 041 
-0 048 
0 071 
0 010 
-0 034 
-0 057 
0 139 
-0 092 
-0 022 
-0 075 
-0 071 
-0315 
0 113 
0 001 
-0 002 
0 105 
-0 426 
-0 003 
0 003 
0 130 
-0 033 
186 
52 
490 
494 8 
3 998 *** 
0 000 
-0 044 
-0 027 
0 076 
0 010 
-0 035 
-0 066 
0 148 
-0 114 
0 012 
-0 099 
-0 059 
-0 342 
0 140 
-0 001 
-0 001 
0 136 
-0 474 
-0 003 
0 005 
0 134 
-0 080 
0 162 
-0 018 
186 
52 
493 
497 9 
4 013 *** 
0 000 
0 009 
-0 056 
0 076 
0 008 
-0 039 
-0 101 
0 124 
-0 136 
-0 050 
-0 053 
-0 074 
-0 340 
0 080 
0 004 
0 002 
0 152 
-0 463 
0 004 
-0 001 
-0 001 
0 023 
0 192 
-0 042 
186 
52 
491 
495 M 
4 023 *** 
0 001 
0011 
-0 044 
0 086 
0 007 
-0 037 
-0 096 
0 136 
-0 140 
-0 028 
-0 064 
-0 064 
-0 381 
0 098 
0 000 
0 003 
0 187 
-0 518 
0 004 
0 000 
0 023 
-0 110 
0 126 
-0 095 
0 047 
0 214 + 
-0 016 
186 
52 
497 
501 
+ p < l,*p < 05, ** p < 01, *** p < 01 
187 
Table 19: Network Benefits and Costs Predict Subordinate Organizational Commmitment 
Intercept 
Subordinate Controls 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company tenure 
Manager tenure 
Agreeableness 
Conscientiousness 
Emotional Stability 
Extroversion 
Openness 
Manager Controls 
Organization B 
Organization C 
Function 
Span of Control 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company Tenure 
Transformational Leadership 
Network Benefits and Costs 
Resource Access 
Information Access 
Manager Status 
Ascribed Identity 
Manager Availability 
Manager lime Constraint 1 
3 656 *** 
-0 001 
-0178 
-0 306 + 
-0 110 + 
0 001 
0 021 
0 270 ** 
-0 088 
0 023 
0118 
-0 102 
0317 
0 050 
0 203 
-0 014 
0 004 
-0146 
-0 088 
0 032 
-0 012 
0 320 ** —1 3 716*** 
0 000 
-0 061 
-0 262 + 
-0 130 ** 
0 000 
0011 
0 092 
-0 096 
-0 088 
0 102 
-0 058 
0 278 
-0 047 
0 142 
-0 012 
0 002 
-0167 
0 009 
0 015 
-0 015 + 
0 197 + 
0 491 *** 3 
3 674 *** 
0 002 
-0116 
-0 244 
-0 075 
0 000 
0013 
0182 + 
-0109 
-0 032 
0130 
-0115 
0316 
0010 
0205 
-0 014 
0 003 
-0 099 
0 024 
0012 
-0 012 
0 188 + 
0 417 *** "1 3 658 *** 
0.005 
-0.183 
-0.166 
-0.140 * 
-0 004 
0.012 
0 232 * 
-0.047 
-0.053 
0.086 
-0 077 
0 306 
0 074 
0.188 
-0.013 
-0 006 
-0.257 + 
-0.080 
0.013 
-0 006 
0114 
0 298 ** 5 
3 631 *** 
0.004 
-0.148 
-0.138 
-0 142 * 
-0.004 
0 014 
0 254 * 
-0 051 
-0.030 
0.064 
-0 056 
0 366 + 
0 094 
0.187 
-0 013 
-0.007 
-0 261 + 
-0.084 
0.001 
-0 010 
0.176 
0146 * 
Number of Subordinates 
Number of Managers 
Goodness of Fit -2 Log Likelihood 
Goodness of Fit AIC 225 
69 
516 
520 225 
69 
445 
449 225 
69 
489 
493 225 
69 
501 
505 225 
69 
510 
514 
+p < !.*/>< 05, **p < 01,***/; < 01 
188 
Table 19: Network Benefits and Costs Predict Subordinate Organizational Commmitment 
(continued) 
Intercept 
Subordinate Controls 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company tenure 
Manager tenure 
Agreeableness 
Conscientiousness 
Emotional Stability 
Extroversion 
Openness 
Manager Controls 
Organization B 
Organization C 
Function 
Span ot Control 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company Tenure 
Transtormational Leadership 
Network Benefits and Costs 
Resource Access 
Information Access 
Manager Status 
Ascribed Identity 
Manager Availability 
Manager Time Constraint 
Number ot Subordinates 
Number of Managers 
Goodness ot Fit -2 Log Likelihood 
Goodness of Fit AIC 6 
3 621*" 
0 006 
-0 083 
-0170 
-0 139 * 
-0 007 
0 014 
0 240 * 
-0 089 
-0 058 
0 077 
-0 049 
0 382 + 
0126 
0173 
-0 012 
0 008 
-0 268 * 
-0117 
-0 015 
0 011 
0117 
0 222 ** 
225 
69 
504 
508 7 
3 599 *** 
0 003 
-0157 
-0 194 
-0 156 * 
-0 004 
0 020 
0 291 *** 
-0 091 
-0 022 
0120 
-0 074 
0 406 + 
0136 
0190 
-0 012 
-0 006 
-0 256 
-0 081 + 
-0 004 
-0 008 
0 303 * 
0 066 
225 
69 
513 
517 8 
3 708 *** 
0 004 
0 042 
-0157 
-0 164 *** 
-0 005 
0 008 
0100 
-0 099 
-0 116 + 
0 083 
-0 040 
0 308 + 
-0 044 
0111 
0 012 
0 002 
-0 226 ** 
-0 041 
-0 029 
-0 014 
0167 
0 450 *** 
0 086 
0 005 
225 
69 
442 
446 9 
3 618 *** 
0 006 
-0 093 
-0167 
-0 136 * 
-0 006 
0 013 
0 238 * 
-0 084 
0 067 
0 072 
-0 033 
0 391 + 
0126 
0184 
-0 012 
-0 008 
-0 265 -r 
-0113 
-0 014 
-0 011 
0100 
0 058 
0189 * 
0 040 
225 
69 
510 
514 M 
3 707 *** 
0 004 
-0 030 
-0143 
-0 155 ** 
-0 005 
0 005 
0 090 
-0 094 
-0 129 + 
0 063 
-0 014 
0 320 + 
-0 046 
0120 
-0 012 
-0 003 
-0 224 * 
-0 039 
-0 031 
-0 015 + 
0116 
0 446 *** 
0 102 
-0 046 
0 099 
0 001 
0 030 
225 
69 
450 
454 
up < \,*p< 05, **p < 01, ***p < 01 
189 
Table 20: Network Benefits and Costs Predict LMX 
Intercept 
Subordinate Controls 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company tenure 
Manager tenure 
Agreeableness 
Conscientiousness 
Emotional Stability 
Extroversion 
Openness 
Manager Controls 
Organization B 
Organization C 
Function 
Span of Control 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company Tenure 
Transformational Leadership 
Network Benefits and Costs 
Resource Access 
Information Access 
Manager Status 
Ascribed Identity 
Manager Availability 
Manager lime Constraint 
Number of Subordinates 
Number of Managers 
Goodness of Fit -2 Log Likelihood 
Goodness of Fit AIC 
rp < l,*p < 0},**/7 < 01,*"/) < 01 f—' 
4 054 *** 
-0 005 
-0 053 
-0184 
-0 031 
-0 004 
0 007 
0 232 * 
-0 238 * 
0161 * 
0186 + 
-0 080 
-0 168 
-0 172 
0010 
-0 002 
0 005 
0 063 
0 080 
-0014 
-0 006 
0 555 *** 
225 
69 
479 
483 "1 4 095 *** 
-0 005 
-0 026 
-0 195 
-0 039 
-0 005 
0 008 
0 182 + 
-0 250 ** 
0119 
0 177 + 
-0 065 
-0 204 
-0 240 
-0 014 
-0 003 
0 007 
0 075 
0 100 
-0 028 
-0 009 
0 517 *** 
0 167 ** 
225 
69 
474 
478 T" 4 065 *** 
-0 004 
-0 043 
-0182 
-0 020 
-0 004 
0 006 
0 212 * 
-0 244 * 
0 147 + 
0 191 * 
-0 085 
-0178 
-0192 
0 017 
-0 002 
0 006 
0 081 
0 103 
-0 015 
-0 006 
0 526 *** 
0101 
225 
69 
480 
484 4 
4 102 *** 
-0 003 
-0 087 
-0 193 
-0 014 
-0 004 
0 003 
0 195 * 
-0 214 * 
0111 
0 163 + 
-0 071 
-0 246 
-0 219 
0 022 
-0 003 
0 006 
0 070 
0 092 
-0 004 
-0 004 
0 374 *** 
0 289 *** 
225 
69 
469 
473 5 
4 101 *** 
-0 003 
-0 027 
-0 086 
0012 
-0 005 
-0 008 
0 157 + 
-0 171 * 
0100 
0 056 
0017 
-0 206 
-0 230 
0 029 
-0 004 
0 002 
0 061 
0 080 
-0 014 
-0 010 
0 207 + 
0411 *** 
225 
69 
439 
443 
190 
Table 20: Network Benefits and Costs Predict LMX (continued) 
Intercept 
Subordinate Controls 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company tenure 
Manager tenure 
Agreeableness 
Conscientiousness 
Emotional Stability 
Extroversion 
Openness 
Manager Controls 
Organization B 
Organization C 
Function 
Span of Control 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company Tenure 
Transformational Leadership 
Network Benefits and Costs 
Resource Access 
Information Access 
Manager Status 
Ascribed Identity 
Manager Availability 
Manager lime Constraint 
Number of Subordinates 
Number ot Managers 
Goodness of Fit -2 Log Likelihood 
Goodness of Fit AIC 
+ p < I," p < U5 "" p < 01,'" p < 01 6 
4 080 *** 
0 000 
0 051 
-0 205 
-0 002 
-0 010 + 
0 005 
0 176 * 
-0 265 *** 
0 059 
0 130 
-0 017 
-0 178 
-0 175 
0 009 
-0 002 
0 004 
0 057 
0 052 
-0 050 
-0 012 
0 228 + 
0 396 *** 
225 
69 
443 
447 7 '•" -
4 071 *** 
-0 005 
-0 048 
-0 161 
-0 031 
-0 005 
0 006 
0 222 * 
-0 223 * 
0 177 * 
0 170 + 
-0095 
-0 196 
-0191 
-0 004 
-0 003 
0 005 
0 058 
0 078 
-0 010 
-0 006 
0 547 *** 
-0 075 
225 
69 
481 
485 —T" 
4120 *** 
-0 004 
-0 067 
-0 202 
-0 028 
-0 005 
0 005 
0 173 + 
-0 222 * 
0 095 
0153 + 
-0 058 
-0 256 
-0 253 
-0 003 
-0 003 
0 007 
0 067 
0 094 
-0 016 
-0 007 
0 389 ** 
0129 + 
-0059 
0 247 ** 
225 
69 
472 
476 i 4 116*** 
0 000 
0 046 
-0 101 
0018 
-0 008 
-0 007 
0 132 
-0 195 * 
0 072 
0 043 
0017 
-0 224 
-0 225 
0 005 
-0 004 
0 002 
0 051 
0 052 
-0 033 
-0 013 
0 095 
0 274 *** 
0 266 *** 
-0 078 
225 
69 
431 
435 w 4 139 *** 
-0 001 
0 043 
-0 108 
0 010 
-0 008 
-0 007 
0 113 
-0 193 * 
0 057 
0 036 
0 021 
-0 248 
-0 261 
-0 011 
-0 005 
0 002 
0 053 
0 062 
-0 039 
-0 014 
0 092 
0 091 
-0 032 
0 039 
0 264 *** 
0 235 *** 
-0 083 
225 
69 
438 
442 
191 
Table 21: Managers' External Relationships Predict Subordinate Sales Performance 
Intercept 
Subordinate Controls 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company tenure 
Manager tenure 
Agreeableness 
Conscientiousness 
Emotional Stability 
Extroversion 
Openness 
Baseline Sales 
Manager Controls 
Organization B 
Span of Control 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company Tenure 
Transtormational Leadership 
Managers' External Relationships 
Advice In Degree 
Advice in Degree Squared 
Fnendship In Degree 
Fnendship in Degree Squared 
LMX-Aftect 
LMX-Affect-Squared 
LMX-Contnbution 
LMX-Contnbution-Squared 
Number of Subordinates 
Number of Managers 
-2 Log Likelihood 
AIC 1 
1 046 *** 
-0 001 
-0 010 
-0 046 
-0 006 
-0 004 + 
0 001 
0 036 
-0003 
0 041 + 
-0 028 
-0 001 
0 916 *** 
-0 046 
-0 004 
0 004 + 
-0 040 
0 040 
-0 008 
-0 004 
0 047 
150 
42 
-36 
-32 2 
1 070 *** 
-0 001 
-0 014 
-0 049 
-0 007 
-0 003 
0 000 
0 033 
0 001 
0 036 + 
-0 025 
-0 007 
0 907 *** 
-0 107 + 
-0 007 
0 005 * 
-0 049 
0 039 
-0 014 
-0 006 
0 037 
0 005 
150 
42 
-29 
-25 3 
1 061 *** 
-0 001 
-0 015 
-0 048 
-0 007 
-0 003 
0 000 
0 032 
0 002 
0 035 
-0 024 
-0 007 
0 906 *** 
-0 101 
-0 006 
0 005 * 
-0 045 
0 043 
-0 015 
-0 005 
0 038 
0 004 
0 000 
150 
42 
-15 
-11 4 
1 047 *** 
-0 001 
-0 010 
-0 050 
-0 006 
-0 004 -r 
0 001 
0 036 
-0 002 
0 041 + 
-0 027 
-0 002 
0 915 *** 
-0 050 
-0 004 
0 004 + 
-0 040 
0 040 
-0 008 
-0 004 
0 042 
0 001 
150 
42 
-26 
-22 5 
1 031 *** 
-0 001 
-0 012 
-0 046 
-0 006 
-0 004 + 
0 001 
0 036 
-0 001 
0 041 + 
-0 024 
-0 005 
0 916 *** 
-0 044 
-0 003 
0 004 
-0 034 
0 049 
-0 009 
-0 005 
0 046 
-0 001 
0 000 
150 
42 
-13 
-9 
Lp < l,*p< 05, **p < 01, < 01 
192 
Table 21: Managers' External Relationships Predict Subordinate Sales (2 of 3) 
Intercept 
Subordinate Controls 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company tenure 
Manager tenure 
Agreeableness 
Conscientiousness 
Emotional Stability 
Extroversion 
Openness 
Baseline Sales 
Manager Controls 
Organization B 
Span of Control 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company Tenure 
Transformational Leadership 
Managers' External Relationships 
Advice In Degree 
Advice in Degree Squared 
Friendship In Degree 
Friendship in Degree Squared 
LMX Affect 
LMX Affect Squared 
LMX Contribution 
LMX Contribution Squared 
Number of Subordinates 
Number of Managers 
-2 Log Likelihood 
AIC 6 
1 039 *** 
-0 001 
-0 007 
-0 066 
-0 008 
-0 004 + 
0 002 
0 036 
0 002 
0 041 + 
-0 023 
-0 003 
0 914 *** 
-0 025 
-0 003 
0 005 * 
-0 033 
0 036 
-0 006 
-0 004 
0 046 
0 051 * 
150 
42 
-36 
-33 - .j 
1 039 *** 
-0 001 
-0 008 
-0 065 
-0 008 
-0 004 + 
0 002 
0 037 
0 002 
0 041 + 
-0 023 
-0 002 
0 915 *** 
-0 026 
-0 003 
0 005 * 
-0 033 
0 036 
-0 006 
-0 004 
0 045 
0 051 * 
0 001 
150 
42 
-30 
-26 , „g„ 
1 040 *** 
-0 001 
-0 006 
-0 056 
-0 008 
-0 004 + 
0 001 
0 034 
0 001 
0 042 * 
-0 024 
-0 002 
0 914 *** 
-0 027 
-0 005 
0 005 + 
-0 031 
0 026 
-0 007 
-0 004 
0 039 
0 037 
150 
42 
-33 
-29 -1 •" 
1 044 *** 
-0 001 
-0 006 
-0 058 
-0 009 
-0 004 + 
0 000 
0 032 
0 002 
0 040 + 
-0 023 
-0 001 
0 915 *** 
-0 023 
-0 004 
0 005 + 
-0 033 
0 023 
-0 006 
-0 004 
0 044 
0 034 
0 013 
150 
42 
-27 
-23 M 1 090 *** 
0 001 
0 017 
0 039 
-0 004 
0 004 * 
0 001 
0 034 
0 016 
0 034 
0 031 
0 012 
0 910 *** 
0 153 + 
-0 009 
0 007 ** 
0 044 
0 114 
0 027 
0 007 + 
0 037 
0 005 
0 000 
150 
42 
-22 
18 
+ p < l,*p < 05,"/? < 01, ' p < 01 
193 
Table 21: Managers' External Relationships Predict Subordinate Sales (3 of 3) 
Intercept 
Subordinate Controls 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company tenure 
Manager tenure 
Agreeableness 
Conscientiousness 
Emotional Stability 
Extroversion 
Openness 
Baseline Sales 
Manager Controls 
Organization B 
Span of Control 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company Tenure 
Transformational Leadership 
Managers' External Relationships 
Advice In Degree 
Advice in Degree Squared 
Friendship In Degree 
Friendship in Degree Squared 
LMX-Affect 
LMX-Affect-Squared 
LMX-Contribution 
LMX-Contribution-Squared 
Number of Subordinates 
Number of Managers 
-2 Log Likelihood 
AIC il 1.081 *** 
-0.001 
-0.018 
-0.037 
-0.003 
-0.005 * 
-0.001 
0.035 
0.016 
0.035 
-0.030 
-0.013 
0.912 *** 
-0.148 + 
-0.008 
0.006 * 
-0.041 
0.120 
-0.027 
-0.007 + 
0.040 
0.006 
0.000 
-0.001 
0.000 
150 
42 
6 
10 15 ' • 
1.055 *** 
-0.001 
-0.011 
-0.054 
-0.005 
-0.005 * 
0.001 
0.036 
0.014 
0.039 + 
-0.028 
-0.009 
0.917 *** 
-0.061 
-0.003 
0.007 ** 
-0.028 
0.110 
-0.015 
-0.005 
0.054 
0.065 * 
-0.010 
150 
42 
-35 
-31 n 1.053 *** 
-0.001 
-0.006 
-0.055 
-0.004 
-0.005 * 
0.001 
0.035 
0.015 
0.039 + 
-0.025 
-0.008 
0.919 *** 
-0.053 
-0.002 
0.007 ** 
-0.032 
0.106 
-0.014 
-0.005 
0.052 
0.062 * 
0.017 
-0.006 
-0.022 
150 
42 
-24 
-21 u •'"•-
1.083 *** 
0.000 
-0.021 
-0.030 
-0.007 
-0.004 * 
0.000 
0.036 
0.019 
0.029 
-0.022 
-0.012 
0.911 *** 
-0.124 
-0.005 
0.008 ** 
-0.027 
0.085 
-0.026 
-0.006 + 
0.062 + 
0.008 + 
-0.004 
0.081 * 
-0.014 
150 
42 
-21 
-19 15 
1.083 *** 
0.000 
-0.015 
-0.024 
-0.006 
-0.005 * 
0.000 
0.038 
0.017 
0.032 
-0.021 
-0.011 
0.914 *** 
-0.127 
-0.004 
0.008 ** 
-0.033 
0.079 
-0.028 
-0.007 
0.057 
0.009 + 
0.000 
-0.006 
0.000 
0.087 * 
0.025 
-0.009 
-0.010 
150 
42 
17 
20 
> < .1, * p < .05, ""p < .01, •"""p < .01 
194 
Table 22: Managers' External Relationships Predict Subordinate Performance (Manager Assessed) 
Intercept 
Subordinate Controls 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company tenure 
Manager tenure 
Agreeableness 
Conscientiousness 
Emotional Stability 
Extroversion 
Openness 
Manager Controls 
Organization B 
Organization C 
Function 
Span of Control 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company Tenure 
Transformational Leadership 
Managers' External Relationships 
Advice In Degree 
Advice in Degree Squared 
Fnendship In Degree 
Fnendship in Degree Squared 
LMX-Aftect 
LMX-Aftect-Squared 
LMX-Contnbution 
LMX-Contnbution-Squared 
Number ot Subordinates 
Number ot Managers 
-2 Log Likelihood 
AIC i 
3 691 *** 
0 002 
0 043 
-0190 
0 068 
-0 003 
-0 015 
-0 002 
-0 017 
-0 009 
0 099 
-0111 
-0100 
-0 084 
-0 022 
0 009 
-0 001 
0179 
-0 362 
0 025 
0012 
0 003 
186 
52 
574 
578 1 
3 854 *** 
0 002 
0 051 
-0 165 
0 060 
-0 002 
-0 016 
-0 025 
-0 016 
-0 010 
0 097 
-0112 
-0 167 
-0 373 
-0 060 
0 001 
0 000 
0 141 
-0 387 
0 008 
0 012 
-0 012 
0 024 
186 
52 
577 
581 " r • 3 888 *** 
0 002 
0 056 
-0 164 
0 061 
-0 002 
-0 016 
-0 023 
-0 018 
-0 007 
0 098 
-0116 
-0 153 
-0 382 
-0 046 
0 000 
0 000 
0126 
-0 368 
0 009 
0 012 
-0 006 
0 026 
-0 001 
186 
52 
587 
591 4 
3 763 *** 
0 002 
0 057 
-0 176 
0 061 
-0 003 
-0 015 
-0 007 
-0 007 
-0 008 
0 096 
-0 125 
-0 184 
-0 229 
0 023 
0 001 
0 000 
0 160 
-0 339 
0018 
0 012 
-0 046 
0018 
186 
52 
579 
583 5 
3 645 *** 
0 001 
0 046 
-0180 
0 063 
-0 003 
-0 015 
-0 005 
-0 003 
-0 010 
0 096 
-0 126 
-0 115 
-0 123 
0 037 
0 005 
-0 001 
0 170 
-0 338 
0 016 
0013 
-0 056 
0011 
0 001 
186 
52 
589 
593 
1, "p < 05, "p < Ul, r"p < 01 
195 
Table 22: Managers' External Relationships Predict Subordinate Performance 
(Manager Assessed) (2 of 3) 
T 
Intercept 3 741 
Subordinate Controls 
Age 0 002 
Gender 0 043 
Race -0 191 
Education 0 068 
Company tenure -0 003 
Manager tenure -0016 
Agreeableness 0 000 
Conscientiousness -0 006 
Emotional Stability -0013 
Extroversion 0 099 
Openness -0 114 
Manager Controls 
Organization B -0 196 
Organization C -0 107 
Function -0 035 
Span of Control 0 006 
Age 0 001 
Gender 0 215 
Race -0 370 
Education 0 028 
Company Tenure 0 012 
Transformational Leadership 0 008 
Managers' External Relationships 
Advice In Degree 
Advice in Degree Squared 
Friendship In Degree 
Friendship in Degree Squared 
LMX-Affect 
LMX-Affect-Squared 
LMX-Contnbution 
LMX-Contribution-Squared 
Number of Subordinates 
Number of Managers 
-2 Log Likelihood 
AIC 
+p < 1, * p < 05, ** p < 01, ""'p < 01 3 729 *** 
0 002 
0 047 
-0 188 
0 068 
-0 003 
-0 015 
0 004 
-0 008 
-0 011 
0 099 
-0 115 
-0 212 
-0 126 
-0 048 
0 006 
0 001 
0 225 
-0 378 
0 028 
0 012 
-0 004 3 681 
0 002 
0 043 
-0190 
0 067 
-0 003 
-0 015 
-0 001 
-0 017 
-0 010 
0 098 
-0 111 
-0 086 
-0 074 
-0 018 
0 010 
-0 001 
0 179 
-0 364 
0 026 
0 012 
0 006 1— 
3 731 
0 002 
0 035 
-0 195 
0 066 
-0 003 
-0 015 
-0 009 
-0 017 
-0 009 
0 109 
-0 110 
-0 098 
-0 104 
-0 019 
0011 
0 000 
0 196 
-0 356 
0 031 
0012 
0 012 in 
3 855 *** 
0 002 
0 057 
-0 163 
0 059 
-0 003 
-0 016 
-0 023 
-0 012 
-0 010 
0 097 
-0 119 
-0 194 
-0 382 
-0 029 
-0 001 
0 000 
0 141 
-0 371 
0 008 
0 013 
-0 033 
0 019 
0 009 
150 
186 
52 
574 
578 0 158 
0 047 
186 
52 
577 
581 -0 013 
186 
52 
577 
581 -0 053 
-0 056 
186 
52 
579 
583 186 
52 
583 
587 
196 
Table 22: Managers' External Relationships Predict Subordinate Performance 
(Manager Assessed) (3 of 3) 
Intercept 
Subordinate Controls 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company tenure 
Manager tenure 
Agreeableness 
Conscientiousness 
Emotional Stability 
Extroversion 
Openness 
Manager Controls 
Organization B 
Organization C 
Function 
Span of Control 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company Tenure 
Transformational Leadership 
Managers' External Relationships 
Advice In Degree 
Advice in Degree Squared 
Friendship In Degree 
Friendship m Degree Squared 
LMX-Affect 
LMX-Affect-Squared 
LMX-Contribution 
LMX-Contnbution-Squared 
Number of Subordinates 
Number of Managers 
-2 Log Likelihood 
AIC li 3 754 *** 
0 002 
0 048 
-0 168 
0 063 
-0 003 
-0 015 
-0 020 
-0 012 
-0 007 
0 097 
-0 123 
-0 065 
-0 257 
-0 001 
0 002 
-0 001 
0 125 
-0 348 
0 006 
0 013 
-0 027 
0 025 
-0 001 
-0 005 
0 002 
186 
52 
603 
607 n 
3 645 *** 
0 001 
0 055 
-0 197 
0 073 
-0 002 
-0 016 
0011 
-0 014 
-0 016 
0 081 
-0 103 
-0 076 
-0 006 
-0 012 
0016 
0 000 
0219 
-0 359 
0 020 
0 012 
0 091 
0 268 + 
-0 176 
186 
52 
575 
579 ii 3 722 *** 
0 001 
0 047 
-0 204 
0 072 
-0 002 
-0 015 
0 001 
-0 018 
-0 010 
0 102 
-0 104 
-0 137 
-0 101 
-0 036 
0 016 
0 001 
0 267 
-0 359 
0 030 
0011 
0 080 
0 283 + 
0 079 
-0 238 
-0 101 
186 
52 
578 
582 u 
3 784 *** 
0 002 
0 064 
-0 174 
0 066 
-0 002 
-0 017 
-0 011 
-0 015 
-0 017 
0 081 
-0 106 
-0 132 
-0 263 
-0 034 
0 009 
0 001 
0 180 
-0 376 
0 005 
0 012 
0 066 
0 019 
0 003 
0 234 
-0 167 
186 
52 
584 
588 M 3 806 *** 
0 002 
0 048 
-0 186 
0 067 
-0 002 
-0 016 
-0 024 
-0 019 
-0 005 
0 108 
-0 114 
-0 083 
-0 279 
-0 021 
0011 
0 001 
0 206 
-0 340 
0 015 
0 012 
0 054 
0 025 
-0 001 
-0 006 
0 002 
0 226 
0 072 
-0 237 
-0 124 
186 
52 
608 
612 
+ p < 1, "p < 05, •" p < 01, *"p < 01 
197 
Table 23: Managers' External Relationships Predict Subordinate Organizational 
Commitment 
Intercept 
Subordinate Controls 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company tenure 
Manager tenure 
Agreeableness 
Conscientiousness 
Emotional Stability 
Extroversion 
Openness 
Manager Controls 
Organization B 
Organization C 
Function 
Span of Control 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company Tenure 
Transformational Leadership 
Managers' External Relationships 
Advice In Degree 
Advice in Degree Squared 
Friendship In Degree 
Friendship in Degree Squared 
LMX-Affect 
LMX-Affect-Squared 
LMX-Contribution 
LMX-Contribution-Squared 
Number of Subordinates 
Number of Managers 
-2 Log Likelihood 
AIC T 
3 627 *** 
0 002 
-0 170 
-0 275 + 
-0 054 
-0 004 
0 015 
0271 * 
-0 032 
0 014 
0 173 
-0 159 
0 384 + 
0 091 
0 264 
-0 008 
0 000 
-0 206 
0 038 
-0 014 
-0 003 
0 331 * 
217 
66 
504 
508 1 
3 629 *** 
0 002 
-0 171 
-0 274 + 
-0 055 
-0 004 
0 015 
0 271 * 
-0 031 
0 014 
0 173 
-0 160 
0 384 + 
0 087 
0 265 
-0 008 
0 000 
-0 207 
0 037 
-0 014 
-0 003 
0 332 * 
0 000 
217 
66 
511 
515 r 3 496 *** 
0 002 
-0 190 
-0 275 + 
-0 053 
-0 004 
0 014 
0 267 * 
-0 024 
-0 001 
0 177 + 
-0 141 
0 365 + 
0148 
0 213 
-0 001 
0 001 
-0 123 
-0 009 
-0 021 
-0 001 
0 297 * 
-0 006 
0 003 + 
217 
66 
518 
522 4 
3 617 *** 
0 002 
-0 173 
-0 276 + 
-0 055 
-0 004 
0 015 
0 271 * 
-0 033 
0 014 
0 174 
-0 157 
0 396 + 
0 108 
0 259 
-0 007 
0 000 
-0 206 
0 035 
-0 014 
-0 003 
0 340 * 
-0 002 
217 
66 
511 
515 —r~ 
3 466 *** 
0 002 
-0 186 
-0 283 + 
-0 052 
-0 004 
0015 
0 272 * 
-0 027 
0 012 
0 174 
-0 155 
0 483 * 
0 246 
0 278 
-0 002 
-0 001 
-0 189 
0 024 
-0 015 
-0 002 
0 324 * 
-0 011 
0 002 
217 
66 
521 
525 
t-p < 1, *p < 05, **p < 01, "*p < 01 
198 
Table 23: Managers' External Relationships Predict Subordinate Organizational 
Commitment (2 of 3) 
Intercept 
Subordinate Controls 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company tenure 
Manager tenure 
Agreeabieness 
Conscientiousness 
Emotional Stability 
Extroversion 
Openness 
Manager Controls 
Organization B 
Organization C 
Function 
Span of Control 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company Tenure 
Transformational Leadership 
Managers' External Relationships 
Advice In Degree 
Advice in Degree Squared 
Friendship In Degree 
Friendship in Degree Squared 
LMX-Affect 
LMX-Affect Squared 
LMX-Contnbution 
LMX-Contnbution-Squared g 
3 686 *** 
0 003 
-0 162 
-0 282 + 
-0 051 
-0 005 
0 014 
0 276 ** 
-0 026 
0 005 
0 175 
-0 158 
0 271 
0 070 
0 262 
-0 011 
0 001 
-0 172 
0 007 
-0 010 
-0 001 
0 335 ** 
0 171 * —7 
3 702 *** 
0 003 
-0 172 
-0 286 + 
-0 051 
-0 005 
0 013 
0 271 * 
-0 021 
0 002 
0 176 + 
-0 158 
0 292 
0 096 
0 279 
-0 011 
0 001 
-0 176 
0 021 
-0 007 
0 000 
0 351 ** 
0 163 * 
-0 062 8 — " 
3 781 *** 
0 003 
-0185 
-0 271 + 
-0 058 
-0 005 
0015 
0 265 * 
-0 014 
0 013 
0 194 + 
-0 173 
0 160 
-0 033 
0 238 
-0 021 
0 001 
-0 180 
-0 008 
0 000 
-0 002 
0 250 * 
0 191 * ™2 
3 832 *** 
0 003 
-0 196 
-0 274 + 
-0 057 
-0 005 
0 015 
0 253 * 
-0 017 
0 014 
0 208 + 
-0 174 
0 149 
-0 063 
0 244 
-0 019 
0 001 
-0 171 
0 000 
0 004 
-0 001 
0 266 * 
0 148 
-0 060 •"Iff 
3 622 *** 
0 002 
-0164 
-0 279 + 
-0 048 
-0 002 
0 013 
0 283 ** 
-0 046 
0 029 
0 160 
-0 119 
0 375 
0 143 
0 225 
-0 005 
-0 003 
-0 169 
0 027 
0 012 
0 001 
0 325 * 
0 001 
-0 004 
Number ol Subordinates 217 217 217 217 217 
Number ot Managers 66 66 66 66 66 
-2 Log Likelihood 502 505 501 504 517 
AIC 506 509 505 508 521 
+p < 1, " p < 05, "p < 01, ***p < 01 
199 
Table 23: Managers' External Relationships Predict Subordinate Organizational 
Commitment (3 of 3) 
Intercept 
Subordinate Controls 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company tenure 
Manager tenure 
Agreeableness 
Conscientiousness 
Emotional Stability 
Extroversion 
Openness 
Manager Controls 
Organization B 
Organization C 
Function 
Span of Control 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company Tenure 
Transformational Leadership 
Managers' External Relationships 
Advice in Degree 
Advice in Degree Squared 
Friendship In Degree 
Friendship in Degree Squared 
LMX-Affect 
LMX-Affect Squared 
LMX Contribution 
LMX-Contribution Squared 
Number of Subordinates 
Number of Managers 
-2 Log Likelihood 
AIC • -ii 
3 4^7 *** 
0 002 
0 187 
0 274 + 
-0 049 
0 002 
0 013 
0 281 ** 
0 028 
0 011 
0 164 
0113 
0 383 
0 257 
0 213 
0 003 
0 003 
0 093 
-0 046 
0 002 
0 002 
0 268 + 
0 008 
0 003 
0 001 
0 001 
217 
66 
535 
539 11 3 766 *** 
0 003 
0 170 
-0 270 + 
-0 053 
0 004 
0 012 
0 278 ** 
-0 029 
0 027 
0 176 
0 135 
0 154 
0 024 
0 200 
0 017 
0 001 
0 126 
0 045 
0 013 
0 001 
0 244 + 
0 072 
0 141 
217 
66 
503 
507 13 
3 817 *** 
0 003 
0182 
-0 277 + 
-0 053 
0 004 
0 012 
0 263 * 
0 030 
0 028 
0 190 + 
0 133 
0 153 
0 001 
0 207 
-0 015 
0 000 
0 112 
-0 029 
0 018 
0 001 
0 268 + 
0 083 
0 012 
0 085 
0 063 
217 
66 
508 
512 14 
3 741 *** 
0 003 
0 178 
-0 277 + 
-0 050 
0 003 
0 012 
0 280 * 
0 032 
0 026 
0 177 
0 122 
0 192 
0 080 
0 172 
-0 013 
0 001 
0 114 
0 062 
0 015 
0 000 
0 279 * 
0 002 
0 011 
0 103 
0 133 
217 
66 
516 
520 —TB 
3 621 *** 
0 003 
0 200 
-0 276 + 
0 052 
0 003 
0 012 
0 267 * 
0 021 
0 015 
0 190 + 
0120 
0 202 
0122 
0178 
0 006 
0 000 
0 055 
0 062 
0 012 
0 001 
0 250 + 
0 005 
0 002 
0 005 
0 001 
0 085 
0 014 
0 069 
-0 058 
217 
66 
542 
546 
+ p < 1 "p < 05, "p < 01 *p < 01 
200 
Table 24: Managers' External Relationships Predict LMX 
Intercept 
Subordinate Controls 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company tenure 
Manager tenure 
Agreeableness 
Conscientiousness 
Emotional Stability 
Extroversion 
Openness 
Manager Controls 
Organization B 
Organization C 
Function 
Span ot Control 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company Tenure 
Transformational Leadership 
Managers' External Relationships 
Advice In Degree 
Advice in Degree Squared 
Friendship In Degree 
Friendship in Degree Squared 
LMX-Affect 
LMX-Affect-Squared 
LMX-Contribution 
LMX-Contnbution-Squared 
Number ot Subordinates 
Number of Managers 
-2 Log Likelihood 
AIC "T 
4 011 *** 
0 002 
-0 050 
-0 093 
-0 036 
-0 007 
0 006 
0 273 ** 
-0 231 * 
0 112 
0 207 + 
-0 074 
-0 142 
-0115 
0 075 
-0 002 
-0 001 
-0 043 
-0 019 
-0 005 
0 002 
0 575 *** 
217 
66 
471 
475 1 
3 949 *** 
0 001 
-0 054 
-0103 
-0 033 
-0 007 
0 007 
0 281 ** 
-0 233 * 
0114 
0 210 + 
-0 075 
-0117 
-0 006 
0 094 
0 000 
-0 002 
-0 037 
-0 012 
0 000 
0 002 
0 583 *** 
-0 009 
217 
66 
478 
482 —3 
3 965 "* 
0 001 
-0 054 
-0 105 
-0 033 
-0 007 
0 008 
0 283 ** 
-0 235 * 
0116 
0 210 + 
-0 078 
-0 116 
-0 012 
0 101 
0 000 
-0 002 
-0 046 
-0 008 
0 000 
0 002 
0 587 *** 
-0 009 
0 000 
217 
66 
489 
493 3" 4 048 *** 
0 002 
-0 044 
-0 085 
-0 039 
-0 007 
0 006 
0 270 ** 
-0 225 * 
0111 
0 206 + 
-0 083 
-0186 
-0 186 
0 096 
-0 006 
-0 001 
-0049 
-0 012 
-0 006 
0 002 
0 551 *** 
0 009 
217 
66 
478 
482 2 
4 020 *** 
0 002 
-0 049 
-0 087 
-0 038 
-0 007 
0 007 
0 271 ** 
-0 224 * 
0 110 
0 207 + 
-0 084 
-0 171 
-0 161 
0 101 
-0 005 
-0 001 
-0 047 
-0 013 
-0 006 
0 002 
0 549 *** 
0 007 
0 000 
217 
66 
490 
494 
+ p < \,*p < 05. **p < 01,"*/? < 01 
201 
Table 24: Managers' External Relationships Predict LMX (2 of 3) 
Intercept 
Subordinate Controls 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company tenure 
Manager tenure 
Agreeableness 
Conscientiousness 
Emotional Stability 
Extroversion 
Openness 
Manager Controls 
Organization B 
Organization C 
Function 
Span of Control 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company Tenure 
Transformational Leadership 
Managers' External Relationships 
Advice In Degree 
Advice in Degree Squared 
Friendship In Degree 
Friendship in Degree Squared 
LMX-Affect 
LMX Affect Squared 
LMX Contribution 
LMX Contribution Squared 6 
4 003 *** 
0 001 
•0 052 
•0 094 
-0 037 
•0 007 
0 007 
0 274 ** 
•0 233 * 
0 112 
0 208 + 
•0 075 
•0 126 
•0 112 
0 080 
•0 002 
•0 002 
•0 052 
•0 016 
-0 005 
0 002 
0 575 *** 7 
3 990 *** 
0 001 
-0 045 
-0 091 
-0 037 
-0 007 
0 008 
0 280 ** 
-0 236 * 
0115 
0 207 + 
-0 076 
-0 149 
-0138 
0 065 
-0 003 
-0 002 
-0 046 
-0 036 
-0 005 
0 001 
0 561 *** 8 
3 947 *** 
0 001 
-0 043 
-0 098 
-0 034 
-0 006 
0 007 
0 277 ** 
-0 240 * 
0111 
0199 + 
-0 067 
-0 049 
-0 061 
0 091 
0 003 
-0 002 
-0 054 
-0 010 
-0 006 
0 002 
0 612 *** £ 
3 880 *** 
0 001 
-0 030 
-0 091 
-0 033 
-0 006 
0 006 
0 291 ** 
-0 237 * 
0 109 
0 182 + 
-0 067 
-0 039 
-0 021 
0 087 
0 001 
-0 003 
-0 073 
-0 029 
-0 012 
0 002 
0 596 *** m 3 956 *** 
0 001 
0 043 
-0 097 
0 036 
0 007 
0 007 
0 283 ** 
-0 223 * 
0116 
0 209 + 
-0 093 
-0 181 
0 031 
0156 
0 004 
0 002 
0 039 
0 011 
0 003 
0 003 
0 540 *** 
-0 020 
0 018 
-0 027 -0018 
0 060 
217 
66 
474 
478 217 
66 
477 
481 -0 086 
217 
66 
473 
477 -0 026 
0 081 
217 
66 
475 
479 217 
66 
482 
486 Number of Subordinates 
Number of Managers 
-2 Log Likelihood 
AIC 
< 1, *p < 05, ""p < 01 *"p < 01 
202 
Table 24: Managers' External Relationships Predict LMX (3 of 3) 
Intercept 
Subordinate Controls 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company tenure 
Manager tenure 
Agreeableness 
Conscientiousness 
Emotional Stability 
Extroversion 
Openness 
Manager Controls 
Organization B 
Organization C 
Function 
Span of Control 
Age 
Gender 
Race 
Education 
Company Tenure 
Transformational Leadership 
Managers' External Relationships 
Advice In Degree 
Advice in Degree Squared 
Friendship In Degree 
Friendship in Degree Squared 
LMX Affect 
LMX Affect Squared 
LMX Contribution 
LMX Contribution-Squared 
Number of Subordinates 
Number of Managers 
-2 Log Likelihood 
AIC 11 
3 931 *** 
0 001 
0 050 
0 098 
0 036 
0 008 
0 008 
0 284 ** 
0 222 * 
0 113 
0 211 + 
0 093 
0 184 
-0 019 
0 158 
-0 004 
0 002 
-0 031 
0 010 
0 001 
0 003 
0 534 *** 
-0 021 
0 000 
0 019 
0 000 
217 
66 
505 
509 ii 
3 941 *** 
0 001 
0 041 
0 100 
0 033 
0 006 
0 006 
0 280 ** 
0 240 * 
0 109 
0 197 + 
0 065 
0 049 
0 048 
0 093 
0 004 
0 002 
0 045 
0 013 
0 007 
0 002 
0 627 *** 
0 051 
0 117 
217 
66 
476 
480 13 "• ••" 
3 877 *** 
0 001 
0 030 
0 094 
0 033 
0 006 
0 007 
0 294 ** 
0 237 * 
0 107 
0 182 + 
0 067 
0 039 
-0 012 
0 092 
0 002 
0 003 
0 069 
0 030 
0 013 
0 002 
0 609 *** 
0 037 
0 001 
0 051 
0 078 
217 
66 
481 
485 ii 3 880 *** 
0 001 
-0 033 
0 103 
0 034 
-0 007 
0 008 
0 289 ** 
-0 233 * 
0 115 
0 199 + 
0 084 
-0 077 
0 033 
0 181 
0 002 
-0 003 
0 049 
0 022 
0 000 
0 003 
0 585 *** 
-0 020 
0 020 
0 017 
0 113 
217 
66 
486 
490 15 
3 765 *** 
0 001 
-0 039 
-0 102 
0 033 
0 007 
0 008 
0 300 ** 
-0 228 * 
0106 
0 189 + 
0 083 
0 039 
0 125 
0 189 
0 004 
0 003 
-0 056 
0 015 
0 008 
0 003 
0 575 *** 
0 023 
0 001 
0 020 
0 000 
0 004 
0 034 
0 073 
0 067 
217 
66 
486 
490 
+ p < 1, *p < 05, **p < 01, "*p < 01 
203 
Table 25: Explanatory Variable Correlations with Manager Personality 
Transformational 
Leadership 
Manager Personality 
Agreeableness -0.127 
C onscientiousness 0.180 
Emotional Stability 0.135 
Extroversion 0.062 
Openness to Experience 0.031 
Note: N = 83, values > |.25| are significant atp < . Advice Friendship LLX- LLX-
In-Degree In-Degree Afiect Contribution 
-0.284 
-0.145 
-0.052 
-0.094 
-0.100 -0.007 
0.088 
-0.105 
0.115 
0.123 0.205 
0.049 
-0.219 
0.121 
0.142 0.067 
0.117 
-0.068 
0.050 
0.236 
and highlighted in italics 
204 
Table 26: Manager personality as predictors of intervening variables--Level 2 HLM parameters 
Perceived 
Resource Information Manager Ascribed Manager Time 
Access Access Status Identity Availability Constraints 
Manager Personality 
Agreeableness 
C onscientiousness 
Emotional Stability 
Extroversion 
Openness to Experience -0.196 
0.161 
-0.094 
0.065 
-0.111 -0.276 * 
0.167 + 
-0.002 
0.042 
-0.152 -0.043 
-0.043 
-0.003 
-0.012 
-0.032 0.026 
-0.027 
0.149 
0.153 
-0.058 -0.210 
0.162 
-0.058 
0.031 
0.007 0.100 
0.002 
-0.166 
-0.128 
0.072 
"Note: 294 subordinates, 83 managers 
+ p < .1, *p < .05, **p < .01, ***,p < .001 
205 
Figure 1: Theoretical Model 
Inputs Benefits and Costs 
Internal Vertical Leadership 
Manager's 
External 
Relationships 
Boss 
Peers Subordinate 
access to 
resources and 
information 
i\ Perceived 
manager 
Status 
Manager 
Ascribed 
Work Group 
Identity 
Manager 
Accessibility 
206 Outcomes 
Subordinate In-
Role Performance 
Subordinate 
Organizational 
Commitment 
Leader Member 
Exchange 
Figure 2: Managers' Peer Advice Network, Organization A 
207 
Figure 3: Managers' Peer Friendship Network, Organization A 
208 
Figure 4: Managers' Peer Advice Network, Organization B 
209 
CQ 
a o 
N 
'3 
00 
o 
-a 
T3 
C 
s 
u 
OH 
a> 
ID 
3 
no © 
o a o 
N 
t>0 
%-
o 
o 
(U 
o 
> 
-a < ?-< 
a> <u 
bfl <N 
Figure 7: Managers' Peer Friendship Network, Organization C 
(L 
212 
Figure 8: Summary of Results 
Manager External 
Relationships 
Advice In-
Degree 
Friendship In-
Degree 
LLX-Affect 
LLX-
Contribution Intervening Effects 
Note: Paths significant at/? < .05 
Note: All paths controlled for Transformational Leadership Resource 
Access Subordinate 
Outcomes 
Task Performance 
Organizational 
Commitment 
Leader Member 
Exchange 
213 
Information 
Access Figure 9: Information Access 
Peer vs. Boss Effects 
Friendship 
LLX-Contribution 
+1 +2 
Standard Deviations from Mean 
214 
Manager 
Status 4.0 
3.9 
3.8 
3.7 
3.6 
3.5 
3.4 
3.3 
3.2 
3.1 
3.0 Figure 10: Manager Status 
Peer vs. Boss Effects 
-"•"-Friendship 
HBfr"*LLX-Contribution 
+1 +2 
Standard Deviations from Mean 
215 
Appendix A: Survey Scales 
LMX-MDM scale (Liden and Maslyn, 1998) 
Utilized to measure LLX and LMX 
(Up: Subordinate perspective) 
Instructions: In this section, we ask you to consider the nature of your relationship your 
direct supervisor. Please read each statement and assess the degree to which you agree 
with it. l=strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree. 
Affect 
1. I like my supervisor very much as a person. 
2. My supervisor is the kind of person one would like to have as a friend. 
3. My supervisor is a lot of fun to work with. 
Loyalty 
4. My supervisor defends my work actions to my superiors, even without complete 
knowledge of the issue in question. 
5. My supervisor would come to my defense if I were 'attacked' by others. 
6. My supervisor would defend me to others in the organization if I made an honest 
mistake. 
Contribution 
7. I do work for my supervisor that goes beyond what is specified in my job 
description. 
8. I am willing to apply extra efforts, beyond those normally required, to meet my 
supervisor's work goals. 
9. I do not mind working my hardest for my supervisor. 
Professional Respect 
10.1 am impressed with my supervisor's knowledge of his/her job. 
11.1 respect my supervisor's knowledge of and competence on the job. 
12.1 admire my supervisor's professional skills. 
(Down: Supervisor perspective) 
Instructions: In this section, we ask you to consider the nature of your relationship with 
this specific employee. Please read each statement and assess the degree to which you 
agree with it. l=strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree. 
Affect 
1. I like this employee very much as a person. 
2. This employee is the kind of person one would like to have as a friend. 
216 
3. This employee is a lot of fun to work with. 
Loyalty 
4. This employee defends my work actions to my superiors, even without complete 
knowledge of the issue in question. 
5. This employee would come to my defense if I were 'attacked' by others. 
6. This employee would defend me to others in the organization if I made an honest 
mistake. 
Contribution 
7. This employee does work for me that goes beyond what is specified in his or her 
job description. 
8. This employee is willing to apply extra efforts, beyond those normally required, 
to meet my work goals. 
9. This employee does not mind working his or her hardest for me. 
Professional Respect 
10.1 am impressed with this employee's knowledge of his/her job. 
11.1 respect this employee's knowledge of and competence on the job. 
12.1 admire this employee's professional skills. 
217 
Subordinate access to information and resources (Spreitzer, 1996) 
Completed by Subordinates at Tl 
Instructions: In this section, you are asked about the information and resources available 
to you in your job. Please assess the extent to which you agree with each statement 
below. l=strongly disagree and 5=strongly agree. 
Subordinate access organization information 
1. I understand the strategies and goals of the organization 
2. I understand top management's vision of the organization 
3. I have access to the strategic information I need to do my job well 
Subordinate access to resources 
1. I can obtain the resources necessary to support new ideas 
2. When I need additional resources to do my job, I can usually get them. 
3. I have access to the resources I need to do my job well. 
218 
Perceived Supervisor Status (Eisenberger et al, 2002) 
(Completed by subordinates at Tl) 
Instructions: In this section, you are asked to consider the status your supervisor holds 
within the organization. Please assess the extent to which you agree with each of the 
following statements. l=strongly disagree and 5=strongly agree. 
1. The organization holds my supervisor in high regard. 
2. The organization gives my supervisor the chance to make important decisions. 
3. The organization values my supervisor's contributions. 
4. The organization gives my supervisor the authority to try new things. 
5. The organization supports decisions made by my supervisor. 
6. My supervisor participates in decisions that affect the entire organization. 
219 
Ascribed Identity, Items Surveyed, partially adapted from Hogg, Hains, and Mason 
(1998) and Mael and Ashforth (1992) 
Instructions: In this section, you are asked to consider how you perceive your supervisor 
in relationship to the work group. Please read each item below and assess the extent to 
which you agree with the statement. l=strongly disagree, 5=strongly agree. 
1. I identify my supervisor with our work group. 
2. My supervisor is "one of us", one of the group. 
3. My supervisor sees him/herself as a member of our work group. 
4. When I think about our work group, I envision my supervisor as one of the 
members. 
220 
Manager Accessibility, partially adapted from Janssen (2001) 
Instructions: This section asks you to consider the time availability and access you have 
to your manager. Please read each question and assess the degree to which you agree 
with each statement. 1= strongly disagree, 5= strongly agree 
Manager Availability 
1. My manager is not always available when a member of my work group needs him 
or her. (R) 
2. My manager is able to make time available to meet with his or her subordinates 
when they need it. 
3. My manager does not have enough time to provide the group the direction it 
needs. 
4. If a member of my work group has an issue, he or she can get access to our 
manager to deal with it. 
5. My manager is present for members of my work group at critical times. 
6. When a member of my work group needs input from our manager, he or she can 
usually get it in a timely fashion. 
Manager Time Constraints 
1. My manager faces significant pressures on his or her time. 
2. My manager feels a lot of time demands from his or her job. 
3. My manager feels a lot of time demands from his or her job. 
4. My manager has too many demands on his or her time 
221 
Affective Organizational Commitment (Allen and Meyer, 1990) 
Instructions: Please read the following statements and assess the degree to which you 
agree with each one. 1= strongly disagree to 5 = strongly agree 
1. I would be very happy to spend the rest of my career with this organization 
2. I enjoy discussing my organization with people outside it 
3. I really feel as if this organization's problems are my own 
4. I think that I could easily become as attached to another organization as I am to 
this one (R) 
5. I do not feel like 'part of the family' at my organization (R) 
6. I do not feel 'emotionally attached' to this organization (R) 
7. This organization has a great deal of personal meaning for me 
8. I do not feel a strong sense of belonging to my organization (R) 
222 
Subordinate Task Performance (Manager Assessed at Time 2) 
1. Relative to an absolute standard, please rate this employee's performance of the 
specific tasks required of his or her job (1 = poor to 5 = excellent) 
2. Relative to your expectations, how does this employee perform on the specific 
tasks of the job (1 = well below expectations to 5 = well above expectations) 
3. This employee uses appropriate methods and behaviors in performing his or her 
work (1= strongly disagree to 5= strongly agree) 
223 