EUR Research Information Portal
The impact of network management strategies on the outcomes in governance
networks
Published in:
Public Administration
Publication status and date:
Published: 01/01/2010
DOI (link to publisher):
10.1111/j.1467-9299.2010.01826.x
Document Version
Peer reviewed version
Citation for the published version (APA):
Klijn, E. H., Steijn, B., & Edelenbos, J. (2010). The impact of network management strategies on the outcomes in governance
networks. Public Administration, 88(4), 1063-1082. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9299.2010.01826.x
Link to publication on the EUR Research Information Portal
Terms and Conditions of Use
Except as permitted by the applicable copyright law, you may not reproduce or make this material available to any third party
without the prior written permission from the copyright holder(s). Copyright law allows the following uses of this material
without prior permission:
            • you may download, save and print a copy of this material for your personal use only;
            • you may share the EUR portal link to this material.
In case the material is published with an open access license (e.g. a Creative Commons (CC) license), other uses may be
allowed. Please check the terms and conditions of the specific license.
Take-down policy
If you believe that this material infringes your copyright and/or any other intellectual property rights, you may request its
removal by contacting us at the following email address: openaccess.library@eur.nl. Please provide us with all the relevant
information, including the reasons why you believe any of your rights have been infringed. In case of a legitimate complaint,
we will make the material inaccessible and/or remove it from the website.
The Impact of Network Management  on Outcomes in Governance 
Networks 
This article is published as: Klijn, E.H, B. Steijn, J. Edelenbos (2010), The impact of 
network management strategies on the outcomes in governance networks, in Public 
Administration  vol 88, no4: 1063-1082  
   Erik-Hans Klijn 
Bram Steijn 
Jurian Edelenbos 
 
Summary 
There is a vast amount of literature and research on network management strategies. However, only a 
limited portion of this literature examines the relationship between network management strategies and 
outcomes (for an exception see Meier and O’Toole 2001) Most of the research focuses on managerial activity or networking rather than on the question of which types of strategies matter the most for outcomes of complex processes in networks. This paper attempts to address the question of whether managerial 
strategies matter for outcomes and also explores which types of strategies have an effect on outcomes. 
The research is based on a survey sent to respondents involved in environmental projects in The 
Netherlands. The findings show that there is a strong effect of the number of employed network management strategies on perceived outcomes, but a few variations in the effect of four constructed types 
of network management strategies are found. These include: exploring content, connecting, arranging and 
process agreements.  
Author information 
Professor Dr E.H. Klijn (Professor, Department of Public Administration, Erasmus 
University Rotterdam  and Visiting Professor at the School of Public Policy, University of 
Birmingham) 
Professor Dr B. Steijn (Professor, Depart ment of Public Administration, Erasmus 
University Rotterdam, The Netherlands) Dr J. Edelenbos (Associate Professor, Depa rtment of Public Administration, Erasmus 
University Rotterdam, The Netherlands) 
 
Keywords : governance networks, network management, types of management strategies, 
network outcomes 
 
1. Introduction: managing networks  
 
Today, there is a vast amount of literature on  governance networks and the ways in which 
actors within these networks achieve outcome s. Within this discussion, much attention 
has recently been paid to the role and importance of network management and network 
managers. One of the crucial questions being asked is whether network management 
actually improves cooperation processes within networks and contributes to the outcomes 
of these networks. There have so far been few studies that attempt to trace the influence 
of network management in general (for an  exception see Meier and O’Toole, 2001; 
2007), and almost no studies that explore the effects of separate managerial strategies on 
outcomes of networks. 
 
The need for managing networks 
The mantra of modern public administration theory is that many decision-making 
processes take place within complex networks of actors (Hanf and Scharpf, 1978; 
Kaufman et all, 1986; Marsh and Rhodes, 1992; Kickert et all, 1997; Rhodes, 1997). 
These networks emerge out of a necessit y to interact and ar e, on the one hand, 
consciously planned in the sense that actors deliberately interact and attempt to structure 
these interactions with organisations and rules, but on the other hand, are also unplanned 
as a result of coincidental interactions an d strategies and previously created rules. 
Governance networks can roughly be defined as  “more or less stable patterns of social 
relations between mutual dependent actors, which form around policy program and/or 
cluster of means and which are formed, maintained and changed through series of games” 
(Koppenjan and Klijn, 2004, pp.69-70)1. Crucial to the emergence and existence of 
networks are dependency relations between actors (Hanf and Scharpf, 1978). The 
resource dependencies around policy problems or policy programs require actors to 
interact with one another and create more intensive and enduring interactions (Laumann 
and Knoke, 1987).  
Not surprisingly, there has been a prolifer ation of literature that has attempted to 
understand this development theoretically. This  type of literature, which can be labelled 
as a network perspective on public policy and management, does not focus so much on 
the actions of a public actor alone but more on the actions of a network of actors. As 
such, it attempts to provide a tool for analysing, but also for managing, contemporary governance processes (Scharpf, 1978; Rhodes, 1997; Mandell, 2001; Agranoff and 
McGuire, 2001). A number of terms have been coined to describe this management 
activity, including meta governance (Sorenson and Torfing, 2007), network governance 
and network facilitating, but the most popular terminology that is in use is network 
management (Agranoff and McGuire, 2001; Gage and Mandell, 1990; Kickert et all, 
1997; Mandell, 2001). The basic argument is usually that without adequate network 
management strategies, it is very difficult, or even impossible, to achieve interesting 
outcomes in these complex interaction processes. 
 
What this article addresses: the effects of network management 
This article investigates the effects of network management strategies on perceived 
outcomes in governance networks. The research is based on a survey conducted in 2006-
2007 where 337 responses to a questionnaire were received by individuals involved in 
environmental projects in The Netherlands.  
Environmental projects are very suitable fo r testing assumptions about the relationship 
between network management strategies and outcomes, because they are good examples 
of decision-making processes in governance networks. As we will explain in section 3 
they deal with wicked problems, many ac tors are involved with relatively dense 
interactions and they are sustained over a long period of time (see for characteristics of 
governance networks: Koppenjan and Klijn, 2004; Sorensen and Torfing, 2007). 
 
The main research question that this article addresses is: What is the effect of network 
management strategies on perceived outcom es and what strategies seem to matter? 
Section 2 deals with basic assumptions about network management. A number of 
hypotheses for the research are derived ba sed on the previous literature. Section 3 
provides an explanation of the research design. Section 4 addresses the question of how 
network management strategies influence perceived outcomes in governance networks. 
Section 5 deals with the various types of network management strategies and their 
effects. The article ends with several conclusions. 
2. Network management and network managers: assumptions 
 
In public administration, we encounter an increasing number of situations where public 
actors arrange policy making, service delivery or policy implementation within networks 
of actors (Rhodes, 1997; Sorenson and Torfing, 2007). We use the term ‘network’ to 
describe public policy making and implementation through a web of relationships 
between government, business and civil society actors. Networks are associated with new 
systems for public policy deliberation, decisi on and implementation (Pierre and Peters 
2000; Koppenjan and Klijn 2004).  They are based on interdependencies, but not 
necessarily equity, between public, private and civil society actors.  
As a result of complex interactions which, by definition, characterise networks, it is no 
simple task to achieve mutual ly agreeable outcomes. Interactions within the network may 
produce sharp conflicts about, for instance, the distribution of the costs and benefits of a 
solution. The different perceptions of the actors involved on, for instance, the nature of 
the problem(s), the desired solution or the best organisational arrangements to utilize to 
ensure cooperation, can be major obstacles to achieve meaningful outcomes that satisfy 
the actors involved. This section looks at the influence of network management on 
outcomes in governance networks. Network management and outcomes are first defined. 
This is followed by a discussion of the lite rature on network ma nagement, to find out 
what has previously been said about its impact on outcomes. Subsequently, different 
types of network management strategies are highlighted. 
 
Two types of network management 
Since cooperation and the coordination of goals and interests do not occur on their own 
accord, it is necessary to steer interactio ns in policy games within networks. The 
(implicit) assumption in the literature is th at a satisfactory outcome is often impossible 
without network management (Gage and Mand ell, 1990; Agranoff and McGuire, 2001; 
Kickert et all, 1997).   
The deliberate attempt to govern processes in networks is called network management 
(Gage and Mandell, 1990; Kickert et al., 1997; Meier and O‘Toole, 2001). Network 
management aims at initiating and facilitating interaction processes between actors (Friend 
et al., 1974), creating and changing network arrangements for better coordination (Rogers 
and Whetten, 1982; Scharpf, 1978) creating new content by exploring new ideas for instance (Koppenjan and Klijn, 2004) and guiding interactions (Gage and Mandell, 1990; 
Kickert et all., 1997). 
Various management strategies have been identified in the literature. In general most of 
the strategies of network management that have been mentioned can be categorized either 
as strategies of process management or of institutional design (Gage and Mandell, 1990; 
Koppenjan and Klijn, 2004). Process manageme nt strategies attempt to facilitate 
interactions between actors in policy games. What is crucial in these types of strategies is 
that although they are indirect in the sense th at they try to facilitate interactions and the 
actions of other actors, they consider the structure of the network (the rules, positions of 
actors and resource division) as a given. They are thus direct strategies aimed at actors 
and interactions (hands-on strategies; see Sorenson and Torfing, 2007).  
If management strategies are aimed at alte ring the institutional characteristics of the 
network (like changing actor positions, entry rules or other more drastic ways to 
intervene in the structure of the network), th ey can be labelled as institutional design 
strategies (Koppenjan and Klijn, 2004). This article focuses solely on process 
management strategies. 
 
Outcomes in governance networks 
There has been much discussion in the governance literature on how to measure 
outcomes of complex decision-making processes in networks. The main conclusion is 
that measuring these outcomes is a difficult task . One of the reasons for this is that actors 
have different goals and it is thus difficult to pick a single goal by which to measure 
outcomes for these processes. Measuring outcomes is also problematic because decision-
making processes in governance networks are lengthy and the goals of actors are likely to 
change overtime. Goal displacement is th e negative term for this phenomenon while 
learning is the positive term (see Koppenjan and Klijn, 2004).  
Another problem encountered while conducting our research is that it is not possible to 
assess the ‘objective’ outcomes (realized dwellings, infrastructure, time of decision-
making, etc) of the wide variety of projects that were mentioned by the respondents. This 
problem has been addressed in this paper by using perceived outcomes as a proxy for 
these outcomes and by using more than one criterion to measure them. This is in keeping with the fact that goals change and that actors have different views about the outcomes. A 
distinction has been made between content outcomes (the innovative character, cost 
efficiency, etc) and process outcomes (managerial effort, support of the stakeholders 
involved). This distinction is also used by other scholars on governance networks where, 
besides ‘hard performance’ criteria, a wide variety of other measures are mentioned for 
evaluation (see, for instance: Skelcher et all, 2005), including measurements that include 
stakeholder involvement and democratic anchorage (Klijn and Skelcher, 2007; Sorensen 
and Torfing, 2007). 
The content outcomes are characterized by a number of aspects derived from the 
literature on governance networks and network management. This body of literature 
mentions many aspects and elements to characterize the substance of results from 
governance processes. The first element that is  used here is the innovative character of 
outcome. This is the way in which the project showed innovative results (c.f. Nooteboom, 
2002). The second element is the integrative as pect of the solution, i.e. the way in which 
the plan represents different environmental functions (housing, recreation, etc.) (C.f. De 
Jong and Edelenbos, 2007). The third element is the recognizable contribution made, 
which refers to the impact of the involvement of the stakeholders in the decision-making 
process (c.f. Edelenbo s and Klijn, 2006). The fourth element is the problem-solving 
capacity of results. This is the extent to which the solutions really address the problem (c.f. Innes and Boohler, 2003). A fifth element that is identified in the literature is the 
robustness of the results, i.e. the future  robustness (time frame) of the results (c.f. 
Koppenjan and Klijn, 2004). The sixth element is the relationship between the costs and 
benefits of results from governance networks. This element ensures that the costs of the 
plan do not overrun the benefits of a project (c.f. Mantel, 2005).  
Process outcomes can also be characterized by a number of different elements that also 
have been mentioned in the literature on governance networks and network management. 
The first is the management of the governan ce network, which refers to the level of 
satisfaction of the ways in which actors are involved in the project (c.f. Meier and 
O’Toole, 2001). The second element is conflic t resolution, i.e. the way in which conflicts 
have been averted and/or solved (Süsskind and Cruikshank, 1987). The third element 
identified in the literature is the extent to which the process has encountered stagnations or deadlocks (c.f. Van Eeten, 1999). The fourth element is the productive use of 
differences in perspectives. This is the way in which differences in frame and perspective 
have been reconciled (c.f. Koppenjan and Klijn, 2004). Th e fifth element is contact 
frequency, i.e. the frequency of interactions between actors (c.f. Meier & O’Toole, 2001). 
Finally, the sixth element is the support for results coming from governance networks. 
This refers to the extent to which stakeholde rs are satisfied with the results achieved (c.f. 
Koppenjan and Klijn, 2004).  
  
Network management and outcomes 
The crucial question, of course, is how managerial strategies influence policy decisions 
and outcomes in governance networks. Although a lot of research on governance 
networks has been done thus far, this question has not really been addressed until now. 
Especially studies that use larger data sets (m ostly surveys) the so called larger N studies 
on this particular question are scarce (but not completely absent; see, for example, Meier 
and O’Toole, 2001, 2007). 
One thing is clear from an observation of the large amount of, and ever growing, 
literature on networks (both case studies and larger N studies) – that governance 
networks are complex and include many different actors. In the introductory chapter of a 
book that contains case studies from various countries, Torfing (Torfing, 2007) stresses 
that network actors interact w ith one another through negotiation and that this results in 
complex processes. Most of the literature on governance networks, whether case studies 
(see Mandell, 2001; Agranoff and McGuire, 2003; Agranoff 2007; Marcussen and 
Torfing, 2007; Bekkers et all, 2007) or larger N studies (see for instance O'Toole et all, 
2007; Meier and O’Toole, 2001, 2007), tend to emphasize that it is important to have 
good contacts with other actors within the network. This network contact and 
‘embeddedness’ are also stressed by various studies that utilize a social network analysis. 
They show that this embeddedness is important  for achieving outcomes (see, for instance, 
Huang and Provan, 2007; Kenis and Oerlemans, 2008) or achieving innovation (see 
Considine et al, 2008). O’Toole et al (2007) have shown that networking is common 
among managers both in the US and on the European continent, if the UK, where the 
sample was taken from, can be taken to be representative of the entire European continent (see also Walker et all, 2007).  
There may be differences between networking and employing network management 
strategies – although the two are related. However, in analyzing the many case studies on 
governance networks, network management strategies have been shown to play a 
prominent role in many case studies in the US (Mandell, 2001; Agranoff and McGuire, 
2003; Agranoff, 2007; Huang and Provan, 2007), the Scandinavian countries (Jensen and 
Kahler, 2007; Sorenson, 2007), the UK (Newman, 2001; Sullivan and Skelcher, 2002), 
the Netherlands (A and D, 2000; B and A, 2006), Italy (Cepiku and Meneguzzo, 2005; 
Meneguzzo and Cepiku, 2008), Belgium (De Ri nck and Voets, 2006), France (see Le 
Gales, 2001) and Germany (for example: Ho ltkamp, 2005). Thus, there seems to be a 
broad consensus about the growing importance of both governance networks and network 
management as factors in achieving good results.  
Network management is necessary most importantly because of the complexity of policy 
making and service delivery since, in order to achieve interesting results, a wide variety 
of actors and policy levels have to be connected. As Agranoff and McGuire (2003: 123) 
conclude in their study on how city officials work with other layers of government and 
organizations to develop their city economics: “From the perspective of the city 
government, there is not one cluster of linkages to manage but several clusters- some 
horizontal some vertical, and some that include both within a context of a single project 
or program”. This statement is very much in keeping with the scarcity of large N studies 
on network management and outcomes of governance networks. Huang and Provan 
(2007) have shown that network involvement, or network embeddedness, is positively 
related to social outcomes. Meier and O Toole (2001), in well-known studies on 
educational districts in Texas, have shown that networking by district managers is 
positively correlated with the performance of the district. 
Thus, both the case studies and the large N studies tend to highlight the importance of 
network management. In comparing two cases in Denmark, Sorensen (2007: 107) 
concludes that: “The case study of the meta-governance of two networks in Skanderborg 
suggests that it is an open question whether or not governance networks can become 
efficient co-producers of public governance. It depends very much on the ability of public 
authorities to perform competent meta governance”.  Other authors, such as Agranoff and McGuire (2003), Edelenbos and Klijn (2006) and Le Gales (2001), have also stressed the 
importance of network management activities in the achievement of interesting 
outcomes. Edelenbos and Klijn (2006: 436) concluded after comparing 6 interactive 
decision-making cases that: “Our findings on these six case studies do, however, provide 
a good impression of the importance of good process management for the success of 
interactive decision-making processes. Mana gement matters in the successful evolution 
of interactive decision-making processes”. 
It should be noted that the case studies identify more specific  factors for success 
compared to the large N studies, which include political support, the careful use of new 
policy initiatives, etc. They also stress the impo rtance of national institutional contexts in 
the observed ‘world wide trend to governance’. In analyzing the Oslo Regeneration 
program in Norway, Hanssen and Klausen (2007: 48) have warned that the Norwegian 
state “still provides a lot of leeway for the operation of traditional hierarchical 
government. As consequence, the shift towards governance networks is less obvious in 
Norway than in other countries”. In addition, Le Gales (2001), in his research in Rennes, 
has analyzed the development of governance networks in Re nnes as a product of elite 
strategy. 
Although these case studies and large N data studies may have been conducted on 
different types of policies than those that are studied in this article positive correlations 
between network management strategies and outcomes in governance networks in 
environmental projects can be expected. Since most scholars have stressed the 
importance of networking, embeddedness and network management strategies to the 
results of complex governance processes, the following hypothesis has been formulated:  
- Hypothesis 1: If more network management strategies are employed in 
governance networks around environmen tal projects, these projects will have 
better outcomes (both process and content outcomes).  
 
Types of network management strategies and their impact  
The number of management strategies or the strength of the social embeddedness in 
networks is not the only factor that could explain the effects of governance networks and 
network management. The type of management strategy used could also explain the outcome of governance networks. Therefore, the various types of network management 
strategies and their impacts are also of interest. However, most studies on network 
management do not really distinguish between various types of strategies. There is, 
therefore, not much material on the impact of various strategies on the outcome of 
governance networks. In order to fill this void, a typology is first required to ground the 
research conducted in this paper. Network management can be oriented towards hands on 
activities in managing interactions between actors within the governance network (A and 
B, 2008; Sorensen and Torfing, 2007)). The literature has dealt with an impressive 
number of the types of network management strategies to guide interaction processes, so 
an exhaustive list cannot be provided here (see Gage and Mandell, 1990; O’Toole, 1988, 
Agranoff and McGuire, 2001; 2003). 
Table 1 provides a summary (albeit a non-exhaustive one) of the types of strategies that 
have been identified, providing examples of each of the categories. 
 
Table 1 Overview of process management strategies 
Types of 
strategies Process agreements Exploring content Arranging Connecting 
Main 
strategies 
mentioned 
in the literature Rules for entrance into or 
exit from the process, 
conflict regulating rules, 
rules that specify the interests of actors or veto possibilities, rules that 
inform actors about the availability of 
information about decision-making 
moments, etc. Searching for goal 
congruency, creating 
variation in solutions, 
influencing (and explicating) perceptions, managing and collecting 
information and research, creating 
variation through creative competition Creating new ad 
hoc 
organisational 
arrangements (boards, project organisations, 
etc.).  Selective (de)activation of 
actors, resource mobilizing, 
initiating new series of 
interactions, coalition building, mediation, appointment of process 
managers, removing obstacles to co-operation, creating 
incentives for co-operation. 
Adapted from Klijn, 2005 
 Connecting strategies like the activation of actors or resources  are required in order to 
start the game. The network management literature stresses that the network manager has 
to identify the actors required for an initiative and actually create a situation in which 
they become interested in investing their resources (see also Lynn, 1981). Scharpf (1978) 
calls this selective activation and states th at the correct identification of necessary 
participants and the lack of opposition from other actors who possess the resources to 
block the initiative are crucial for inter-o rganisational policy-making. Sometimes, the 
manager has to try to deactivate actors because their involvement is not productive. The 
interactions within the game itself also have to be managed. This can be done by 
appointing a process manager, who invests time and energy in connecting the actions and 
strategies of actors to one another during the interactions. 
Once the game has begun, strategies for exploring content are necessary to clarify the 
goals and perceptions of actors  (Fisher, 2003, Koppenjan and Klijn, 2004) and to try to 
invest time and money in developing solutions that create opportunities for actors’ 
participation. However, the process is sometimes short of creative solutions to satisfy the 
various actors involved. In such cases, more variation is required, for instance by using 
different teams of experts who compete against one another to create solutions. 
The managerial strategy arranging  means setting (temporary) st ructures for consultation, 
interaction and deliberation, like project organization, communication lines, etc.  (Rogers 
and Whetten, 1982). The transaction costs of these arrangements must be kept as low as 
possible (Williamson, 1996), but at the same time, the arrangements have to be 
acceptable to the actors involved.  
Another important strategy mentioned in th e literature are strategies of process 
agreements that draft temporary set of rules for interaction  that structure the interactions 
and protect each actor’s core values (Koppenjan and Klijn, 2004). The rules can be seen 
as ground rules for behaviour and interaction in the network that the actors in the network 
(explicitly) agreed on. 
 
As stated earlier, it is not easy to find evidence in the existing literature on governance 
networks and network management that provides clues to the relationship of these four types 
of strategies to content and process outcomes. Given the fact that a substantial portion of the 
literature emphasizes innovation and learning as important goals of networks (see Huang 
and Provan, 2007; Agranoff, 2007) and that it is important to search out new information 
and combine actors and their various content and information, one can expect that especially 
the strategies of exploration and connection will be important. It is also logical to expect 
there to be a relationship between exploration and connection and content outcomes (for a similar reasoning from a slightly different pers pective, see Fisher, 2003). Exploration would 
be expected to have a more positive relationship with content outcomes than connection, 
and the connection strategy is probably also positively related to process outcomes. 
Arranging and process design strategies mainly facilitate interactions. These can be expected 
to be related to process outcomes and not directly, but perhaps indirectly, to content 
outcomes. 
 
This line of argumentation leads to the following hypothesis:   
- Hypothesis 2: with respect to the various managerial strategies, exploring 
content will be more strongly relate d to content outcomes while process 
agreements and arranging will be more strongly related to process outcomes. 
Connection will be related to both process and content outcomes 
 
 
3. Research design: survey on outcomes and management strategies 
 
The analysis in this article is based on an  Internet survey held in 2006-2007 among 
respondents involved in environmental projects in the Netherlands. The problem with 
surveying a population like this is that a list of all environmental projects in the 
Netherlands obviously does not exist – let alone a list of all the respondents involved in 
these projects and the networks surrounding them. In order to acquire the addresses of 
people involved in environmental projec ts, the database of a large knowledge 
organisation in The Netherlands called ‘Habiforum’ was therefore utilized. This is a 
knowledge network in which professionals from the environmental domain participate. It 
was established in 1999 and incorporates practitioners (from the government, NGOs, 
water boards, project developers and builders , etc), scientists and consultants (most of 
who are actually involved in environmental projects).2 
These environmental projects that are part of the survey are projects where environmental 
issues are handled, like realising or restructuring build environment (restructuring 
neighbourhoods, realising new dwellings), water management, business areas, green 
projects or projects where combinations of these issues are dealt with. More information on the population and survey can be found in the appendix. 
 
Environmental projects as governance networks 
There is also the question of whether these environmental projects match the 
characteristics of governance networks that have been mentioned in the literature (many 
actors, frequent interaction between the actors, a certain stability (networks have existed 
for some time), complex decision-making and wicket issues). As has already been 
indicated in the introduction, there is much evidence that they can be regarded as 
governance networks: 
- Many actors and frequent contact (see Gage and Mandell, 1990; Agranoff and 
Mc Guire, 2001; Koppenjan and Klijn, 2004); the average number of actors 
whom respondents have contact with is 12. The standard deviation is 4.8, 
which is considerably high. This is main ly due to the fact that there are a few 
respondents with very few contacts. However, 90% of the respondents do 
have regular contact with at least 6 or more actors and 70% with at least 9 or 
more actors. The frequency of contact is also fairly high.  
- Existence and stability over time (Kickert et all, 1997; Agranoff and McGuire, 
2003; Meier and O ‘Toole, 2001, 2007); the average amount of time taken to 
complete the project is more than 10 years (see Table 3). Most respondents 
filled this in as a projection, however , and it is widely known that projects 
often take longer to complete than estimated. This means that there are 
enduring networks here; 
- Complex issues (Koppenjan and Klijn, 2004; Sorensen and  Torfing, 2007) ; 
Most of the projects involve various environmental functions (see Table 3) 
which make the decision-making process complex.  
 
Thus, based on the evidence above, it can be concluded that these environmental projects 
and governance networks can be appropriately considered in this research. 
 
Project and respondent characteristics 
The respondents were asked questions about several topics, including trust, project 
characteristics, management strategies, (perceived) outcomes and the involvement of 
stakeholders and political parties in the deci sion-making process. Not all the items in the 
questionnaire are analyzed in this article as noted above. Each respondent was asked to 
answer the questions with a specific  environmental project in mind.  
In terms of the demographics of the respondents and the projects they were involved in, 
they were predominantly male (83.4%), middle-aged (on average 48 years old) and 
highly educated (80.7% hold a university degree). They had, on average, 12.24 years 
experience with environmental projects. Their level of involvement in the project can be 
distinguished as follows:  
- 12.0% followed the project ‘from a distance’  
- 23.4% were ‘thinking along with the project’ 
- 35.7% ‘actively participated in the project’ 
- 28.8% were managing the project. 
It can thus be seen that the large majority  of respondents (almost 65%) were heavily 
engaged in the project they answered the questions for. Finally, the background of the 
respondents (e.g. the parental organization) is also important. There were four different 
categories of respondents in terms of their background: 1) national civil servants (10.7%); 
2) local civil servants (including civil servants from the counties) (28.5%); 3) private 
sector respondents (48.3%); 4) ‘others’ (12.4%). The last group was mostly made up of 
respondents from stakeholder organizations such as environmental groups. 
 
Table 3 describes characteristics of the projects these respondents were involved in. 
 
Table 3. Descriptions of project characteristics (N=337) 
The project involves   
Building of houses 60.8%  
Building of business terrain 30.3%  Mean number of different activities 
 (maximum 6) 2.98 Includes: houses, business terrain, water 
development, environmental development and commercial 
development 
Median timeline of the project 10 years  
Average number of contacts of respondents 12.12 All other organizations – according to 
the respondents – with whom the 
organization has contact with in the project 
 
Next, the conceptualization and measurement of the main variables included in the 
analysis to test the hypotheses will be explor ed. Table 4 provides a brief overview of the 
measurement of the main variables. A more detailed description can be found in the 
appendix. 
 
Table 4. Brief descriptions of the measurement of the main variables 
Variable Nature Conceptualization and measurement 
Outcomes (divided into content 
and process outcomes) Dependent variable Measured by 6 items that were added and 
divided by 6 to construct two scales ranging 
from 1 to 5. 
Project complexity Control variable Number of different activities (housing, road 
development, etc) ranging from 0 to 6. 
Network management strategies Independent variable 16 items measuring managerial activities 
divided into four subcategories (arranging, 
process agreements, connecting, exploring content). A summation of the 16 items was 
used as a measure of the number of strategies. 
Saved factor scores were used as a value for 
the four individual strategies (see appendix 
for more information on this factor analysis). 
   
Phase of project Control variable Measured by several types of activities 
performed in the project. 
Parent organization of 
respondent Control variable Organizational background of respondent 
Number of actors involved Control variable Number of actors, indicated by the 
respondent, who are involved in the project 
  
The analysis will include both a measure of the number of strategies and the four 
different strategies that have been identified. These variables are clearly correlated (for 
example, the more types are used, the higher the number of strategies). In fact, a brief 
analysis shows that the four strategies account for 82% of the variance in the number of 
strategies. This means that it does not make much sense to include these variables in one 
analysis, which is why the testing of Hy potheses 1 and 2 will be conducted in two 
separate sections3. 
 
 
4. Network management strategies and their effects 
 
This section addresses the first hypothesis: If more network management strategies are 
employed in governance networks around environmental projects, these projects will 
have better outcomes (both process and content outcomes). The hypothesis is tested using 
a regression analysis, with the content and process outcomes as dependent variables. The 
independent variables are the number of strategies employed, with the respondent and 
project characteristics serving as control variables. 
Table 5 Results of OLS regression analysis with process outcomes as dependent variable 
(N=208) 
Model   Step 1 Step 2 
    B Beta Sig B Beta Sig 
 (Constant) 3.,347   ,000** 2,272  ,000** 
 parent organization of respondent (national 
civil servants =reference category)       
  local civil servants .101 .084 ns -,055 -,043 ns 
  private sector respondents .073 .050 ns -,014 -,012 ns 
  others .278 .200 ,023* -,197 -,118 ns 
 project phase (preparation phase = reference 
category)       
  developmental phase .042 .033 ,802 ,101 ,084 ns 
  building phase .023 .020 ,885 ,099 ,067 ns 
  managerial phase -.129 -.077 ,486 ,177 ,128 ns 
 complexity of project -.038 -.094 ,176 -,037 -,092 ns 
  managerial position .107 .090 ,078 ,010 ,0146 ns 
 number of managerial strategies    ,077 ,553 ,000** 
 
Step 1 R Square Adjusted R Square Step 2 R Square Adjusted R Square 
1 ,054 ,016 2 ,342 ,312 
* p < 0.05 ** p< 0.01 
 
 
Table 6 Results of OLS regression analysis wi th content outcomes as dependent variable  
(N=210) 
Model   Step 1 Step 2 
    B Beta Sig B Beta Sig 
1 (Constant) 3,688  ,000** 3,062  ,000** 
 parent organization of respondent (national 
civil servants =reference category)       
  local civil servants ,115 ,086 ns ,018 ,014 ns 
  private sector respondents ,073 ,060 ns ,033 ,027 ns 
  others -,039 -,022 ns -,110 -,063 ns 
 project phase (preparation phase = reference 
category)       
  developmental phase ,075 ,060 ns ,092 ,073 ns 
  building phase -,103 -,066 ns -,049 -,031 ns 
  managerial phase ,215 ,146 ns ,131 ,089 ns 
 complexity of project ,006 ,013 ns ,014 ,033 ns 
  managerial position ,175 ,140 ,047* ,088 ,071 ns 
  number of managerial strategies    ,077 ,521 ,000** 
 
Step 1 R Square Adjusted R Square Step 2 R Square Adjusted R Square 
1 ,064 ,027 2 ,319 ,289 
* p < 0.05 ** p< 0.01 
 
The results in Tables 5 and 6 strongly support the first hypothesis4. The effect of the 
number of managerial strategies on both process and content outcomes is high (beta’s are 
0.553 and 0.521 respectively). The relative strength of this effect is also shown by the fact that the effect on the dependent variable of the included variables in Step 1 is rather 
low, but is in both cases substantially higher in Step 2 (from an adjusted explained 
variance of 1.6% to 31.2% for process outcomes, and from 2.7% to 28.9% for content 
outcomes). It should also be noted that in both cases in Step 2, none of the respondents or 
project characteristics (such as the phase of the project) are statistically significantly 
related to the perceived outcomes. Overall, the explained variance of the variables that 
have been included is slightly higher for the process outcomes than for the content 
outcomes. However, the general message from the analysis is clear: network management 
strategies are highly relevant to achieve satisfactory outcomes and using more diverse 
strategies is good for outcomes. 
 
 
5. Types of managerial strategies: which has the strongest effect? 
 
The second hypothesis is then tested: with respect to the various managerial strategies, 
exploring content will be more strongly re lated to content outcomes while process 
agreements and arranging will be more strongly related to process outcomes. Connecting 
will be related to both pr ocess and content outcomes.  With this hypothesis, it is not so 
much the number of strategies, but the types of strategies used that is important. The 
second hypothesis is also tested through the use of a regression analysis, but instead of 
the number of strategies employed, the four different strategies derived from the factor 
analysis (explained in the appendix) are incl uded as independent variables. The results 
are presented in Tables 7 and 8. 
Table 7 Results of OLS regression analysis with process outcomes as dependent variable (N=208 
Model   Step 1 Step 2 
    B Beta Sig B Beta Sig 
1 (Constant) 3,347   ,000** 3,012  ,000** 
 parent organization of respondent (national civil 
servants =reference category)       
  local civil servants ,101 ,084 Ns -,013 -,010 ns 
  private sector respondents ,073 ,050 Ns ,012 ,010 ns 
  others ,278 ,200 ,023* -,130 -,078 ns 
 project phase (preparation phase = reference 
category)       
  developmental phase ,042 ,033 Ns ,070 ,059 ns 
  building phase ,023 ,020 Ns ,105 ,071 ns 
  managerial phase -,129 -,077 Ns ,160 ,115 ns 
 Complexity of project -,038 -,094 Ns -,037 -,092 ns 
  managerial position ,107 ,090 Ns -,031 -,026 ns 
 Exploration    ,160 ,280 ,000** 
 Connecting    ,282 ,493 ,000** 
 Arranging    ,106 ,183 ,002* 
 Process agreements    ,139 ,243 ,000** 
 
Step 1 R Square Adjusted R Square Step 2 R Square Adjusted R Square 
1 ,054 ,016 2 ,434 ,399 
* p < 0.05 ** p< 0.01 
 
Table 8 Results of OLS regression analysis with content outcomes as dependent variable (N=210) 
Model   Step 1 Step 2 
    B Beta Sig B Beta Sig 
1 (Constant) 3,688  ,000** 3,726  0,000** 
 parent organization of respondent (national civil 
servants =reference category)       
  local civil servants ,115 ,086 Ns ,018 ,014 ns 
  private sector respondents ,073 ,060 Ns ,033 ,027 ns 
  Others -,039 -,022 Ns -,110 -,063 ns 
 project phase (preparation phase = reference 
category)       
  developmental phase ,075 ,060 Ns ,134 ,107 ns 
  building phase -,103 -,066 Ns ,039 ,025 ns 
  managerial phase ,215 ,146 Ns ,192 ,131 ns 
 Complexity of project ,006 ,013 Ns ,022 ,051 ns 
  managerial position ,175 ,140 ,047* ,057 ,046 ns 
 Exploration    ,255 ,425 ,000** 
 Connecting    ,259 ,428 ,000** 
 Arranging    ,087 ,145 ,011* 
 Process agreements    ,092 ,147 ,008** 
 
Step 1 R Square Adjusted R Square Step 2 R Square Adjusted R Square 
1 ,064 ,027 2 ,429 ,395 
* p < 0.05 ** p< 0.01 
 
   
From Tables 7 and 8, the first part of the hypothesis can be confirmed as exploration is 
indeed shown to be more strongly correlated to content outcomes. It should also be noted 
that connecting is strongly related to both process and content outcomes. The second part 
of the hypothesis, with respec t to process outcomes, cannot be confirmed, as the effects 
of arranging and process agreements on process outcomes are not particularly strong. 
Although both relationships are significant, especially that between process agreements 
and process outcomes, the beta is not very high. In fact, the management strategy 
exploration also has a strong relationship with process outcomes. As can be seen from the 
analysis, all four strategies are statistically significant in relation to process outcomes. 
However, from observing the beta effect, it can be seen that the connecting strategy 
clearly has the strongest effect on process outcomes, followed by content exploration, 
process agreements and arranging. 
 
 
6. Conclusion and discussion 
 
This article has investigated the relationship between network management and perceived 
outcomes from governance networks. It has addressed the question whether network 
management matters and which strategies matter the most. Much case study research has 
indicated that the answer to this question is yes, but apart from the well-known research 
studies on Texas educational districts (Meier  and O’Toole, 2001, 2007); there is little 
large N data on this question. Based on a review of the available literature, a typology of 
network management strategies (exploring, connecting, arranging and process design) 
was constructed and two hypotheses were formulated. These hypotheses were tested 
through a large survey of individuals involved in environmental projects in The 
Netherlands. 
Our research showed that network management is strongly related to outcomes. It can 
therefore be concluded that network management does, indeed, matter. This also 
confirms the earlier findings of the case study research and the work of Meier and 
O’Toole (2001) as well as the work of others  that stress networking (Walker et all, 2007) 
and embeddedness (Huang and Provan, 2007)  and suggest that these are positively 
related to outcomes. Thus, the first conclusion  from this research is that in general, 
network management is an important factor in achieving successful outcomes in governance networks. 
However, it was also discovered that it does make a difference which network 
management strategies are employed in facilitation and guiding interaction in the 
governance network.  This is an important finding because although much has been 
written about network management in general and a large number of specific network 
management strategies have been identified in the literature, there is very little empirical 
data about what types of strategies matter the most. A few scholars have mentioned that 
the outcomes of governance networks depend on the ability or competence of managers 
(Sorenson, 2007) and the way in which managers strategically operate in complex 
governance processes (Edelenbos and Klijn, 2007; Agranoff and McGuire, 2007), but an 
explicit relationship to outcome had not yet been made.  
The research conducted in this paper has provided new insights into the relationship 
between the type of management strategy and (process and content) outcomes. It can be 
concluded that connecting is the most promising management strategy in realising 
outcomes. Although the other management stra tegies did turn out to be statistically 
significant in realising outcomes, especially the strategy of exploring content, connecting 
as a strategy turned to be the most effective strategy. It is thus important for a network 
manager to identify which actors are crucial in the network and then activate and connect 
these actors in the network.  A manager must have connective ability  (see also Goldsmith 
and Eggers, 2004). 
 
Another important finding is that the arranging and process agreements are less important 
to realize outcome. This is inte resting because in at least part  of the governance literature 
and certainly that of one of its manifestations - public private partnerships, a lot of 
attention is paid to organizational forms (c.f. Benson, 1982). Our findings, however, 
suggest that network management is far more than solely setting the organizational 
conditions in place. This is of course sli ghtly discouraging for practitioners who think 
that they hold the key to success in instal ling a specific organizational form. However, 
this is in line with much of the case study fi ndings that stress the dynamics of the process 
and the need to cope with those dynamics through active network management strategies, 
like connecting and exploring. This issue – that management matters far more than organization – should certainly be explored further. 
 
However, these conclusions must be considered with care for a number of reasons. First, 
this study has focused on environmental projects. The results cannot automatically be 
assumed to hold also for other types of projects, such as service delivery. Second, the 
research has been conducted in The Netherlands, and the cases are all Dutch. Results may 
differ in other countries with  different decision-making cultures. However, the material 
from Meier and O‘Toole does seem to suggest that a number of the conclusions also hold 
for the US and for other policy fields. Third, the specific context of the project should be 
taken into account. The connecting strategy could work in certain cases, but in other 
circumstances the strategy of exploring content, arranging or process agreements could 
turn out to be more effective. In-depth case study research has to be conducted in order to 
gain more insight into this. The strong effect of exploring content on both content and 
process outcomes that came out of this research suggests that managing the content 
dimension of networks is equally important as managing the process dimension. Since 
these complex processes are essentially about content and value choices, this may be less 
surprising than it seems. In the end, actors get involved because they want to achieve 
certain content and do not simply participate for the sake of the process.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References 
Agranoff, (2007), Managing within networks; adding value to public organizations, Washigton D.C: 
Georgetown University Press 
Agranoff, R., M. McGuire,  (2001), Big questions in public network management research, Journal of 
Public administration research and Theory, vol 11 (2001), no. 3: 295-326 
Agranoff, R. and M. McGuire (2003) Collaborative Public Management; new strategies for local 
governments , Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press. 
Bekkers, V., G.  Dijkstra, A.  Edwards, M.  Fenger (2007), Governance and the democratic deficit; assessing 
the democratic legitimacy of governance practices, Aldershot: Ashgate 
Benson, J.K., (1982), A framework for policy analysis, in: Rogers/Whetten(eds.) 1982. 
Cepiku, D., M.  Meneguzzo (2005), Interorganizational networks in the publivc sector; towards a 
multidisplinary theoretical framework, International Research seminar of Public Management, Budapest 2005 
Considine, M., J.M. Lewis and D. Alexander (2009), Ne tworks, innovations and public policy; politicians, 
bureaucrats and the pathway to change inside government, Houdmills basigstrole: Palgrave 
Macmillan 
Cropper, S.,  M. Ebers, C Huxham and P. Ring (2008), The Oxford handbook of inter-organizational relations, 
Oxford: Oxford University Press 
De Rynck, F. & J. Voets, Democracy in area-based networks: the case of Ghent, in: American Review of 
Public Administration , 2006, nr. 1, p. 58-78. 
J. Edelenbos, E.H. Klijn (2006), Managing stakeholder involvement in decision-making: a comparative 
analysis of six interactive processes in The Netherlands, Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory vol 16, number 3: 417-446 
De Jong, M. & J. Edelenbos, 2007, An insider’s look into policy transfer in trans-national expert networks. 
in: European Planning Studies , vol.15(5), pp.687-706.  
Eeten, M. van, (1999), Dialogues of the Deaf. Defining New Agendas for Environmental Deadlocks , Delft: 
Eburon 
Fischer, F. (2003). Reframing public policy; discursive politics and deliberative practices , Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Gage, R.W., M.P. Mandell (eds.), (1990), Strategies for managing intergovernmental policies and 
networks, New York/London: Preager 
Goldsmith, S. and W.D. Eggers (2004) Governing by Network – The New Shape of the Public Sector , 
Brookings Institution Press, Washington.  
Hanf, K, and F.W. Scharpf (eds.) (1978), Interorganisational Policy Making, London: sage 
Hanssen, G.S., J.E.  Klaussen (2007), Oslo Inner city district: network failure in the face of policy success in 
Marcussen and Torfing (2007)pp.  47-65 
Holtkamp, L, (2005), Neue formen kommunaler burgerbeteiligung, netwerkeuphorie und 
beteiligungsrealitat in : J.  Oebbecke (2005), Nich normative steuerung in dezeltralen systemen, Stuttgart: Frans Steiner verlag 
Huang, K., K.G. Provan (2007), Structural embeddedness and organizational social outcomes in a centrally 
governed mental health service network, Public Management Rieview, vol 9 nr.2: 169-189 
Innes, J.E. and D.E. Booher (2003) Collaborative policymaking: governance through dialogue, in: Hajer, 
M.A. and H. Wagenaar (eds.) Deliberative policy analysis. Understanding governance in the network 
society , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 
Jensen, L., H.  Kahler (2007), The Danish ministry of finance as metagovner; the case of public sector 
digitalization, in: Marcussen and Torfing (2007): 174-191 
Kaufmann, F.X., G. Majone and V. Ostrom (eds.) (1986) Guidance, Control and Evaluation in the Public 
Sector: The Bielefeld Interdisciplinary Project , Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.  
Kenis, P., L. Oerlemans (2008), The social network perspective: understanding the structure of cooperation 
in:: Cropper et all (2008): 289-312 
Kickert, W.J.M., E.H. Klijn and J.F.M. Koppenjan (eds.) (1997) Managing complex networks; strategies 
for the public sector , London: Sage. 
E.H. Klijn (2005), Networks and inter-organisational management; Challenging steering, evaluation and 
the role of public actors in public management  in  E. Ferlie, L. Lynn & C. Pollitt (eds.) The Oxford 
Handbook of Public Management , Oxford: Oxford University Press (pp. 257-281 
E.H. Klijn, C.K. Skelcher (2007), Democracy and governance networks: compatible or not? Four 
conjectures and their implications, Public Administration, vol 85, no 3,2007: 1-22  
Koppenjan, J.F.M. and  E.H. Klijn, Managing uncertainty in networks, Routledge: Londen 
Laumann, E.O., D. Knoke, (1987), The organisational state: Societal choice in National Policy Domains, 
Wisconsin,WI: University of Wisconsin Press 
Le Galès, P. 2001. ‘Urban governance and policy networks: on the boundedness of policy networks. A 
French case.’ Public Administration  79, 1, 167-84. 
Mandell, M.P. (ed.), 2001, Getting results trough collaboration, Westport: Quorum Books 
Mantel, S.J. (2005, second edition). Core concepts of project management . New York: Wiley. 
Marcussen, M. & J. Torfing (red.) (2007). Democratic network governance in Europe ,  Cheltenham: 
Edward Elgar. 
Marsh, D. (ed.), (1998), Comparing policy networks, Buckingham: Open University Press 
Marsh, D., Rhodes, R.A.W. (eds.), (1992), Policy networks in Britisch Government, Oxford: Clarendon 
Press 
Meier, K.J. and L.J. O’Toole (2001) ‘Managerial strategies and behaviour in networks: a model with evidence 
from U.S. public education’, in:  Journal of Public Administration and Theory  (11) 3: 271-293. 
Meier, K. L.J. O’Toole (2007), Modelling Public Management: empirical analysis of the management-
performance nexus Public Administration Review,  9(4), 503-527. 
Meneguzzo, M., D. Cepiku (eds.) (2008), network pubblici; strategia, strutture e governance, Milano: 
McGraw-Hill 
Milward H. Brinton, K.G. Provan, (2000), Governing the hollow state, Journal of public Administration 
Research and Theory, vol 10 no. 2 pp. 359-379 
Newman, J. (2001), Modernizing governance: new labour, policy and society, London: Sage 
Nooteboom, B. (2002). Trust: Forms, foundations, functions, failures and figures . Cheltenhal:Edgar Elgar 
O'Toole, L.J. (1988) Strategies for Intergovernmental Management: Implementing Programs in Interorgani-
zational Networks, in:  Journal of Public Administration , 11 (4): 417-441. 
O’Toole, L.J. (1997), Treating networks seriously: practical and research based agendas in public 
administration, Public Administration Review, 57: 1 (pp. 43-57) 
O’Toole, L.J., R.M. Walker, K. Me ier, G. Boyne (2007), Networking in comparative context: Public 
managers in the USA and the UK, Public Management Review, vol 9, nr.3: 401-420 
Pierre, J.  and B.  Guy Peters.  2000.  Governance, Politics and the State .  Basingstoke: Macmillan. 
Rhodes, R.A.W. (1997), Understanding Government, Open University Press, Buckingham. 
Rogers, D.L., D.A. Whetten (eds.), 1982, Interorganizational coordination: theory, research and 
implementation, Iowa: Iowa State University Press 
Scharpf, F.W.  (1978)  Interorganizational Policy Studies: Issues, Concepts and Perspectives , in: K.I.  Hanf 
and F.W.  Scharpf (eds.): 345-370. 
Skelcher, C., N. Mathur & M. Smith (2005). The public governance of collaborative spaces: discourse, 
design and democracy, Public Administration,  83(3), 573-596. 
.Sorenson E., J. Torfing (eds.) (2007), Theories of democratic network governance, Cheltenham: Edward 
Elgar 
Sorensen, E. (2007), Local politicians and administrators as meta governors, in Marcussen and Torfing 
(2007): 89-108 
Sullivan, H.  and C.  Skelcher.  2002.  Working Across Boundaries: Collaboration in Public Services .  
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Süsskind, L. and J. Cruikshank (1987) Breaking the Impasse. Consensual Approaches to Resolving Public 
Disputes . London: BasicBooks 
Torfing, J. (2007), Introduction: democratic network governance, in: Marcussen and Torfing (eds.) (2007): 
1-22 
Walker, R.M., L.J. O’Toole, K. Meier (2007), It’s where you are that matters: the networking behaviour of 
English local government officers, Public Administration vol. 85, nr.2 :739-756 
Williamson, O.E., (1996), The mechanisms of governance, Oxford: Oxford University Press  
 
 
Appendix: conceptualizing and measuring the variables 
 
This section provides a more detailed description of the survey and  conceptualization 
and measurement of the variables that are used in our analysis. 
 
Population and survey 
Table 2 describes the population used for the survey, and the number of respondents who 
have returned a usable questionnaire. 
 
Table 2. Population and Survey 
Number of people on Habiforum List (after 
removing researchers) 1592  
Returned questionnaires  547 
Analyzed questionnaires 337 
 
The original list contained 1592 names (after  removing university researchers, since the 
interest was only in practitioners). An e- mail was sent in November 2006, with a 
(secured) link to a webpage containing the questionnaire. It was known beforehand that 
this list included many people with only a br oad interest in spatial projects and without 
‘real’ involvement in such projects. Therefore, one of the first questions in the 
questionnaire was about a specific project the respondents were involved in. It was meant 
to select only those respondents who are rea lly involved in these projects. In total, 547 
completed questionnaires were returned. Many of these, however, were incomplete.5 In 
fact, 188 people did not provide any information about a project they were involved in, 
and quit the survey after the questions about these projects began to be asked. Many of 
these respondents indicated in an open question  that they were in fact not involved in 
such a project. These respondents were therefore deleted from the database. Another 22 respondents were also removed, because they were missing on most of the variables. This left 337 respondents who answered most of the questions in the questionnaire and 
indicated that they themselves were involved in environmental projects.  
In relation to the number of e-mails sent, the response rate can be estimated to be 21%, 
although in relation to the number of people who are involved in environmental projects 
this response can be estimated to be substantially higher. The number of 188 incomplete 
questionnaires is an indication of the actual population, the following rough estimation of 
the actual response can be made: Of the 547 returned questionnaires, 188 or 34% are missing. If this same proportion holds for the total sample, then the actual number of 
people involved in environmental projects is 1056 (.66*1600). If this assumption is true, 
the actual size of the response is about 33% (347/1056). It is possibly even higher, as 
people not involved in environmental projects  will probably not have bothered to take 
part in the survey 
The above implies that care must be taken in interpreting the data, as: a) the actual 
population of people involved in environmental projects is unknown and b) it is therefore 
impossible to find out whether the response is  representative of this population. However, 
there is reason to believe that this sample provides a reasonable overview of all 
environmental projects in the Netherlands (see note 2). 
 
Conceptualizing and measuring outcomes: process and content outcomes 
Table I provides an indication of these two dimensions of outcomes and the (five 
category Likert) items that were used to measure them. 
 
Table I. Measurements of outcomes 
Content outcomes Items 
1. innovative character Do you think that i nnovative ideas are developed during the project 
 
2. integral nature of solution Do you think that different environmental functions have been connected 
sufficiently?  
3. involvement of actors 
(content) Do you think that in general the involved actors have delivered a recognizable 
contribution to the development of the results?  
4. effectiveness solutions Do you think that the solutions that have been developed really deal with the 
problems at hand? 
 
5. effectiveness in the future Do you think that the developed solutions are durable solutions for the future? 
 
6. Relation costs and benefits  Do you think that - in general - the bene fits exceed the cost s of the cooperation 
process?  
Process outcomes Items 
1.  level of management Do you think that the involved actors have contributed substantively to the 
management of the project? 
 
2. conflict resolution  Do you think that conflicts and differences of opinion have been solved 
adequately during the project?  
 
3. deadlocks Did you witness any dist urbing deadlocks during the project? 
 
4. productive use of differences Do you think that the involved actors have made use of the existing different 
perspectives and insights (among the actors) in an adequate way with regard to 
solutions and problems in the project?  
5. contact frequency Do you think that the involved actors had frequently contact with each other during 
the project?  
6. support Do you think that the results from  the project can expect the support of the 
involved actors? 
 
 
The Cronbach’s alpha of the six items measuring process outcomes is 0.80, so that they can be considered 
as forming one scale measuring the perception of process outcomes. The scores on the six items were 
added up, and divided by six. The items were also recoded, so that a higher score on the scale indicates a 
more positive perception of the process outcomes. The resulting scale has a mean score of 3.39 and a 
standard deviation of 0.60.  
The Cronbach’s alpha of the six items measuring content outcomes was 0.84. Again, the six items were 
recoded, added up, and divided by six, resulting in a scale with a mean score of 3.90 and a standard 
deviation of 0.62. In both cases, the scores are above the theoretical mean (3), which indicates that the 
respondents are on average positive about the outcomes. Comparing both means, it also appears that they 
are somewhat more positive about the content outcomes compared to the process outcomes. 
 
Project complexity  
In the second hypothesis, project complexity figures as a control variable. An environmental project was considered to be more complex when it dealt with more activities. Six different activities were identified: 
the building of houses, industry development, commercial development, environmental development, road 
development and water management (compare with Table 2). Based on the responses, we measured for 
each project whether one or more of these activities were performed. This resulted in a complexity scale 
ranging from 0 to 6. According to the mean score, the projects involved 2.98 activities on average, with a 
broad diversity given a standard deviation of 1.59. 
 
Network management strategies 
This is an important variable to test Hypothesis 2. Which network management strategies can be found in 
governance networks and how effective are they?  
As indicated in Section 2, four types of activities were identified based on the available literature: 
- arranging; this includes strategies to organize the interactions in governance networks in 
temporary organizational structures 
- exploring content; exploring different views of actors and possible new solutions, and connecting 
the ideas of different actors 
- connecting; securing contacts between actors, improving relations, etc 
- process agreements; agreements about process rules and methods of interaction between the actors 
 
Four items were created for each of these strategy types. A factor analysis of these 16 items showed that 
these 16 items were fairly strongly correlated with one  dimension dominating the sultion (for more 
information please contact the researchers) 
 
Number of strategies employed 
Although the factor analysis confirmed the existence of the four different strategies, it also showed the 
dominance of the first factor in the solution. As mentioned above, this suggests that good management 
involves the use of all available strategies. In fact, if a reliability analysis is performed on all sixteen items 
measuring the network strategies, a Cronbach’s alpha of 0.90 is obtained, indicating a strong correlation 
between management strategies employed. To measure the number of strategies employed (an important variable in Hypothesis 1), the sixteen items 
measuring the strategies were first dichotomized6, and then the number of strategies that were actually used 
in the project were counted. The resulting variable ranges from 0 (3.6% of the respondents) to 16 (6.3%), 
with a mean of 9.11 strategies used (standard deviation 4.18). 
 
Project and respondent characteristics as control variables 
The above variables measure the main concepts included in the hypotheses. In order to test these, several 
control variables were also included, with respect to both characteristics of the respondent as well as to 
relevant project characteristics.  
 
Phase of the project 
The projects the respondents discussed were not all in the same phase. This obviously influences perception 
on outcomes. For instance, almost by definition there will be fewer outcomes in the first phases of an 
environmental project. The respondents were not directly asked which phase they were in, but a number of 
activities were listed (from initiating ideas to implementation of actual maintenance activities) and the 
phase was deduced based on the level of activities respondents indicated they were involved in . Four 
different phases were discerned: 1) preparation phase (21%); 2) developmental phase (41%); 3) building 
phase (17%); 4) maintenance phase (21%). 
 
Parent organization of the respondent  
The respondents come from different backgrounds. As it is possible that this background influences the 
perception of democratic anchorage and/or the outcome perception, this is controlled for in the analysis. 
Four different background types can be discerned: 1) national civil servants (11%); 2) local civil servants 
(including counties and water board) (29%); 3) private sector respondents (48%); 4) ‘others’ (13%). The 
last group mostly included respondents from stakeholder organizations like environmental groups. In order 
to incorporate this variable into the analysis, three dummies were included. National civil servants serve as 
the reference category. 
 
Position in project 
The perception of outcomes can depend on the position of the respondent within the project. Given our 
interest in the effect of managerial strategies, in the analysis a dummy variable is included distinguishing 
those with a managerial position (28.8%) from those without. 
 
 
Endnotes 
 
                                                 
1 We are aware that the term governance is sometimes used in other ways (good governance, corporate 
governance, governance as new public management).  However governance is most often used for 
situations where governments operate in a multi-actor situation and use horizontal ways of steering/governance (Rhodes, 1997; Pierre, 2000), which fits our description of governance networks. 
2 Habiforum has established itself as a fairly important network organization with a lot of members. 
Looking at the projects mentioned by the respondents, it can be seen that almost all the well-known 
environmental projects in The Netherlands are represented (and of course a number of lesser known ones as 
well), which provides confidence that this is a fairly reasonable sample of the available projects in The Netherlands
 
3 In fact, it would also not make much sense to include the number of strategies and the results of the factor 
analysis within one analysis, as these variables are based on the same items, which also explains the high 
correlation. 
4 As explained above (see note 4), a substantial portion of the respondents were lost because many were not 
able to answer detailed questions about the projects. To validate the results, the analyses were also performed on the sub-sample of ‘more involved respondents’ (categories 3 and 4 in Table 2), but the results 
– not included here – were highly similar. 
5 This is a normal situation with internet surveys since a number of people only glance through the 
questionnaire as they would have done if it was a paper version, and then decide that the survey is not 
relevant to them, or decide that they do not want to answer it. In this case, the fact that they had to answer the questionnaire for a specific project
 probably inflated the number of people who only filled in a very 
limited number of questions  
                                                                                                                                                 
6 The scores 1 and 2 (indicating that the strategy was (certainly) used) were scored as 1, while the other 
three categories were scored as 0. 