GROUPS, BOUNDARY SPANNING,
AND THE TEMPORAL IMAGINATION
Allen C. Bluedorn and Rhetta L. Standifer
ABSTRACT
The temporal imagination is the understanding of the intersection of one
entity’s timescape with the larger timescapes of which that entity is a part.Weexamineindetailwhatthetemporalimaginationis,complementedwithadiscussion of the related timescape idea, and why the temporal imaginationis necessary to function in any timescape. We also discuss group attributesthatwilllikelyaffectthedevelopmentofthetemporalimaginationanditsuseand how its use in group boundary spanning efforts affect both the groupsand the larger organization.
INTRODUCTION
Thetemporalimaginationistheabilitytounderstandtheintersectionofoneentity’stimescape with the larger timescapes of which that entity is a part. The entity canbe an individual, a group, or an entire organization, but this chapter focuses onboundary spanning groups and their parent organizations. Several attributes ofboundary spanning groups that are likely to inﬂuence the quality of the group’stemporal imagination are then presented and analyzed (group diversity, sharedmental models within the group, longevity, and autonomy).
Two generations ago, C. Wright Mills’ wrote The Sociological Imagination
(1959), which ever since has provided an enduring description of the enterprise
Time in Groups
Research on Managing Groups and Teams, Volume 6, 159–182Copyright © 2004 by Elsevier Ltd.All rights of reproduction in any form reservedISSN: 1534-0856/doi:10.1016/S1534-0856(03)06008-0
159
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/books/edited-volume/chapter-pdf/9414627/s1534-0856_03_06008-0.pdf by University College London user on 31 May 2026160 ALLEN C. BLUEDORN AND RHETTA L. STANDIFER
ofsocialscienceasdeﬁnedbytheconceptinthebook’stitle.AccordingtoMills,
“The sociological imagination enables us to grasp history and biography and therelationsbetweenthetwoinsociety”(p.6).Further,thesociologicalimaginationallowspeople“tounderstandwhatishappeninginthemselvesasminutepointsofthe intersection of biography and history in society” (p. 7). Thus it would be fairtosaythatthesociologicalimaginationistheabilitytounderstandtheintersectionofhistoryandbiography,andinthatunderstandingtocomprehendtheeffecteachhas on the other.
It is impossible, however, to understand that intersection completely without
an understanding of the temporal dimensions of both biography and history,such an understanding being the proper focus of the temporal imagination . The
term “temporal imagination” has been used sparingly in a variety of disciplines,including literature ( Barth, 1991; Weitzel, 1999 ), sociology ( Nock, 1998 ), and
political science ( Chowers, 1998 ). To the best of our knowledge, it has not been
used previously in the organization sciences.
What is the temporal imagination? Why is it necessary to function in any
timescape? How does its use in group boundary spanning efforts affect both thegroups and the larger organization? These will be the f