Marketing culture to service climate: the
inﬂuence of employee control and ﬂexibility
Tyler R. Morgan, Adam Rapp, R. Glenn Richey, Jr. and Alexander E. Ellinger
Department of Marketing, The University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, Alabama, USA
Abstract
Purpose – The purpose of this research is to explore how ﬁrm market orientation, as a culture, affects the service climate that develops in the ﬁrm.
Design/methodology/approach – Empirical testing is performed at the managerial level and boundary-spanning employee level as part of this
multilevel study. The sample includes participants from a US-based ﬁrm operating in the hospitality industry.
Findings – Results indicate that a market-oriented ﬁrm culture interacts with other elements such as boundary-spanning employee ﬂexibility and
control to positively impact the service climate that develops.
Research limitations/implications – This research provides theoretical implications for the development of a service climate within a
market-oriented ﬁrm culture and the inﬂuence of managers on boundary-spanning employees in the development of the climate.
Practical implications – As managers attempt to develop a service climate through a market-oriented ﬁrm culture, they will ﬁnd success by
providing boundary-spanning employees with control and hiring employees that possess ﬂexibility as a personality trait.
Originality/value – The framework developed in this research provides insights regarding the multilevel nature of service climate development and
the impact of a market-oriented culture.
Keywords Culture, Flexibility, Market orientation, Service climate, Boundary spanner
Paper type Research paper
An executive summary for managers and executive
readers can be found at the end of this issue.
Introduction
Marketing continuously evolves. The early work of marketing
focused on product orientation where the ﬁrm facilitated the
transfer of ownership and distribution of goods (Achrol, 1991;
Gummesson, 1991). Now, out of necessity, many ﬁrms have
shifted to market orientation in their pursuit of improved ﬁrm
performance by increasing the value that products deliver to
consumers through a better understanding of their needs
(Kumar et al., 2011). As many markets become crowded with
competition,
it
is
increasingly
important
for
ﬁrms
to
differentiate themselves from their competitors. Firms have
done this is by increasing the value they provide customers
through the services they offer (Gebauer et al., 2011;
Karmarkar,
2004).
Although
the
beneﬁts
of
providing
superior service are well understood (Day and Wensley, 1988;
Zeithaml et al., 1996), the mechanisms through which ﬁrms
can achieve such service are not. We explore the mechanisms
that facilitate superior service, and thus, a competitive
advantage for ﬁrms. Speciﬁcally, we investigate constructs at
two different levels within the ﬁrm (i.e. employee and
manager) that have the potential to inﬂuence service climate.
First, we examine market orientation, which Slater and Narver
(1995) deﬁne as a ﬁrm culture that places priority on customer
value while also providing norms for behavior regarding ﬁrm
development and responsiveness to market information. A
market-oriented culture can beneﬁt the ﬁrm as it pursues an
advantage
over
competitors
through
service.
Speciﬁcally,
market-oriented ﬁrms aim to gain a competitive advantage by
focusing
their
efforts
on
understanding
customers
and
competitors,
while
also
promoting
the
inter-functional
coordination of ﬁrm resources (Narver and Slater, 1990). A
ﬁrm’s culture describes the norms and values that ﬁrm managers
and employees believe are present, while the ﬁrm’s climate
illustrates how the ﬁrm operationalizes the culture in everyday
behaviors (Deshpandé and Webster, 1989). If managers have
successfully developed a culture within the ﬁrm, then a climate
should be present to reinforce the values and beliefs of that
culture. Boundary-spanning employees aim to project a climate
of service to their customers through an enhanced understanding
of their needs as developed under the market-oriented culture of
the ﬁrm. Firm managers may look to develop a service climate
because competing through service is increasingly important
(Lusch et al., 2007) as the ﬁrm continues to pursue a competitive
advantage over a more traditional, product-oriented or less
market-immersed ﬁrm.
At the employee level, we investigate the role that a speciﬁc
personality
characteristic,
ﬂexible
disposition,
plays
in
inﬂuencing service climate. In accordance with previous
research, “personality (disposition) represents the innate
characteristics of an individual” (Mechinda and Patterson,
2011 p. 102). A ﬂexible disposition can be beneﬁcial to the
The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/0887-6045.htm
Journal of Services Marketing
28/6 (2014) 498–508
© Emerald Group Publishing Limited [ISSN 0887-6045]
[DOI 10.1108/JSM-08-2013-0226]
Received 19 August 2013
Revised 10 January 2014
Accepted 15 March 2014
498
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsm/article-pdf/28/6/498/1675125/jsm-08-2013-0226.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
boundary-spanning
employee
in
their
interactions
with
customers and has been highlighted as important to successful
adaptive selling (Spiro and Weitz, 1990). Employee ﬂexibility
may also inﬂuence the ability of the employee to provide
adequate service to customers (Gwinner et al., 2005).
A ﬁrm’s culture, and ultimately what is presented from
managers to frontline employees, inﬂuences how customers
will perceive the ﬁrm as a whole (Dean, 2004). The service
climate permeates through all levels of the ﬁrm, including
boundary-spanning employees and their exchanges with
customers. By adopting a market orientation, a ﬁrm sends a
message to frontline employees regarding the culture it is
developing and the climate it expects them to provide to
customers.
Purpose and gap
This research advances a framework to depict how a ﬁrm’s
market orientation affects the service climate felt by its
customers. Speciﬁcally, we describe how ﬁrm culture, as
created through market orientation, inﬂuences the service
climate perceived by boundary-spanning employees. We also
investigate how the ﬂexible disposition of boundary-spanning
employees contributes to the service climate at various levels
of market orientation and employee control.
Recent research has called for additional investigation into
the science of service (Ostrom et al., 2010) and factors that
contribute to the development of a ﬁrm service climate
(Bowen and Schneider, 2013; Schneider et al., 2013; Auh
et al., 2011b). Predecessors to service climate such as
perceived autonomy, the Big Five personality traits and a
service worker’s control have been explored in the literature
(Auh et al., 2011a; Auh et al., 2011b; Yagil and Gal, 2002).
However, no research has speciﬁcally investigated the link
between market orientation and service climate. Thus, it is
sensible
to
merge
previous
research
regarding
market
orientation and the inﬂuence it has on proﬁtability and
workplace culture (Kumar et al., 2011; Kirka et al., 2005) with
investigations of service climate.
Additionally, we aim to contribute to the service climate
literature
by
exploring
how
the
control
granted
to
boundary-spanning employees by managers facilitates the
service climate that is sought within the ﬁrm. Previous
research
links
the
performance
of
boundary-spanning
employees to the control they have over their day-to-day
operations and the time they dedicate to each of the tasks they
need to complete (Challagalla and Shervani, 1996). More
recently, research linked boundary-spanning employee control
to management and ﬁrm culture (Patel and Conklin, 2010).
In a market-oriented culture, the control that managers
provide to employees should enrich the service climate of the
ﬁrm, as employees may use the control they are given to
provide a superior service climate to their customers.
Boundary-spanning employees may also have speciﬁc
personality attributes that will inﬂuence the ﬁrm service
climate, and research to identify these attributes is needed
(Ostrom et al., 2010). This research investigates how one of
these
boundary-spanning
employee
attributes,
ﬂexible
disposition, facilitates the service climate. Research widely
recognizes that personal ﬂexibility reﬂects the degree to which
a person will engage in adaptive selling techniques (Spiro and
Weitz,
1990).
By
being
ﬂexible,
boundary-spanning
employees can tailor their services to each customer, providing
them a greater level of service.
To ﬁll the void in research, this study examines the link
between a company’s managerial culture, represented by
market orientation and the climate felt by customers, in this
case, a service climate. Additionally, we investigate the effect
of
boundary-spanner
control
and
ﬂexibility
as
possible
facilitators of market orientation culture to service climate.
Literature review
Market orientation
Firms look to attain sustainable competitive advantages
over
competitors
through
developing
a
comprehensive
understanding of the markets in which they compete (Day,
1994). In the pursuit of superior performance outcomes,
market-oriented ﬁrms will use a three-component mix of
customer
orientation,
competitor
orientation
and
interfunctional coordination to achieve their goals (Narver
and Slater, 1990). When implementing a market-oriented
approach, the key to success is focusing on the customer’s
needs ﬁrst (Beitelspacher et al., 2011; Deshpandé et al., 1993).
As
previously
described,
a
market
orientation
culture
prioritizes customer value and establishes norms for utilizing
market information (Slater and Narver 1995). Culture is “the
pattern of shared values and beliefs that help members of an
organization understand why things happen and thus teach them
the behavioral norms in the organization” (Deshpandé and
Webster, 1989, p. 4). A market-oriented culture is deeply rooted
in employees, both managers and boundary spanners. The
beneﬁts of a market orientation are many (Javalgi et al., 2005;
Chang and Chen, 1998), as employees and ﬁrms with a strong
market orientation culture outperform those with weaker
cultures (Van Egeren and O’Connor, 1998; Slater, 1997).
Gainer and Padanyi (2005) describe one of the strongest
unions of market orientation and the culture it creates when they
advocated that a market-oriented culture affects market vigilance
and leads to action. When the culture that management
establishes empowers boundary-spanning employees to act in a
way that beneﬁts the ﬁrm, they are doing so because of the
climate that rewards them for this action. Climate refers to the
behaviors that an employee perceives as being rewarded by the
ﬁrm under the provided organizational structure (Schneider and
Reichers, 1983). The results of adopting a market-oriented
culture, as described by Gainer and Padanyi (2005), can be that
boundary-spanning employees act in a manner that beneﬁts and
is rewarded by the ﬁrm.
Service climate
Strong organizational climates are associated with better
performance from both managers and their subordinates
(Pritchard and Karasick, 1973). Service climate, like any other
climate, is something that permeates the workforce and is
reﬂective of how employees perceive the ﬁrm as fulﬁlling their
expectations (Deshpandé and Webster, 1989). Speciﬁc to
service, when a ﬁrm has an organizational climate centered on
providing services to customers, it is said to have a service
climate (Schneider et al., 1992). Later, Schneider et al. (1998)
further expanded upon a service climate to include employee
perceptions of the practices, procedures and behaviors that are
Marketing culture to service climate
Tyler R. Morgan et al.
Journal of Services Marketing
Volume 28 · Number 6 · 2014 · 498–508
499
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsm/article-pdf/28/6/498/1675125/jsm-08-2013-0226.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
expected, supported and rewarded with regard to customer
service and customer service quality.
As previous studies document (Schneider et al., 1998; Dietz
et al., 2004), the ﬁrm receives beneﬁts from having a strong
service climate. Speciﬁcally, boundary-spanning employees
perform well in a strong service climate, as it encourages them
to view customer care as a key part of their position within the
ﬁrm (Schneider et al., 2009) and has a positive impact on work
engagement (Barnes and Collier, 2013). In their deﬁnition of
service climate, Schneider et al. (1998) describe employee
perceptions as the measurement of service. These perceptions
dictate whether a ﬁrm can be said to have a strong or weak
service climate and are the focus of later research that depicts
service climate as an intangible resource (Ray et al., 2004). It
is difﬁcult for ﬁrms to copy or imitate the service climate of
another ﬁrm, and this may explain some of the beneﬁts that
ﬁrms receive as they work toward obtaining a competitive
advantage through service.
Previous research regarding different types of climate
identiﬁed that supervisors acting in the way that they want
their employees to act led to higher employee recognition of
that climate (e.g. safety climate) (Zohar and Luria, 2004). A
similar connection is drawn between managerial input and
boundary-spanner performance. Dietz et al. (2004, p. 81)
argue that “when excellent service is an important theme in an
organization, a positive service climate exists”. It is the
employee’s perception of management’s desired actions that
manifests as the service that customers receive. This being the
case, service climate originates at the managerial level and,
when it is communicated to boundary spanners, results in
greater perceived customer service (Dietz et al., 2004). In the
current economy, it is vital that a company with a strong
market orientation develop a compelling service climate as a
way to differentiate their offerings from the competition and
create a sustained competitive advantage.
Theory and research hypotheses
Service-dominant logic
Marketing for many ﬁrms has shifted from concentrating on
the producer of goods to emphasizing the importance of the
customer. Service-dominant logic reﬂects this change, and
shifts attention to the service that, together with the goods,
creates the value offering (Vargo and Lusch, 2004a). In this
context, service is regarded as a perspective on value creation
and not a category of offerings put forth to the market
(Edvardsson et al., 2005). Thus, goods provide a distribution
mechanism for services required by consumers. Firms use
resources to create value for customers through the services
they provide via goods (Vargo and Lusch, 2004b). As
service-dominant logic has matured, it has been reﬁned to
afﬁrm that “goods (both durable and non-durable) derive
their value through use – the service they provide” (Vargo and
Lusch, 2008). Understanding that the exchange of goods
inherently includes the services they provide is critical when
applying a service-dominant logic framework to the ﬁrm.
Traditionally, it was thought that the ﬁrm should market to
customers after performing an appropriate analysis of their
needs and producing products for their consumption (Lusch
et al., 2007). Accordingly, traditional ﬁrms classify their
customers as an operand resource, a resource upon which an
operation is performed to produce an effect (Constantin and
Lusch,
1994).
Service-dominant
logic
proposes
that
customers be reclassiﬁed as operant resources where the
customer is a resource that is capable of acting upon other
resources (Lusch et al., 2007). In this respect, ﬁrms no longer
market to customers but market with them through the
co-production of value.
Market-oriented ﬁrms should inherently look to understand
customer needs as this is a critical task in the value creation
process (Deshpandé et al., 1993). Service-dominant logic
indicates that customers are focused on the service that goods
provide them. As such, organizations may gain a competitive
advantage by adopting a service orientation, regardless of the
type of goods offered (Lusch et al., 2007). As ﬁrms attempt to
satisfy the service requirements of consumers, a service
climate will develop. Managers will set forth practices and
procedures
to
be
implemented
by
boundary-spanning
employees as they seek to fulﬁll their expected roles in the ﬁrm
by providing customer service. Therefore, we hypothesize
that:
H1.
The market-oriented culture of the ﬁrm will be
positively associated with the service climate of the ﬁrm.
Control
The practices and procedures that managers set forth shape
the way that boundary-spanning employees will interface with
their customers. The distribution of control from manager to
employees rests on a continuum, with complete control held
by managers on one end and complete control held by
employees on the other (Deci and Ryan, 1987). Prior research
suggests that the customer–ﬁrm interaction is the key to value
co-creation (Prahalad and Ramaswamy, 2004) and, by
deﬁnition, takes place between the customer and a boundary
spanner. When boundary spanners are given greater levels of
control by their managers, they are increasingly empowered to
treat every interaction differently, and tailor it to the customer.
Prahalad and Ramaswamy (2004) go on to say that diverse
co-creation experiences through heterogeneous interactions
lead to a focus on innovating experiences and personalization
of the co-creation experience. As such, the ability to service
the customer with a desirable level of variety stems from the
amount of control boundary spanners are provided by
management.
Managers
who
maintain
organizational
control
for
themselves and dictate the actions of boundary spanners,
restrict the ability of boundary-spanning employees to tailor
their communications and interactions to each individual
customer. Employees who are empowered to make their own
decisions through tailoring the service they provide to each
customer perceive service as important and strengthen the
service
climate
(Schneider
et
al.,
1998).
Reducing
boundary-spanner control increases employee work strain
(Varca, 2001) and limits their ability to satisfy customer
requests. Many encounters between employees and customers
may be seen as routine. However, true customer service lies
with the employee’s response to unusual request, and
employees who do not have enough control over their job to
respond creatively may provide lower service (Varca, 2001).
Allowing boundary spanners to use their discretion when
Marketing culture to service climate
Tyler R. Morgan et al.
Journal of Services Marketing
Volume 28 · Number 6 · 2014 · 498–508
500
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsm/article-pdf/28/6/498/1675125/jsm-08-2013-0226.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
meeting the needs of the customer may positively inﬂuence
both the customer response and how they grade the service
encounter (Hartline and Ferrell, 1996).
A ﬁrm that adopts a market orientation and strives for a
service climate will ﬁnd that climate more difﬁcult to
implement if the actions of boundary-spanning employees are
strictly controlled by management. One of the components of
a market orientation, as deﬁned by Narver and Slater (1990),
is being customer oriented. Employees who have control of
their actions are empowered to listen to customer needs,
requests and ideas. A market-oriented ﬁrm is focused on
customer value (Slater and Narver, 1995) which, according to
service dominant logic, is manifested in the service provided.
The service the customer receives becomes both what is
measured and what is rewarded by the ﬁrm. In this way, a
service climate develops; promoted by management, instilled
in boundary spanners and felt by customers.
Therefore, we hypothesize that:
H2.
The positive association between market orientation
and service climate is moderated by boundary spanner
control such that when employees have greater control,
the perceived service climate is stronger.
Flexibility
Previous
research
has
centered
on
understanding
the
disposition of boundary-spanning employees (Mechinda and
Patterson, 2011), as ﬁrms look to ﬁnd individuals with
characteristics that are most conducive to the interactive
customer
environment
(Weitz,
1981).
Understanding
employee dispositions is useful as a disposition provides a
“regular or expectable response to certain circumstances or
occurrences (Hempel, 1960)” (Fridhandler, 1986 p. 171).
However, past studies suffer from mixed success when
attempting to link speciﬁc employee dispositions to behaviors.
Spiro and Weitz (1990), in a departure from previous
research, focused on the general personality traits that
reﬂected an individual’s ﬂexibility as an indicator of how
boundary-spanning
employees
engage
customers.
Later
research expanded on the ability of boundary spanners to
improve
performance
by
focusing
on
working
smart.
Boundary spanners that work smart engage in planning
activities, utilize a variety of selling activities and retain the
capacity to be functionally ﬂexible (Sujan et al., 1994). The
individual’s ability to employ a range of different behaviors, as
required by a given interpersonal situation, deﬁnes their ability
to be functionally ﬂexible when interacting with customers
(Sujan et al., 1994).
Prior research regarding boundary-spanning employees
expressed ﬂexibility as a fundamental employee disposition for
success (Spiro and Weitz, 1990; Sujan et al., 1994). Further
depth on the understanding of ﬂexibility has come from
studies such as Boorom et al. (1998) who researched the role
of ﬂexibility in communication. They stress that ﬂexibility in
communication
can
have
an
important
impact
on
the
boundary spanner’s interactions with customers and sales
performance. Speciﬁc to the context of services, Gwinner et al.
(2005) used employee personality predispositions related to
ﬂexibility in their study of adaptive service offerings. They
found that employees with high ﬂexibility are more adaptive in
their service offerings to customers. As ﬁrms attempt to
differentiate themselves through the services they provide,
employees who are ﬂexible will be better prepared to satisfy
ﬁrm requirements and provide the service climate they aim to
develop. Therefore, we hypothesize that:
H3.
Boundary-spanner
ﬂexibility
will
be
positively
associated with the service climate of the ﬁrm.
Additionally, a robust ﬁrm culture should strengthen the
individual’s ability to act upon their ﬂexible disposition.
Previous research has supported that a manager’s market
orientation positively inﬂuences the market orientation of their
employees (Lam et al., 2010). A market orientation focuses on
learning about and satisfying customer needs (Slater and
Narver, 1995), which should enhance the ability of boundary
spanners with a ﬂexible disposition to service their customers
in the most suitable fashion. Individuals with high levels of
ﬂexibility who operate in an environment with a strategic
market orientation will perceive an even higher level of service
climate, as the market orientation in which they operate can
lead them to actions that beneﬁt and are rewarded by the ﬁrm
(Gainer and Padanyi, 2005). Therefore, we hypothesize that:
H4.
The positive association between boundary spanner
ﬂexibility and service climate is moderated by market
orientation such that when market orientation is
greater, the perceived service climate is stronger.
However, we believe that the amount of control given to
boundary-spanning employees by management will inﬂuence
this
association.
Prior
research
indicates
that
boundary-spanning
employees
need
ﬂexibility
to
make
decisions
and
satisfy
the
customer
throughout
their
interaction, but that they also must be empowered with
sufﬁcient control from management to make those decisions
quickly and independently (Hartline and Ferrell, 1996). A
ﬂexible employee does not further a service climate when they
are not allowed to deviate from the directions they have been
given by management. As we discussed earlier, a stronger
perception of service is realized throughout the ﬁrm and the
customer base when more control is granted to boundary
spanners to service their clients. Less control provided to
boundary spanners will limit their ability to service customers
in creative ways (Varca 2001) and constrains their ability to
provide customer value in their offerings.
When given greater control over their activities, a ﬂexible
disposition is utilized to whatever extent the individual
boundary spanner possesses characteristic. Barrick and Mount
(1993) propose that the validity of some personality predictors
is moderated by the degree of control employees have over
their job. Assuming that a ﬂexible disposition is one such
personality
predictor,
its
validity
would
rise
when
the
boundary spanner is given more control over their position
and, speciﬁcally, over time, they interact with the customer.
The combination of inherent ﬂexibility and empowerment
from
management
to
make
decisions
allows
boundary
spanners to more effectively service the needs of their clients.
Therefore, we hypothesize that:
Marketing culture to service climate
Tyler R. Morgan et al.
Journal of Services Marketing
Volume 28 · Number 6 · 2014 · 498–508
501
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsm/article-pdf/28/6/498/1675125/jsm-08-2013-0226.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
H5.
The amount of control a boundary-spanning employee
is
given
intensiﬁes
the
positive
effect
of
market
orientation on the relationship between boundary
spanner ﬂexibility and service climate.
A ﬁgure of our hypothesized relationships is shown in
Figure 1.
Research methodology
The sample
The participants in this study work for a US-based ﬁrm
operating in the hospitality industry. This ﬁrm provides
business-to-business solutions to maintain the facilities of 
30,000 businesses across a broad range of hospitality settings.
They provide equipment, chemicals, training, programs and
certiﬁcation for a number of important areas such as
foodservice and sanitation. The company structure is typical
where managers frequently interact with boundary-spanner
subordinates. As such, managers are fully aware of the
behaviors of subordinates.
Data for the study were collected from two sources:
1
written employee surveys; and
2
written manager surveys.
The boundary-spanning employees are service employees who
interact with customers to provide solutions using company
provided products and programs. The ﬁrm requires all
employees
to
undergo
extensive
training.
The
boundary-spanning employees are compensated by a salary
and bonus structure where individual performance heavily
inﬂuences pay. All ﬁrm boundary-spanning service employees
were solicited for participation in the survey. The total
number of employees surveyed was 428, and 323 provided
usable responses for a 75 per cent response rate.
Managers are responsible for employee selection, training
and on the job development. Managers act as supervisors over
productivity where they are responsible for business results
and manage employee relationships. Customer retention and
satisfaction are also manager responsibilities. Additionally,
managers train employees to follow company processes and
procedures, as well as relevant laws. All ﬁrm managers were
solicited for participation in the survey. Of the 80 managers
surveyed, 75 provided usable responses for a 94 per cent
response rate. Finally, manager and subordinate data were
matched so cross-level relationships could be analyzed.
Demographics
of
the
two
samples,
managers
and
employees, are provided here according to experience, gender
and age. The mean age of managers in the ﬁrm is 42 years,
while the mean employee age is 36 years. Males represent 68
per cent of the managers in the ﬁrm and 61 per cent of
employees in the ﬁrm. Experience varies between managers
and employees. Managers have a mean experience in the
industry of 9.3 years, in sales 9.9 years and with the company
4.0 years. Employees have a mean experience in the industry
of 9.6 years, in sales 11.5 years and with the company 3.2
years. The mean amount of experience for employees with
their current manager is 2.3 years.
Measures
All four scales were Likert-type and adapted, when necessary,
from previous multi-item scales found in the literature.
Reliabilities, correlations and relevant psychometric properties
are reported in Table I.
From
the
boundary-spanning
employee,
we
collected
information on service climate and ﬂexibility. Service climate
was assessed using six items based on the service climate scale
developed by Schneider et al. (1998). A sample item is, “the
job knowledge and skills of employees to deliver superior
customer
service
are
outstanding”.
Boundary-spanning
employee ﬂexibility was assessed using four items based on
Spiro and Weitz’s (1990) ADAPTS scale. Spiro and Weitz’s
study emphasized the importance of boundary-spanning
Figure 1 Hypothesized model
H5
H4
H3
H2
H1
Boundary Spanner Employee Level
Manager Level
Market
Orientaon
Service
Climate
Boundary
Spanner
Control
Flexibility
Marketing culture to service climate
Tyler R. Morgan et al.
Journal of Services Marketing
Volume 28 · Number 6 · 2014 · 498–508
502
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsm/article-pdf/28/6/498/1675125/jsm-08-2013-0226.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
employee ﬂexibility on their performance, and the items used
from the scale measure employee ﬂexibility. A sample item
includes,
“I
believe
each
customer
requires
a
unique
approach”.
We collected information on the ﬁrm’s market orientation
and the control afforded to boundary-spanning employees at
the manager level. Firm market orientation was measured
using 12 items based on the scale developed by Lam et al.
(2010). A sample item includes, “I am always looking for new
products and services”. The fourth construct, control, was
measured using an adaptation of a scale developed by Noble
(2008). The scale assesses the control provided by the
manager to the employee. A sample item includes, “I allow my
salespeople to decide how best to get the job done”. A list of
the scale items is provided in Table II.
Analysis strategy
Our research model focuses on the interaction of manager
level (e.g. market orientation and boundary-spanner control)
and boundary-spanner employee-level factors (e.g. ﬂexibility),
as they inﬂuence the service climate perceived by the
boundary-spanning
employee.
As
mentioned,
the
data
collected for the model were multilevel. Speciﬁcally, the
independent variable (i.e. market orientation) and one of
the moderating variables (i.e. control) were collected at the
manager level (Level 2). All other variables (i.e. service climate
and ﬂexibility) were collected at the boundary-spanner level
(Level 1). Thus, the most appropriate analytical procedure to
empirically examine the cross-level relationships hypothesized
is hierarchical linear modeling (HLM; Bryk and Raudenbush,
1992; Hofmann, 1997). We used HLM version 7.0, reporting
both generalized least squares standard errors, as well as
robust standard errors.
The HLM method of analysis is a two-stage strategy that
investigates variables residing at two levels. First, Level 1
variables are estimated discretely for each Level 2 unit of
analysis (i.e. each individual manager). The ﬁrst-stage analysis
provides intercept and slope terms estimated separately for
each Level 1 unit (i.e. each boundary spanner). The ﬁrst stage
estimates are used as outcomes in Stage 2 of the analysis,
which considers the degree to which Level 2 factors predict
variance in the Level 1 intercepts and slopes.
As recommended by Enders and Toﬁghi (2007), we group
mean centered our Level 2 variables to provide a more natural
interpretation of the cross-level interaction effects. For our
Level 2 interaction (H2), both terms were mean centered. A
multiplicative term was created for importation into HLM to
be treated as an antecedent to the service climate construct.
Table I Descriptive statistics, reliabilities and correlations of study variables
Serial number
Variable
Mean
SD
Reliability ()
1
2
3
4
1
Market orientation
5.44
1.04
0.94
1
2
Boundary-spanner control
3.91
0.92
0.71
0.043
1
3
Flexibility
5.77
1.04
0.84
0.047
0.028
1
4
Service climate
4.99
1.33
0.92
0.079
0.099
0.354
1
Notes: Sample size, n  75, for market orientation and boundary-spanner control; Sample size, n  323, for boundary-spanner ﬂexibility and service
climate
Table II Scale items
Market orientation (Lam et al., 2010)
MO1
I am always looking for new products and services
MO2
I try to help develop the product and service offerings of our
company
MO3
I consider innovative new products and services as a key
component of success
MO4
I pay close attention to competitors’ activities
MO5
I keep a close eye on our competitors’ customer retention
activities
MO6
I monitor exactly what special actions our competitors are
doing
MO7
I think customer preferences are a key factor to the success of
COMPANY NAME
MO8
I frequently survey customers to ﬁnd out the products and
services they would like to see in the future
MO9
The goals I set for my team members are mainly aiming at
customer satisfaction
MO10
I try to ﬁgure out what a customer’s needs are
MO11
I have the customer’s best interests in mind
MO12
I think my team members are very market oriented
Boundary-spanner control (Noble, 2008)
C1
I allow my salespeople to decide how best to get the job
done
C2
I provide my salespeople a great deal of autonomy to do their
jobs
C3
I want my salespeople to believe they are their own bosses
when doing their jobs
C4
In doing this job, the salespeople can make their own
decisions
Flexibility (Spiro and Weitz, 1990)
F1
I believe each customer requires a unique approach
F2
When I feel that my sales approach is not working, I can
easily change to another approach
F3
I like to experiment with different sales approaches
F4
I take a problem-solving approach in selling products or
service to customers
Service climate (Schneider et al., 1998)
SC1
The job knowledge and skills of employees to deliver superior
customer service are outstanding
SC2
Efforts to measure and track the quality of service provided to
customers are very strong
SC3
The recognition and rewards employees receive for delivering
superior service to customers are excellent
SC4
The overall quality of the service provided is outstanding
SC5
My manager provides strong support of efforts to provide
superiors customer service
SC6
The overall climate for service in my territory is excellent
Marketing culture to service climate
Tyler R. Morgan et al.
Journal of Services Marketing
Volume 28 · Number 6 · 2014 · 498–508
503
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsm/article-pdf/28/6/498/1675125/jsm-08-2013-0226.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
Tests of validity
Using hierarchical linear modeling does not allow us to
demonstrate item loadings or overall model ﬁt due to the lack
of speciﬁc indices. The testing of model validities was done
following the procedure utilized by Mathieu and Taylor
(2006). Accordingly, a conﬁrmatory factor analyses (CFA)
was performed for both Level 1 and Level 2 data. Our CFA
demonstrated strong ﬁt indices [2(109)  364.401, p  0.01;
CFI  0.92; TLI  0.91; RMSEA  0.08]. Following Fornell
and
Larcker’s
(1981)
approach,
we
assessed
construct
convergent
and
discriminant
validity.
Results
suggested
convergent and discriminant validity criteria were met by the
measurement
model.
Convergent
validity
is
strongly
supported as the construct reliabilities all exceed 0.70
(Table I) and all indicators signiﬁcantly load on their latent
constructs (p  0.001) (Gerbing and Anderson 1988).
Results
To
begin
our
analysis,
we
examined
the
cross-level
relationship of market orientation and service climate. Using
HLM 7.0, we ﬁrst formed a baseline model using the Level 1
variables (i.e. service climate and ﬂexibility) and Level 2
variables (i.e. market orientation and control). This model
demonstrates a positive, but nonsigniﬁcant, effect of market
orientation on service climate (  0.08, ns). Thus, we do not
ﬁnd support for H1. In addition, we observe signiﬁcant
variance still to be explained at Level 2 (ICC  0.22),
providing support for the further investigation into our
hypothesized cross-level interactions.
For the next step, we investigated the cross-level interactive
effects of control and ﬂexibility on the inﬂuence of market
orientation and service climate. To do this, the Level 2
variables (i.e. market orientation and control) were then
added to the model to examine H2. This model did not
indicate a signiﬁcant moderating effect for boundary-spanner
control on the relationship between market orientation and
service climate (  0.20, ns). Thus, we do not ﬁnd support
for H2.
Our initial baseline model did show positive effects for the
of boundary-spanner ﬂexibility on service climate (  0.47,
p  0.01), providing support for H3. The Level 2 variable
market
orientation
was
also
evaluated
regarding
the
moderating inﬂuence it provides over boundary-spanner
ﬂexibility in the next step of our analysis. The model does
provide support for H4, and the positive interactive inﬂuence
of market orientation (  0.19, p  0.01).
Finally, we investigated the cross-level interactive effect of
control, market orientation and ﬂexibility as a test of H5. The
Level 2 variables (i.e. market orientation and control) were
then added with a three-way interaction mixed model of
market
orientation,
control
and
ﬂexibility.
This
model
demonstrates a positive three-way interaction (  0.227, p 
0.05) of the effects of market orientation, control and
ﬂexibility on service climate, which supports H5.
To assist with interpretation of the interaction relationship
between ﬂexibility and market orientation (H4), we used the
method suggested by Preacher et al., (2006) for modeling
cross-level interactions in multi-level modeling. Using the
model results, we plotted the relationship between ﬂexibility
and service climate under varying levels of market orientation
(one standard deviation below and above the mean). These
results
appear
in
Figure
2,
which
depicts
that
a
market-oriented culture increases the effect of ﬂexibility on
service climate.
Discussion and implications
The presented research investigates ﬁrm service climate as
part of a framework to explore how ﬁrms utilize service to
differentiate themselves from competitors. First, we examined
ﬁrm culture and the inﬂuence it has on the development of a
service climate. Second, additional factors measured at both
the manager and employee level were also considered as
potentially shaping the service climate that develops within the
ﬁrm. While our hypotheses do not support the direct inﬂuence
of a market orientation culture on the service climate of the
ﬁrm, we did ﬁnd support for other factors that interact with
market orientation to create a service climate.
Culture to climate
The results of our analysis do not support that market orientation
alone is enough to create a service climate. Market-oriented ﬁrms
perform better than their non-market-oriented counter parts
(Slater 1997), but it seems that in the context of service, a
market orientation alone does not account for an increased
service climate. Employee adoption of a particular climate has
been shown to be related to manager promotion of that
climate through their actions (Zohar and Luria 2004).
However, we do not ﬁnd that management actions, as they
pertain to a market-oriented culture, are directly inﬂuential in
the service climate that develops.
We also investigated the positive moderating impact of
boundary-spanner control, as provided by managers, over the
relationship between market orientation and service climate.
Previous research supports that control provided to boundary
spanners can lead to increased performance (Challagalla and
Shervani, 1996). Additionally, strengthening of the service
climate also occurs when boundary spanners have the control
to modify the services they provide to customers (Schneider
et al., 1998). Our results indicate that this does not occur
Figure 2 Interaction plot ﬂexibility and market orientation
Marketing culture to service climate
Tyler R. Morgan et al.
Journal of Services Marketing
Volume 28 · Number 6 · 2014 · 498–508
504
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsm/article-pdf/28/6/498/1675125/jsm-08-2013-0226.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
through the strengthening of the direct impact market
orientation has on the development of the service climate but
manifests through an interaction with ﬂexibility.
Flexibility
A ﬂexible disposition is fundamental to the success of
boundary spanners (Spiro and Weitz, 1990), and our ﬁndings
offer further support regarding the inﬂuence it has on the
development of the service climate perceived by employees.
Highly ﬂexible boundary spanners are more creative in their
offerings to customers (Gwinner et al., 2005) and providing
the services they require. The positive association between
ﬂexibility
and
service
climate
indicates
that
boundary-spanning employees with a ﬂexible disposition are
able to more easily engage the practices, procedures and
behaviors that are supported by the ﬁrm regarding service and
contribute to the service climate.
Although market orientation does not directly impact the
service climate of the ﬁrm, our results support that the
market-oriented culture has a moderating inﬂuence on
the relationship between ﬂexibility and service climate.
Success
for
the
market-oriented
approach
comes
from
focusing on customer needs (Deshpandé et al., 1993).
Boundary-spanning employees with a ﬂexible disposition are
further empowered to provide increasingly valuable service to
customers if the culture of the ﬁrm is centered on meeting
customer demands via a market orientation. We agree with
previous researchers that the personality of boundary-spanning
employees is of substantive importance, with ﬂexibility being
fundamental to success (Sujan et al., 1994). Our contribution to
previous research comes from connecting ﬂexibility to the
service climate of the ﬁrm and the conditions under which
boundary-spanning
employees
are
most
successful
in
development of the service climate.
Furthermore, our framework indicates that boundary-spanner
control contributes to the ﬁrm service climate as part of an
interaction with market orientation and ﬂexibility, see H5.
Support for this three-way interaction demonstrates the
complexity involved with the development of a service
climate and the cross-level interaction between managers
and boundary-spanning employees. Under the condition that
managers provide adequate control to boundary-spanning
employees to meet customer needs, the market oriented culture
of the ﬁrm is associated with a service climate through enabling
boundary-spanning employees to use their inherent ﬂexibility to
tailor their service offerings. The ﬁndings of the present
research
are
the
ﬁrst
attempts
at
such
a
complex
understanding of service climate at multiple levels and
through these moderating relationships.
Managerial implications
First, managers should recognize that the culture of the ﬁrm
inﬂuences the climate that develops. In the context of service,
a market orientation, as dictated by managers, is most
successful when coupled with boundary-spanning employees
who possess a ﬂexible disposition. Therefore, the ﬁrm will
beneﬁt
from
training
managers
and
hiring
the
right
boundary-spanning
employees.
Speciﬁcally,
the
results
indicate that managers must promote a market-oriented
culture and provide control to boundary-spanner employees.
Thus, ﬁrms will need to work with managers to make sure they
understand
the
ideas
and
concepts
associated
with
a
market-oriented ﬁrm and that they empower their employees
with the control required to satisfy customer service needs as
part of the strengthening of the service climate (Schneider
et al., 1998).
For many years, researchers have investigated personality
traits as important to the interactive customer environment
(Weitz, 1981). However, building on the ﬁndings of previous
researchers regarding the importance of ﬂexibility, (Spiro and
Weitz, 1990; Sujan et al., 1994) the results we present
provide further clarity to the beneﬁts of boundary-spanner
ﬂexibility.
Managers
may
ﬁnd
it
useful
to
evaluate
employees regarding ﬂexibility via an assessment of their
personality to ensure they are matched with an appropriate
position in the ﬁrm. Those individuals with higher ﬂexibility
are more likely to be successful in providing service to
customers. This will be especially true for those employees
provided
adequate
control
from
managers
within
the
market oriented culture of the ﬁrm.
Limitations and opportunities for future research
First, our research underscores the complexity involved in the
development of a service climate, as we ﬁnd that more than
just a market-oriented culture is required for a service climate
to
emerge.
Although
our
results
indicate
that
market
orientation played a moderating role in service climate
development, other ﬁrm cultures may impact service climate
differently. Thus, evaluating the impact of varying ﬁrm
cultures, and their impact on service climate, represents an
avenue for future research.
Second,
our
survey
of
managers
and
employees
is
cross-sectional in nature, as all four measures were evaluated
at only one point in time. A longitudinal study would provide
the opportunity to assess how variations in ﬁrm culture and
control impact the service climate that evolves relative to the
time they take to develop. The inclusion of performance
measures at the boundary-spanner level would also assist with
determining the service quality provided under a speciﬁc
service climate. In future research, some measures, like
employee control, might be captured at both the manager and
employee levels as the perception of employee control may
vary depending on the viewpoint taken.
Finally,
the
methodology
utilized
relies
on
a
self-administered survey, which we realize may cause concern
regarding reporting bias from participants. The beneﬁt of our
survey approach is that it allowed us to obtain multilevel
responses from both managers and their employees. The
insights from this multilevel survey add to the contribution of
our research. However, future investigations would beneﬁt
from a multiple method approach, which can provide further
conﬁrmation of the results.
References
Achrol,
R.S.
(1991),
“Evolution
of
the
marketing
organization: new forms for turbulent environments”,
Journal of Marketing, Vol. 55 No. 4, pp. 77-93.
Auh, S., Menguc, B., Fisher, M. and Haddad, A. (2011a),
“The contingency effect of service employee personalities
on service climate getting employee perceptions aligned can
Marketing culture to service climate
Tyler R. Morgan et al.
Journal of Services Marketing
Volume 28 · Number 6 · 2014 · 498–508
505
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsm/article-pdf/28/6/498/1675125/jsm-08-2013-0226.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
reduce personality effects”, Journal of Service Research,
Vol. 14 No. 4, pp. 426-441.
Auh, S., Menguc, B., Fisher, M. and Haddad, A. (2011b),
“The
perceived
autonomy–perceived
service
climate
relationship: the contingency effect of store-level tenure
diversity”, Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, Vol. 18
No. 6, pp. 509-520.
Barnes, D. and Collier, J.E. (2013), “Investigating work
engagement in the service environment”, Journal of Services
Marketing, Vol. 27 No. 6.
Barrick, M.R. and Mount, M.K. (1993), “Autonomy as a
moderator
of
the
relationships
between
the
big
ﬁve
personality dimensions and job performance”, Journal of
Applied Psychology, Vol. 78 No. 1, pp. 111-118.
Beitelspacher, L.S., Richey, R.G. and Reynolds, K.E. (2011),
“Exploring a new perspective on service efﬁciency: service
culture
in
retail
organizations”,
Journal
of
Services
Marketing, Vol. 25 No. 3, pp. 215-228.
Boorom, M.L., Goolsby, J.R. and Ramsey, R.P. (1998),
“Relational communication traits and their effect on
adaptiveness and sales performance”, Journal of the Academy
of Marketing Science, Vol. 26 No. 1, pp. 16-30.
Bowen, D.E. and Schneider, B. (2013), “A service climate
synthesis and future research agenda”, Journal of Service
Research, Vol. 17 No. 1, pp. 5-22.
Bryk, A.S. and Raudenbush, S.W. (1992), Hierarchical Linear
Models, Sage, Thousand Oakes, CA.
Challagalla, G.N. and Shervani, T.A. (1996), “Dimensions
and types of supervisory control: effects on salesperson
performance and satisfaction”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 60
No. 1, pp. 89-105.
Chang, T.Z. and Chen, S.J. (1998), “Market orientation,
service quality and business proﬁtability: a conceptual
model
and
empirical
evidence”,
Journal
of
Services
Marketing, Vol. 12 No. 4, pp. 246-264.
Constantin, J.A. and Lusch, R.F. (1994), Understanding
Resource Management, Irwin Professional, Burr Ridge, IL.
Day,
G.S.
(1994),
“The
capabilities
of
market-driven
organizations”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 58 No. 4,
pp. 37-52.
Day, G.S. and Wensley, R. (1988), “Assessing advantage: a
framework for diagnosing competitive superiority”, Journal
of Marketing, Vol. 52 No. 2, pp. 1-20.
Dean, A.M. (2004), “Links between organizational and
customer
variables
in
service
delivery:
evidence,
contradictions and challenges”, International Journal of
Service Industry Management, Vol. 15 No. 4, pp. 332-350.
Deci, E.L. and Ryan, R.M. (1987), “The support of
autonomy
and
the
control
of
behavior”,
Journal
of
Personality
and
Social
Psychology,
Vol.
53
No.
6,
pp. 1024-1037.
Deshpandé, R. and Webster, F.E. Jr. (1989), “Organizational
culture and marketing: deﬁning the research agenda”,
Journal of Marketing, Vol. 53 No. 1, pp. 3-15.
Deshpandé, R., Farley, J.U. and Webster, F.E. Jr. (1993),
“Corporate
culture,
customer
orientation,
and
innovativeness in Japanese ﬁrms: a quadrad analysis”,
Journal of Marketing, Vol. 57 No. 1, pp. 23-37.
Dietz, J., Pugh, S.D. and Wiley, J.W. (2004), “Service climate
effects on customer attitudes: an examination of boundary
conditions”, Academy of Management Journal, Vol. 47
No. 1, pp. 81-92.
Edvardsson, B., Gustafsson, A. and Roos, I. (2005), “Service
portraits in service research: a critical review”, International
Journal of Service Industry Management, Vol. 16 No. 1,
pp. 107-121.
Enders, C.K. and Toﬁghi, D. (2007), “Centering predictor
variables in cross-sectional multilevel models: a new look at
an old issue”, Psychological Methods, Vol. 12 No. 2,
pp. 121-138.
Fornell, C. and Larcker, D.F. (1981), “Evaluating structural
equation
models
with
unobservable
variables
and
measurement error”, Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 18
No. 1, pp. 39-50.
Fridhandler, B.M. (1986), “Conceptual note on state, trait,
and the state–trait distinction”, Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, Vol. 50 No. 1, pp. 169-174.
Gainer, B. and Padanyi, P. (2005), “The relationship between
market-oriented activities and market-oriented culture:
implications for the development of market orientation in
nonproﬁt
service
organizations”,
Journal
of
Business
Research, Vol. 58 No. 6, pp. 854-862.
Gebauer,
H.,
Gustafsson,
A.
and
Witell,
L.
(2011),
“Competitive advantage through service differentiation by
manufacturing companies”, Journal of Business Research,
Vol. 64 No. 12, pp. 1270-1280.
Gerbing, D.W. and Anderson, J.C. (1988), “An updated
paradigm
for
scale
development
incorporating
unidimensionality and its assessment”, Journal of Marketing
Research, Vol. 25 No. 2, pp. 186-192.
Gummesson, E. (1991), “Marketing-orientation revisited: the
crucial role of the part-time marketer”, European Journal of
Marketing, Vol. 25 No. 2, pp. 60-75.
Gwinner, K.P., Bitner, M.J., Brown, S.W. and Kumar, A.
(2005),
“Service
customization
through
employee
adaptiveness”, Journal of Service Research, Vol. 8 No. 2,
pp. 131-148.
Hartline, M.D. and Ferrell, O.C. (1996), “The management
of
customer-contact
service
employees:
an
empirical
investigation”,
Journal
of
Marketing,
Vol.
60
No.
4,
pp. 52-70.
Hempel, C.G. (1960), “Operationism, observation, and
scientiﬁc terms”, in Danto, A. and Morgenbesser, S. (Eds),
Philosophy of Science, World Publishing, Cleveland, OH,
pp. 101-120.
Hofmann, D.A. (1997), “An overview of the logic and
rationale
of
hierarchical
linear
models”,
Journal
of
Management, Vol. 23 No. 6, pp. 723-744.
Javalgi,
R.R.G.,
Whipple,
T.W.,
Ghosh,
A.K.
and
Young,
R.B.
(2005),
“Market
orientation,
strategic
ﬂexibility,
and
performance:
implications
for
services
providers”, Journal of Services Marketing, Vol. 19 No. 4,
pp. 212-221.
Karmarkar,
U.
(2004),
“Will
you
survive
the
services
revolution?”, Harvard Business Review, Vol. 82 No. 6,
pp. 100-107.
Kirka, A.H., Jayachandran, S. and Bearden, W.O. (2005),
“Market orientation: a meta-analytic review and assessment
of its antecedents and impact on performance”, Journal of
Marketing, Vol. 69 No. 2, pp. 24-41.
Marketing culture to service climate
Tyler R. Morgan et al.
Journal of Services Marketing
Volume 28 · Number 6 · 2014 · 498–508
506
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsm/article-pdf/28/6/498/1675125/jsm-08-2013-0226.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
Kumar, V., Jones, E., Venkatesan, R. and Leone, R.P. (2011),
“Is market orientation a source of sustainable competitive
advantage or simply the cost of competing?”, Journal of
Marketing, Vol. 75 No. 1, pp. 16-30.
Lam, S.K., Kraus, F. and Ahearne, M. (2010), “The diffusion
of market orientation throughout the organization: a social
learning theory perspective”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 74
No. 5, pp. 61-79.
Lusch, R.F., Vargo, S.L. and O’Brien, M. (2007), “Competing
through service: insights from service-dominant logic”, Journal
of Retailing, Vol. 83 No. 1, pp. 5-18.
Mathieu, J.E. and Taylor, S.R. (2006), “Clarifying conditions
and decision points for mediational type inferences in
Organizational
Behavior”,
Journal
of
Organizational
Behavior, Vol. 27 No. 8, pp. 1031-1056.
Mechinda, P. and Patterson, P.G. (2011), “The impact of
service
climate
and
service
provider
personality
on
employees’ customer-oriented behavior in a high-contact
setting”, Journal of Services Marketing, Vol. 25 No. 2,
pp. 101-113.
Narver, J.C. and Slater, S.F. (1990), “The effect of a market
orientation on business proﬁtability”, Journal of Marketing,
Vol. 54 No. 4, pp. 20-35.
Noble, C. (2008), “The inﬂuence of job security on the ﬁeld
sales manager satisfaction: exploring frontline tensions”,
Journal of Personal Selling and Sales Management, Vol. 28
No. 3, pp. 247-261.
Ostrom, A.L., Bitner, M.J., Brown, S.W., Burkhard, K.A.,
Goul,
M.,
Smith-Daniels,
V.,
Demirkan,
H.
and
Rabinovich, E. (2010), “Moving forward and making a
difference: research priorities for the science of service”,
Journal of Service Research, Vol. 13 No. 1, pp. 4-36.
Patel,
P.C.
and
B.
Conklin
(2010),
“Perceived
labor
productivity in small ﬁrms – the effects of high performance
work
systems
and
group
culture
through
employee
retention”, Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, Vol. 36
No. 2, pp. 205-235.
Prahalad, C.K. and Ramaswamy, V. (2004), “Co-creating
unique value with customers”, Strategy and Leadership,
Vol. 32 No. 2, pp. 4-9.
Preacher,
K.J.,
Curran,
P.J.
and
Bauer,
D.J.
(2006),
“Computational tools for probing interactions in multiple
linear regression, multilevel modeling, and latent curve
analysis”, Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics,
Vol. 31 No. 4, pp. 437-448.
Pritchard, R.D. and Karasick, B.W. (1973), “The Effects of
organizational climate on managerial job performance and
job
satisfaction”,
Organizational
Behavior
and
Human
Performance, Vol. 9 No. 1, pp. 126-146.
Ray,
G.,
Barney,
J.B.
and
Muhanna,
W.A.
(2004),
“Capabilities,
business
processes,
and
competitive
advantage: choosing the dependent variable in empirical
tests of the resource-based view”, Strategic Management
Journal, Vol. 25 No. 1, pp. 23-37.
Schneider, B. and Reichers, A.E. (1983), “On the etiology of
climates”, Personnel Psychology, Vol. 36 No. 1, pp. 19-39.
Schneider, B., Wheeler, J.K. and Cox, J.F. (1992), “A passion
for service: using content analysis to explicate service
climate themes”, Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 77
No. 5, pp. 705-716.
Schneider, B., White, S.S. and Paul, M.C. (1998), “Linking
service climate and customer perceptions of service quality:
test of a causal model”, Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 83
No. 2, pp. 150-163.
Schneider, B., Macey, W.H., Lee, W.C. and Young, S.A.
(2009), “Organizational service climate drivers of the
American
Customer
Satisfaction
Index
(ACSI)
and
ﬁnancial and market performance”, Journal of Service
Research, Vol. 12 No. 1, pp. 3-14.
Schneider, B., Ehrhart, M.G. and Macey, W.H. (2013),
“Organizational climate and culture”, Annual Review of
Psychology, Vol. 64, pp. 361-388
Slater, S.F. (1997), “Developing a customer value-based
theory of the ﬁrm”, Journal of the Academy of Marketing
Science, Vol. 25 No. 2, pp. 162-167.
Slater, S.F. and Narver, J.C. (1995), “Market orientation and
the learning organization”, The Journal of Marketing, Vol. 59
No. 3, pp. 63-74.
Spiro, R.L. and Weitz, B.A. (1990), “Adaptive selling:
conceptualization,
measurement,
and
nomological
validity”, Journal of Marketing Research, Vol. 27 No. 1,
pp. 61-69.
Sujan, H., Weitz, B.A. and Kumar, N. (1994), “Learning
orientation, working smart, and effective selling”, Journal of
Marketing, Vol. 58 No. 3, pp. 39-52.
Van Egeren, M. and O’Connor, S. (1998), “Drivers of market
orientation and performance in service ﬁrms”, Journal of
Services Marketing, Vol. 12 No. 1, pp. 39-58.
Varca, P.E. (2001), “Service representatives, job control, and
white-collar blues”, Journal of Services Marketing, Vol. 15
No. 4, pp. 257-269.
Vargo, S.L. and Lusch, R.F. (2004a), “Evolving to a new
dominant logic for marketing”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 68
No. 1, pp. 1-17.
Vargo, S.L. and Lusch, R.F. (2004b), “The four service
marketing myths remnants of a goods based, manufacturing
model,”
Journal
of
Service
Research,
Vol.
6
No.
4,
pp. 324-335.
Vargo, S.L. and Lusch, R.F. (2008), “Service-dominant logic:
continuing the evolution,” Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, Vol. 36 No. 1, pp. 1-10.
Weitz, B.A. (1981), “Effectiveness in sales interactions: a
contingency framework”, Journal of Marketing, Vol. 45
No. 1, pp. 85-103.
Yagil, D. and Gal, I. (2002), “The role of organizational
service climate in generating control and empowerment
among workers and customers”, Journal of Retailing and
Consumer Services, Vol. 9 No. 4, pp. 215-226.
Zeithaml, V.A., Berry, L.L. and Parasuraman, A. (1996),
“The behavioral consequences of service quality”, Journal of
Marketing, Vol. 60 No. 2, pp. 31-46.
Zohar, D. and Luria, G. (2004), “Climate as a social-cognitive
construction of supervisory safety practices: scripts as proxy
of behavior patterns”, Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 89
No. 2, pp. 322-333.
About the authors
Tyler R. Morgan, MBA, is a doctoral student at the University
of
Alabama,
specializing
in
the
ﬁeld
of
supply
chain
Marketing culture to service climate
Tyler R. Morgan et al.
Journal of Services Marketing
Volume 28 · Number 6 · 2014 · 498–508
507
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsm/article-pdf/28/6/498/1675125/jsm-08-2013-0226.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
management and strategy. He earned a bachelor’s degree in
Finance from the University of Alabama in 2003. Prior to
returning to academe, Mr Morgan worked in the insurance
industry for six years. His research has been published in the
Journal of Physical Distribution and Logistics Management, the
International Journal of Logistics Management and other outlets.
He
has
also
presented
his
research
at
domestic
and
international conferences.
Adam Rapp (PhD. University of Connecticut) is the D. Paul
Jones and Charlene Jones Endowed Chair in Services
Marketing at the University of Alabama. Adam’s research
examines factors inﬂuencing the performance of frontline
service and sales personnel. He has published in the Journal of
Marketing Research, Management Science, Journal of Applied
Psychology, International Journal of Research in Marketing,
Industrial Marketing Management, Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science and the Journal of Personal Selling and Sales
Management, among other journals. Adam Rapp is the
corresponding author and can be contacted at: arapp@
cba.ua.edu
R. Glenn Richey (PhD, University of Oklahoma) is an
Associate Professor of International Marketing and Supply
Chain Management and the Morrow Faculty Excellence
Fellow at The University of Alabama’s Culverhouse College
of Commerce and Business. His current international and
domestic research interests include relationship governance;
green and reverse logistics; manufacturer–distributor–retailer
resource decision-making; and supply chain risk preparedness
and recovery. Dr Richey has published over 60 articles in
peer-reviewed SCML, marketing, management, international
business and operations management scholarly journals. Dr
Richey is the co-editor of International Journal of Physical
Distribution and Logistics Management and on seven editorial
review boards. Prior to entering academe, Dr Richey worked
for 10 years in industry.
Alexander E. Ellinger (PhD, University of Georgia) is Frank
Schultz Professor of Business Administration and Professor of
Marketing and Supply Chain Management in the Culverhouse
College of Commerce and Business Administration at The
University of Alabama. He currently serves as co-editor of
International
Journal
of
Physical
Distribution
&
Logistics
Management. His research interests include the inﬂuence of
human
resource
development
strategies
in
logistics
organizations, marketing/logistics interdepartmental integration
and links between resource-based theory and ﬁrm performance.
To purchase reprints of this article please e-mail: reprints@emeraldinsight.com
Or visit our web site for further details: www.emeraldinsight.com/reprints
Marketing culture to service climate
Tyler R. Morgan et al.
Journal of Services Marketing
Volume 28 · Number 6 · 2014 · 498–508
508
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsm/article-pdf/28/6/498/1675125/jsm-08-2013-0226.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
