Boundary Capabilities in MNCs: Knowledge
Transformation for Creative Solution Development
Esther Tippmann, Pamela Sharkey Scott and
Andrew Parker
University College Dublin; Maynooth University-National University of Ireland Maynooth; University of
Exeter Business School
ABSTRACT The management of knowledge across country units is critical to multinational
corporations (MNCs). Building on the argument that boundary spanning leads to the
development of creative problem solving outcomes, this study advances the concept of MNC
knowledge transformation and examines its relationship with solution creativity. Using
questionnaire data on 67 problem solving projects, we ﬁnd that opportunity formation is an
underlying mechanism linking MNC knowledge transformation to the development of creative
solutions. These insights contribute to our understanding of boundary spanning in global
organizations by substantiating MNC knowledge transformation and elaborating the
relationship between boundary spanning and creative solution development. If successful at
knowledge transformation, collaborators from across the MNC can construct previously
unimagined opportunities for the generation of creative outcomes.
Keywords: boundary spanning, knowledge transformation, MNE/MNC management,
opportunity formation, problem solving, subsidiaries
INTRODUCTION
For multinational corporations (MNCs), competitive advantage rests on utilising their
most valuable resource, the diverse knowledge located in dispersed headquarters and
subsidiaries to generate creative and innovative outcomes (Bartlett and Ghoshal, 1989;
Doz et al., 2001; Kogut and Zander, 1993). The challenge for MNCs, however, is
unlocking this diverse knowledge, as the underlying specializations and context sensitiv-
ities make it difﬁcult to apply this knowledge in new ways when collaborating across the
organization (Mudambi, 2011). To generate creative or innovative outcomes in this
complex setting, collaborators from MNC units located in different countries need to
Address for reprints: Esther Tippmann, Assistant Professor, Department of Management, University College
Dublin, Michael Smurﬁt Graduate Business School, Dublin, Ireland (esther.tippmann@ucd.ie).
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies
Journal of Management Studies 54:4 June 2017
doi: 10.1111/joms.12253

ﬁnd ways to draw on and interlink their diverse knowledge. The ability of collaborators
to span the boundaries that separate their diverse knowledge is critical.
To date, explorations of the challenges of managing knowledge in MNCs have largely
investigated the pattern of knowledge ﬂows (e.g., Gupta and Govindarajan, 2000; van
Wijk et al., 2008), or the search activities of locating and accessing dispersed knowledge
(Parker and Tippmann, 2016; Tippmann et al., 2014). In addition, work on innovation
within the MNC recognizes the value of utilizing diverse knowledge across country units
(Berry, 2014; Mors, 2010; Mudambi et al., 2007). Yet, the implicit boundary spanning
work (Schotter et al., 2017), in particular the action and interaction required to success-
fully deal with diverse knowledge, is not sufﬁciently theorized. Similarly, research con-
cerned with boundary spanning in the MNC context has thus far focused on the role
and skills of individual boundary spanners (Barner-Rasmussen et al., 2014; Schotter and
Beamish, 2011) in connecting different knowledge pockets, and on the role of commun-
ities of practice in the access and dissemination of tacit knowledge (Tallman and Chacar,
2011). Despite this progress, there remains a gap in our understanding of the boundary
spanning behaviours of individuals when working together as a group across geographi-
cally distributed MNC units. Little is known about how collaborators from across sub-
sidiary and headquarters units collectively mobilize their unique and specialized
knowledge to achieve boundary spanning. In sum, there is a need to examine the micro-
social activities of collaborators from different geographically dispersed locations as they
seek to apply their knowledge in new and useful ways and the speciﬁc mechanisms that
govern the impact of these boundary spanning efforts on the generation of creative or
innovative outcomes.
To address this gap, we draw on seminal work by organization scholars, who have
explored more deeply the micro-social interactions of collaborators with diverse knowl-
edge backgrounds in the context of innovation projects (e.g., Carlile, 2002, 2004;
Dougherty, 1992). This work suggests that boundary spanning is at the heart of the gen-
eration of innovative and creative outcomes during problem solving. However, transfer-
ring knowledge in the sense of ‘simple’ processing of information, or even translating
knowledge in the sense of developing a common meaning to overcome interpretive dif-
ferences between contexts is insufﬁcient for solving non-routine problems. Instead,
knowledge transformation is required, that is a systematic approach by individuals to
utilize, learn from and synthesize knowledge at boundaries (Carlile, 2004; Carlile and
Rebentisch, 2003). This necessitates active and deep engagement to modify common
and individual domain-speciﬁc knowledge to effectively share and synthesize knowledge
at the boundary. If collaborators succeed in this demanding task and exhibit a capacity
and ability to act and interact in a manner which iteratively and repeatedly transfers,
translates and transforms knowledge, then a boundary capability is developed (Carlile,
2004). Such a boundary capability enables effective utilization of a ﬁrm’s diverse knowl-
edge for the generation of creative and innovative outcomes.
Following this, we propose the concept of MNC knowledge transformation as one under-
pinning of a boundary capability in the MNC, capturing the behavioural aspects of col-
laborators’ actions and interactions in applying diverse knowledge across subsidiary and
headquarters units in situations where innovative or creative outcomes are desired.
Combining arguments from problem solving theory (Baer et al., 2013; Nickerson et al.,
456
E. Tippmann et al.
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

2012) and the literature on opportunity creation (Alvarez and Barney, 2007; Alvarez
et al., 2013), we further argue that opportunity formation, deﬁned as the extent to which
collaborators explore new possibilities and construct new ideas, is a generative or media-
ting mechanism through which MNC knowledge transformation leads to creative solu-
tions. Breaking out of habitual and common problem deﬁnitions is a key challenge in
problem solving (Baer et al., 2013, Enders et al., 2016; Ford, 2002). Therefore, we pro-
pose that opportunity formation, as an entrepreneurial approach to problem formula-
tion, stimulates the oftentimes lacking, but critically important, activities of reframing or
redeﬁning a situation. This in turn leads to the development of previously unimagined
solutions. Our interest is in the level of creativity of the ﬁnal, implemented solution
(Godart et al., 2015), deﬁned as the degree to which the solution exhibits the two attrib-
utes of creativity – newness and appropriateness (Amabile, 1996; Oldham and Cum-
mings, 1996; Perry-Smith and Shalley, 2003). A creative solution thus combines novelty
and efﬁcacy, meaning that while different to previous solutions, it is not too bizarre to
prevent adoption by the ﬁrm. We test our theoretical model by examining 67 non-
routine problem solving processes (Cyert and March, 1963; Nelson and Winter, 1982)
at a project-level of analysis.
By ﬁnding empirical support for our arguments, this study contributes to theory in
important ways. First, we respond to calls to draw on theories of boundary spanning to
advance the MNC literature (Andersson et al., 2016). Speciﬁcally, by conceptualizing
MNC knowledge transformation as capturing the micro-social actions and interactions
of collaborators across MNC units as they seek to apply their diverse knowledge in new
ways, we address a hitherto neglected perspective of boundary spanning in MNCs. Our
ﬁndings demonstrate that knowledge transformation can be the collective accomplish-
ment of a group of collaborators from different MNC units. Such a perspective on
boundary spanning in global organizations is greatly needed given the rise of project-
level organizing to perform innovative and creative activities. In addition, our ﬁnding
that the micro-social interactions of collaborators lead to the collective achievement of
creative solutions suggests that knowledge transformation is one critical micro-
foundation of a boundary capability in the MNC.
Second, our ﬁndings conﬁrm the value of boundary spanning for the attainment of
creative solutions (e.g., Carlile, 2002, 2004; Dougherty, 1992) and offer interesting
insights into this association. We develop arguments and ﬁnd empirical support for a
more complex association than previously considered: the inﬂuence of knowledge trans-
formation on the development of creative solutions is unlocked by the mediating effect
of collaborators reframing a problem as an opportunity. Knowledge transformation is
the most demanding activity in spanning boundaries during problem solving (Carlile,
2004), and our results imply that proposing and applying diverse knowledge in new
ways across MNC units enables the exploration of alternative problem formulations and
unearths new solution options. Opportunity formation offers new possibilities for gener-
ating novel and useful products, services or processes. Our study thus provides new
insights into the underlying mechanisms of how the difﬁcult task of spanning boundaries
in the MNC adds value.
Our third contribution is to reveal a path for subsidiaries to achieve creative contribu-
tions for the MNC. Despite acknowledging that subsidiaries can be creative (Cantwell
457
Boundary Capabilities in MNCs
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

and Mudambi, 2005, 2011; Scott et al., 2010), there is a lack of research investigating
the speciﬁc ways in which creative solutions are achieved. Our ﬁndings show that crea-
tive outcomes in the MNC can be the result of a collective activity spanning different
units, complementing discussions focused on competence creating subsidiary mandates
with arguments related to the collective, behavioural accomplishments of a diverse
group of MNC collaborators. Last but not least, our study has implications for the litera-
ture on opportunity formation in established ﬁrms as well as insights for management
practice.
THEORY AND HYPOTHESES
MNC Boundary Spanning Circumstances and Boundary Capability
We build on the theory of boundary spanning knowledge processes in situations where
innovative or creative outcomes are desired. Then, the kind of boundary and corre-
sponding challenges of boundary spanning depend on the degree of difference and
dependence of knowledge between the various individuals engaged at the boundary as
well as the extent to which the situational circumstances are atypical, differing from
usual circumstances (Carlile 2004; Carlile and Rebentisch, 2003). We will now identify
how differing circumstances lead to variation in the relative complexity of boundary
spanning in the MNC context.
In the MNC, units located in different countries possess and nurture specialized and
context-speciﬁc knowledge that may lead to various degrees of difference and depend-
ence between headquarters-subsidiary as well as between subsidiary-subsidiary knowl-
edge. In relation to the degree of difference in knowledge between MNC units, each
subsidiary possesses a unique stock of knowledge, inﬂuenced by its mandate and associ-
ated capabilities (Ghoshal and Bartlett, 1990). This means that geographic distribution
causes specialized knowledge pockets. In addition, each subsidiary follows an idiosyn-
cratic pattern of knowledge development in response to its local cultural, administrative
and economic environment (Ghemawat, 2001; Kostova and Zaheer, 1999). In particu-
lar, external interactions with local organizations can lead to highly specialised and
context-speciﬁc knowledge (Mudambi and Swift, 2009), increasing the degree of differ-
ence in knowledge between MNC units. Considering the degree of dependence of
knowledge in the MNC, value creation in such organizations depends to a large extent
on managing the multiple inter-relationships between these different and geographically
distributed knowledge pockets. It is, therefore, fundamental to reintegrate specialized,
yet interdependent knowledge across units (Doz et al., 2001; Ghoshal and Bartlett,
1990). Typical examples of high dependencies in knowledge across MNC units include
international interdependencies at different stages in the global value chain and interna-
tional co-development settings.
Carlile (2004) suggests that if the differences and dependencies in knowledge are
known by the individuals involved at the boundary, a common lexicon is developed that
adequately facilitates knowledge sharing at the boundary. In such situations, the com-
plexity of the boundary is relatively ‘unproblematic’: it is a syntactic boundary that can be
crossed where there is an adequate capacity to process information when transferring
458
E. Tippmann et al.
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

knowledge (Galbraith, 1973; Lawrence and Lorsch, 1967). Many studies on knowledge
transfer in the MNC have adopted this information processing perspective (e.g., Gupta
and Govindarajan, 2000; Szulanski, 1996), assuming that stable conditions in the differ-
ence and dependency of knowledge between headquarters-subsidiary or subsidiary-
subsidiary knowledge enable the creation of a common lexicon, which in turn functions
as common knowledge between MNC units to effectively transfer knowledge at these syn-
tactic boundaries.
However, if the situational circumstances are atypical to some extent, certain differen-
ces and dependencies in knowledge at the boundary become unclear or ambiguous.
This leads to different interpretations among individuals and leads to, what is called, a
semantic boundary (Carlile, 2004). Such atypical circumstances occur when facing differ-
ent requirements, in the MNC, for example, distinct or changing local environments,
and/or when working with unknown individuals as is typical in task-speciﬁc interna-
tional or global teams where individuals with certain expertise or competences are
brought together from various MNC units. To address the consequent interpretive dif-
ferences at semantic boundaries in the MNC, a common meaning needs to be devel-
oped to effectively translate knowledge across boundaries (Carlile, 2004; Dougherty,
1992; Nonaka, 1994). Evidence of considerable efforts by individuals to dis-embed and
re-contextualize localized and embedded knowledge in the MNC to make it meaningful
and actionable in a different context (Erkelens et al., 2015; Noorderhaven and Harzing,
2009) as well as activities of communities of practice (Tallman and Chacar, 2011) are
examples of knowledge translation in the MNC.
Last but not least, there are situations that are highly atypical, which are a common-
place scenario in settings where innovative or creative outcomes are desired. Such situa-
tions cause the most complex form of boundary – called a pragmatic boundary (Carlile,
2004), and reveal the different interests of individuals at the boundary. This hinders
their established ability to share knowledge. To effectively utilise knowledge across prag-
matic boundaries thus requires a more engaged and deeper sharing than ‘simply’ trans-
ferring or translating knowledge between different contexts. Knowledge needs to be
actively transformed to suit the speciﬁc situation at hand (Carlile and Rebentisch, 2003).
In addition, to effectively utilize their diverse knowledge, individuals need to propose
and apply knowledge in new ways (Carlile, 2002, 2004). To this end, individuals need to
learn about the consequences of one’s own knowledge and require a willingness and
ability to modify one’s own knowledge to achieve a novel synthesis (Bechky, 2003; Lev-
ina and Vaast, 2005; Pawlowski and Robey, 2004). Knowledge transformation also
involves trying new alternatives, putting individual knowledge ‘at stake’, and accepting
that some of it may be changed or abandoned (Carlile, 2004). The knowledge used at
pragmatic boundaries then becomes a ‘transformed mixture’ of the knowledge deemed
valuable and of consequence to the speciﬁc situation (Carlile, 2004, p. 559). In addition,
the uniqueness of the situation requires a political approach whereby a new common
interest between actors needs to be negotiated to provide an adequate means for sharing
knowledge. Coopetition structures in the MNC – the duality of cooperative and compet-
ing arrangements between subsidiaries (Luo, 2005; Tsai, 2002), combined with usual
pressures from headquarters to both integrate with the organization while demonstrat-
ing subsidiary-speciﬁc value (Mudambi, 2011), may amplify the political aspects of
459
Boundary Capabilities in MNCs
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

spanning pragmatic boundaries. The ability to negotiate different interests and trade off
ideas to create a common interest across MNC units thus becomes critical to serve as a
foundation for adequately sharing knowledge. Combining these arguments, we propose
the concept of MNC knowledge transformation as the extent to which collaborators from dif-
ferent MNC units propose and apply in new ways one another’s diverse knowledge at
pragmatic boundaries.
Having discussed the various circumstances that can arise at boundaries in the MNC,
it is evident that achieving innovative or creative outputs requires systematically manag-
ing knowledge at boundaries of various complexity, ranging from semantic, to syntactic,
and pragmatic in terms of increasing boundary complexity. To this end, a boundary
capability is needed (Carlile, 2004), deﬁned as the repetitive and iterative approach of
collaborators to not only transfer and translate knowledge, but to transform knowledge
in atypical situations for application in new ways for solution development. By overcom-
ing the challenges of divergent and different interests when working together, we conjec-
ture that such a boundary capability enables the MNC to utilize and exploit the value of
its diverse but geographically dispersed knowledge.
MNC Knowledge Transformation, Opportunity Formation, and Creative
Solutions
The focus of this study is non-routine problem solving. Given that such complex prob-
lem solving occurs in response to situations that are atypical to the ﬁrm (Cyert and
March, 1963; Nelson and Winter, 1982) and requires the reconciliation of divergent
interests as well as the interlinking of diverse sets of knowledge in new ways (Nickerson
and Zenger, 2004), the crossing of pragmatic boundaries becomes important. Thus, we
now develop arguments that link MNC knowledge transformation to the generation of
creative solutions.
Problem solving comprises both problem formulation, in terms of understanding and
deﬁning a problem, and solution development, in terms of designing and implementing
a solution. Prior literature on boundary spanning during problem solving, however, typ-
ically examines the value of knowledge transformation on the solution development
aspect of problem solving and does not explicitly explore the preceding problem formu-
lation (e.g., Carlile, 2004; Carlile and Rebentisch, 2003). A notable exception is the
study by Bechky (2003), who describes how transformational knowledge exchange can
recontextualize a problem to arrive at a shared problem understanding. Due to the cen-
tral inﬂuence of problem formulation on shaping the direction of subsequent solution
development (Baer et al., 2013; Nutt, 1992, Simon, 1973; Simon and Hayes, 1976), we
also focus on the effect of the problem formulation aspect. We suggest that knowledge
transformation is critical to achieving a comprehensive framing when solving challeng-
ing problems at boundaries within the MNC. This leads us to argue a more complex
association between knowledge transformation and the generation of creative outcomes,
and to propose that this relationship is mediated by opportunity formation.
Formulating complex problems is challenging and no single actor’s knowledge covers
all aspects of a problem (Baer et al., 2013; Lyles, 1981; Newell and Simon, 1972). In
addition, problems are not objectively deﬁned but socially constructed ‘from the
460
E. Tippmann et al.
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

knowledge available at a certain point in time and context’ (Nonaka, 1994, p. 28). Alter-
native problem framings may emerge if solution ideas are not imposed and the genera-
tion of new options is encouraged (Lopez-Vega et al., 2016; Nutt, 1993, 2004). This
suggests that bringing together diverse inputs from individual collaborators can beneﬁt
the comprehensiveness of problem formulation, speciﬁcally the extent to which alterna-
tive, yet equally valid problem formulations are generated (Baer et al., 2013; Nutt,
1984).
Bringing collaborators together for problem formulation activities, for example, by
gathering individuals from various subsidiary and headquarter units, generates substan-
tial capacity for building on diverse inputs. However, it is also likely to amplify collabo-
ration impediments (Baer et al., 2013), which may, in some circumstances, inhibit the
generation of alternative problem formulations. It can, for example, lead to power
imbalances whereby powerful collaborators push to reuse certain knowledge, thus con-
straining the ability of other individuals to exploit the boundary spanning situation to
generate more novel ideas (Carlile, 2002, 2004). In addition, there is a heightened dan-
ger of task conﬂict and breakdown in collaboration because of considerable difﬁculties
in interacting and communicating in boundary spanning situations despite the good
intentions of collaborators to share knowledge across such pragmatic boundaries
(Bechky, 2003; Carlile, 2004; Dougherty, 1992; Leonardi, 2011). It has been suggested
that such impediments result in the generation of fewer problem formulation alterna-
tives (Baer et al., 2013), constraining problem formulations within a narrow or existing
range of options. Problem formulation can thus beneﬁt tremendously from effective
boundary spanning enabled by the micro-social activities of individuals collectively
achieving knowledge transformation.
The debating and engaged interaction typical for knowledge transformation may
avoid the narrow or rushed analysis and lack of synthesis of root causes which lead to
inadequate initial deﬁnitions (Lyles, 1981) and constrain solution ﬁnding to arriving at
‘only’ an effective approach (Lyles and Mitroff, 1980; Spradlin, 2012). In addition, deep
transformational knowledge sharing has the capacity to more fundamentally reframe
the problem (Mintzberg and Westley, 2001). By identifying and representing different
knowledge and learning about differences across boundaries, knowledge can be applied
in new ways to enable collaborators to reframe their past experiences. This allows a
‘richer’ understanding of the problem to be gained (Beck and Plowman, 2009), may trig-
ger new interpretations that change previous problem conceptions (Hargadon and
Bechky, 2006; Nutt, 1993), and may expand problem formulation to embrace broader
purposes (Volkema, 1983). Such proposing and application of specialized knowledge
may also stimulate ‘thinking outside the box’ (Ford, 2002; Gavetti and Levinthal, 2000)
by synthesizing the diverse knowledge contributed in new ways. The ‘creative abrasion’
(Leonard-Barton, 1995) which can arise during knowledge transformation allows indi-
viduals to propose divergent and more novel forms of knowledge that help to shed new
light on a problem, its root causes and can ultimately generate alternative problem for-
mulations. By not only bringing together diverse inputs, but producing a novel synthesis,
knowledge transformation allows alternative problem formulations to emerge – to gen-
erate problem formulations that look beyond the habitual, to generate ideas for improv-
ing and innovating. This aligns well with arguments that through activities of accessing,
461
Boundary Capabilities in MNCs
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

learning from and utilizing diverse knowledge an opportunity can emerge (Alvarez and
Barney, 2007; Alvarez et al., 2013; Barreto, 2012; Mitchell et al., 2008). We thus pro-
pose that knowledge transformation can result in collaborators exploring and generating
new and alternative problem formulations – problems may be formulated as
opportunities.
Following this, we suggest that MNC knowledge transformation enables opportunity
formation as it modiﬁes the contributions of collaborators across pragmatic boundaries
within MNCs to generate new problem formulations. Subsidiary driven problem solving
can exhibit strong tendencies to formulate problems within local and context-speciﬁc
constraints (Tippmann et al., 2012). The value of MNC knowledge transformation in
breaking out of such narrow and habitual problem formulation can be illustrated with
an example of an atypical situation experienced by one of the organizations that partici-
pated in our study, a French subsidiary. This unit, mandated with developing and man-
ufacturing new products for developed markets, was challenged to signiﬁcantly lower
the cost of its products to improve margins. A narrow formulation of this problem sug-
gests that the subsidiary would adopt its usual deﬁnition of the root cause; cost of some
supplies or inefﬁciencies in the production process. In this example, however, the French
subsidiary engaged with a broad range of diverse collaborators from other MNC units
to work together and pursue knowledge transformation intensely from the outset.
The French subsidiary managers identiﬁed colleagues in a sister R&D subsidiary in
Asia who had innovated new product platforms for emerging markets. Although the col-
laborators from the French and Asian subsidiary shared some new product development
knowledge, as different product platforms were involved, differences and dependencies
in knowledge became ambiguous, requiring knowledge transformation to span this
boundary effectively (Carlile, 2004). The French subsidiary managers also involved the
global marketing team at the US headquarters, bringing to the fore the political aspect
of MNC knowledge transformation. The primary interest of the French subsidiary was
margin improvement, while the global marketing experts were concerned with main-
taining the premium positioning of the product. The same problem could have been
formulated narrowly as a cost issue or as a marketing challenge. However, through iter-
ations of proposing knowledge and learning about differences, facilitated by headquar-
ter managers engagement in ‘lubricating’ activities to improve interactions (Birkinshaw
et al., 2017), the collaborators moved from a narrow problem formulation and the idea
of opening up a new market segment with the proposed lower cost product platform
emerged – the problem was reframed as an opportunity. In sum, knowledge transforma-
tion can lead collaborators across MNC pragmatic boundaries to explore and generate
alternative problem formulations and reshape problems as opportunities.
Hypothesis 1: MNC knowledge transformation is positively associated with opportu-
nity formation.
Our ﬁrst hypothesis is concerned with activities during problem formulation and we
now develop the argument that opportunity formation serves as the conduit by which
MNC knowledge transformation contributes to solution creativity. Problem solving pro-
ceeds backwards from the ‘goal state’ (Cyert and March, 1963; Felin and Zenger, 2016)
462
E. Tippmann et al.
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

of an envisioned solution (Nutt, 1984, 2005) that guides the efforts of the problem solv-
ers. Having expanded problem formulations by a variety of new possibilities, the spec-
trum of conceivable outcomes increases to embrace more novel and appropriate
solutions. This means that the potential for solution development expands as efforts are
directed beyond the root problem towards attaining a solution that responds to an iden-
tiﬁed opportunity. However, potential creative solutions still need to be realized and
may not be enacted or fall short of successful responses for a variety of reasons. In com-
plex organizations such as MNCs, these include ineffective issue selling (Dutton and
Ashford, 1993), political resistance (D€orrenb€acher and Gammelgaard, 2006), failing to
overcome the ‘not invented here syndrome’ (Birkinshaw and Ridderstrale, 1999) or to
win senior management approval, and the absence of a supportive organizational con-
text (Burgelman, 1983). The translation of formed opportunities to enacted creative sol-
utions cannot be taken for granted. At the same time, as collaborators from different
MNC units repeatedly apply their diverse knowledge to attain an envisioned solution;
solutions then ‘emerge endogenously within a process of interactive human action’ (Sar-
asvathy et al., 2010, p. 155). While collaborators are still required to resolve the initial
organizational challenge that triggered the problem solving efforts, thus working
towards attaining an appropriate solution, the broader perspective of opportunity for-
mation allows for the ‘proliferation and branching’ of solutions (Collins, 2005, p. 211)
and for the emergence of ‘new means, ends, or means-ends relationships’ (Eckhardt and
Shane, 2003, p. 336). This is likely to increase the novelty of solutions (Aldrich and Mar-
tinez, 2010). Thus, opportunity formation allows the beneﬁt of MNC knowledge trans-
formation to be realized because individuals collaborating from across the MNC are
uniﬁed by a common interest to generate a solution that has the required newness to ﬁll
the identiﬁed gap. In this sense, formed opportunities represent a concrete means for
headquarters and subsidiary collaborators to apply their unique knowledge in new ways
for the generation of novel outcomes. Compared to a ﬁnal outcome that ‘merely’ repre-
sents a workable or habitual solution to a problem, the novelty of the solution now
reﬂects both the knowledge diversity of collaborators from across the involved MNC
units and the reformulated problem deﬁnition to achieve an outcome that combines
novelty and usefulness.
In the context of our earlier example, reframing of the French subsidiary’s initial
problem, the need to reduce costs and improve margins, as an opportunity led to the
exploration of new solutions to deliver on the identiﬁed opportunity. The ﬁnal solution,
achieved by bringing together knowledge from various MNC units, not only increased
margins, but created a new market segment in developed markets for ‘good value’ prod-
ucts. This solution was particularly creative for this MNC given the unusual direction of
technology transfer from emerging to developed markets that formed part of solution
development and because it exploited untapped market potential, generating new reve-
nue streams.
In sum, we argue that the emergence of new solutions is stimulated through opportu-
nity formation, while the need to address the initial problem simultaneously pushes
towards the attainment of appropriate solutions.
Hypothesis 2: Opportunity formation is positively associated with solution creativity.
463
Boundary Capabilities in MNCs
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

METHODS
Sample of Problem Solving Projects
A distinct feature of investigating problem solving processes is using the problem solving
project as the level of analysis (Obstfeld, 2012). These projects are initiated as a response
to an organizational problem, deﬁned as ‘a deviation from a desired set of speciﬁc or a
range of acceptable conditions resulting in a symptom or a web of symptoms recognized
as needing to be addressed’ (Baer et al., 2013, p. 199). Given the atypical nature of non-
routine problems, they lend themselves to the investigation of knowledge transformation
at pragmatic boundaries. We sampled 67 such problem solving projects. This sample
size compares well with other studies that examined complex, organizational projects or
initiatives (Ciabuschi et al., 2011; McGrath, 2001).
The problem solving projects in our study were undertaken by 29 subsidiary units of
27 MNCs and are located mostly in Ireland, but also in France and the UK. The chosen
subsidiary units exhibited good variance in a range of characteristics at the unit, subsidi-
ary and corporate level increasing external validity. First, at the corporation level, the
MNCs operated in highly to moderately dynamic industries of ICT, pharmaceutical,
building materials and social media, where organizational challenges regularly trigger
problem solving processes. The MNCs also have different countries of origin (France,
Germany, UK, USA and Sweden) to enhance cross-national coverage. Second, we
aimed to introduce constructive variation at the subsidiary unit level. In the context of
MNC value chain disaggregation and more ‘ﬁne-sliced’ subsidiary mandates, each unit
at the subsidiary may be characterized by a unique organizational context, making it
more appropriate to consider the speciﬁcs of each unit rather than subsidiary level
aggregations (Rugman et al., 2011). The chosen subsidiary units varied in their age,
size, mode of establishment and function. Table I summarizes the characteristics of the
subsidiary units that were used as a platform for investigating problem solving projects.
For each subsidiary unit, the unit manager (usually the General Manager, Managing
Director or Director) identiﬁed all the relevant projects, i.e., created a representative list
of projects that ﬁtted our sampling criteria. To ensure consistency in identifying problem
solving projects, the predetermined sampling criteria included: (1) the problem was non-
routine, that is an atypical situation for which the organization did not at that time have
a pre-determined response (Cyert and March, 1963; Newell and Simon, 1972), (2) the
problem solving process was completed or terminated within the past 12 months, a
recent timeframe that reduces retrospective bias (Huber and Power, 1985), and (3) the
problem solving efforts were initiated at the subsidiary level (rather than at headquarters
or another unit). We emphasized that the problem solving project selected should
include projects deemed more or less successful to reduce potential success bias. Follow-
ing this procedure, 67 problem solving projects were identiﬁed with an average of 2.3
per subsidiary unit, with a range of 1 to 8. They originated in different functional areas,
including R&D (eight processes, 11.9 per cent), manufacturing (23 processes; 34.3 per
cent), marketing/sales (20 processes, 29.9 per cent), services/support (seven processes,
10.4 per cent), supply chain/logistics (four processes, 6.0 per cent), ﬁnance (three proc-
esses, 4.5 per cent), and HR (two processes, 3.0 per cent). The problem solving projects
464
E. Tippmann et al.
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

focused on key organizational challenges of the subsidiary unit and often of the wider
corporation and included replacing legacy processes, replacing legacy products/services,
and rejuvenating management/business practices. Table II provides an overview of the
sample and offers descriptive information that illustrates the variation in problem solv-
ing projects included in this study.
Data Collection
We collected data from August 2012 till November 2013 via paired surveys to capture
information on the problem solving activities and outcomes, and the organization. To
encourage participation, subsidiary top managers endorsed the study and we offered to
share a feedback report and to invite participants to a workshop. Combined with guar-
anteeing conﬁdentiality and the anonymity of organizations, a response rate of 100 per
cent of the respondents contacted was achieved. To minimize common methods bias,
data on the problem solving process was collected from the project leader(s), while infor-
mation on the outcomes and organizational level variables was collected through a per-
sonally addressed email survey of the project leader’s senior colleague and/or subsidiary
top manager. In total, 72 project leaders participated (two project leaders participated
for ﬁve projects), 40 managers evaluated problem solving outcomes (some managers
rated the solutions of multiple projects), and 28 managers completed the subsidiary
organization survey. Before conducting the ﬁnal surveys, the face validity of the survey
items was assessed by a panel of nine experts, comprised of ﬁve academic and four
Table I. Summary of characteristics of subsidiary units selected for study
MNC level (N 5 27)
Industry
ICT 5 16 (59%)
Pharmaceutical 5 8 (30%)
Social media 5 2 (7%)
Building materials 5 1 (4%)
Size (turnover in US$)
Average 5 33.4 bn (SD 5 37.5 bn)
Size (employees)
Average 5 74,400 (SD 5 103,860)
Country of origin
US 5 21 (78%)
UK 5 2 (7%)
Germany 5 2 (7%)
France 5 1 (4%)
Sweden 5 1 (4%)
Subsidiary unit level (N 5 29)
Location
Ireland 5 26 (90%)
UK 5 2 (7%)
France 5 1 (3%)
Age (years)
Average 5 13 (SD 5 10)
Size (employees)
Average 5 410 (SD 5 660)
Mode of establishment
Greenﬁeld 5 24 (83%)
Acquisition 5 5 (17%)
465
Boundary Capabilities in MNCs
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

subsidiary managers. Necessary amendments were undertaken to ensure clarity of
questions.
In contrast to mail questionnaires, our method ensured that the project leaders that
were selected had primary responsibility for pursuing the solution ﬁnding and intimate
knowledge of the process. We also collected data from a senior colleague that was able
to offer an independent evaluation of the problem solving outcomes. Furthermore, the
person most knowledgeable about the subsidiary organization provided information
about the unit’s and subsidiary’s behavioural context. To further increase the reliability
of responses, the survey for the project leaders was interviewer administered, mostly in
face-to-face meetings that lasted approximately one hour, with some lasting close to two
hours. This allowed us to provide any clariﬁcation required. In the ﬁve cases where
more than one project leader was appointed, we interviewed both project leaders simul-
taneously to achieve an agreed answer to our survey questions.
Measures
Table III offers descriptive statistics for all our items and item wording for the latent var-
iables included in our model. The questions for the latent variables were asked using a
7-point Likert scale. We adapted existing measures wherever possible but also found it
necessary to create new ones, as outlined below.
Solution creativity. The degree of solution creativity is most accurately assessed in relation
to established solutions at the subsidiary level – the most proximate outcome. We used
Table II. Description of problem solving projects
Problem solving project type
Typical examples
Proportion in sample
Replacing legacy processes
A need to reduce costs or increase efﬁciency/
quality through:
 Redesigning/creating new processes
 Standardizing current processes
 Developing automated processes and
required tools
41.8%
Replacing legacy prod-
ucts/services
A need to respond to shifting market needs
through:
 Updating products/services
 Designing/developing new market
solutions
19.4%
Rejuvenating manage-
ment/business practices
A need to increase efﬁciency/speed to mar-
ket/quality through:
 Transforming practices/routines
 Renewing/developing new competences
38.8%
Note: N 5 67.
466
E. Tippmann et al.
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

Table III. Operationalization of variables and descriptive statistics
Construct and indicators
Mean
SD
Label
Solution creativity a
5.85
0.75
SC
‘How ORIGINAL and PRACTICAL was the work of the
people involved in the problem solving? Original and
practical work refers to developing ideas, methods, or
products that are both totally unique and especially use-
ful to the organization’.
5.75
1.01
SC1
‘How ADAPTIVE and PRACTICAL was the work of the
people involved in the problem solving? Adaptive and
practical work refers to using existing information or
materials to develop ideas, methods, or products that are
useful to the organization’.
6.10
0.70
SC2
‘How CREATIVE was the work of the people involved in
the problem solving? Creativity refers to the extent to
which the employees developed ideas, methods, or prod-
ucts that are both original and useful to the
organization’.
5.70
1.09
SC3
MNC knowledge transformation a
5.10
1.31
KT
‘Explaining the meaning of technical knowledge to col-
leagues from other units’.
4.84
1.40
KT1
‘Sharing unit-speciﬁc knowledge to establish a shared mean-
ing with colleagues from other units’.
5.21
1.38
KT2
‘Making efforts to integrate knowledge from different units’.
5.27
1.55
KT3
Opportunity formation a
5.63
1.01
OF
‘We used the problem to explore or build new possibilities’.
5.28
1.26
OF1
‘We used the problem to construct new ideas’.
5.61
1.14
OF2
‘We saw the problem as an opportunity to improve and
innovate’.
5.99
1.04
OF3
Problem pressure a
4.50
1.33
PP
‘To what extent did the problem exert pressure on the
subsidiary’.
4.99
1.39
PP1
‘To what extent did the problem exert pressure on the
wider (MNC) organization’.
4.01
1.76
PP2
People involved b
2.83
0.96
People
Functional diversity c
0.42
0.35
FuncDiv
Unit risk taking propensity d
3.54
1.39
Risk
‘Low risk projects with normal and certain rates of return
vs. High risk projects with unpredictable rates of return’.
3.15
1.40
Risk1
‘A cautious wait and see posture in order to minimize the
probability of making costly decisions when faced with
uncertainty vs. A bold aggressive posture in order to
maximize the probability of exploiting potential when
faced with uncertainty’.
3.73
1.57
Risk2
‘Owing to the nature of the environment, it is best to
explore gradually via cautious behaviour vs. Owing to
the nature of the environment, bold wide-ranging acts
are necessary to achieve the ﬁrm’s objectives’.
3.75
1.61
Risk3
MNC normalization of problem solving e
4.98
1.46
NormPS
467
Boundary Capabilities in MNCs
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

the established creative performance measure developed by Oldham and Cummings
(1996). Following the deﬁnition of creativity, the item phrasing highlights that newness
and usefulness are both necessary conditions. We adapted the item phrasing to refer to
problem solving.
MNC knowledge transformation. MNC knowledge transformation was measured by three
items that capture the collaborators’ activities of proposing and synthesizing diverse
knowledge from MNC units located in other countries to apply it in new ways for the
respective problem solving project. The items were developed with reference to descrip-
tions of boundary spanning knowledge processes in co-located organizations (Carlile,
2002, 2004) and MNCs (Tippmann et al., 2012, 2014) as well as additional interviews
to gain insights into typical MNC boundary spanning activities (details available from
authors). The respondents were asked to indicate ‘To what extent did you observe the
following activities by the people engaged in the problem solving process?’.
Opportunity formation. Following Alvarez and Barney (2007) we adopt a broad deﬁnition
of opportunity formation. The three items that measure opportunity formation were
derived from descriptions of opportunity formation by Alvarez et al. (2013), and Alvarez
and Barney (2008). Opportunity formation was measured by asking the respondents:
‘To what extent did you observe the following activities by the people engaged in the
problem solving process?’.
Controls. Other factors related to the problem solving and organizational context may
inﬂuence the degree to which collaborators can achieve creative solutions. We divided
our controls into four broad categories consisting of problem characteristics, problem
solving group level, subsidiary level, and MNC level controls.
Problem characteristic controls. We controlled for problem pressure as decision situations of
high pressure intensity increase the likelihood of calling into question the efﬁcacy of the
organization’s previous responses (Papadakis et al., 1998), and are more likely to allow
creative solution ideas to be pursued. The two items were adapted from Papadakis et al.
Table III. Continued
Construct and indicators
Mean
SD
Label
‘Organizational communications signal that non-routine
problems are considered an ordinary occurrence’.
4.33
1.59
NormPS1
‘The organization takes non-routine problems in its stride’.
5.33
1.32
NormPS2
‘As far as the organization is concerned, non-routine prob-
lems are not seen as anything extra-ordinary’.
5.27
1.76
NormPS3
Note: N 5 67.
aAssessed on 7 point Likert scale, ranging from 1 5 ‘to a very small extent’, to 7 5 ‘to a very large extent’.
bLog transformation of number of people involved.
c% people in different function.
dAssessed on a 7 point semantic differential scale.
eAssessed on a 7 point Likert scale, ranging from 1 5 ‘strongly disagree’, to 7 5 ‘strongly agree’.
468
E. Tippmann et al.
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

(1998) to suit the problem solving context, and respondents were asked to indicate to
what extent the problem exhibited each of two features of pressure. We also examined
whether the problem type, i.e., replacing legacy processes, replacing legacy products, or
rejuvenating business practices, had an effect on our model. When we included two
dummy variables for problem type in our model, we found neither was signiﬁcant and
there was no change to the signiﬁcance or direction of our variables of interest. There-
fore we have presented the more parsimonious model. Additional controls such as project
duration and problem complexity were also examined, but as these had no signiﬁcant effect
they are also omitted from our ﬁnal model.
Problem solving group controls. More radical creativity, which shows high divergence from a
ﬁrm’s current practices or processes, is fostered by resource availability (Madjar et al.,
2011). To account for the availability of resources, we took the objective measure of the
number of people involved in the project, using its log transformation in our analysis. We
also controlled for functional diversity because a certain level of diversity in group composi-
tion is expected to provide more varied input and hence increase chances of creative
output (e.g., Ancona and Caldwell, 1992). Additional controls were considered for inclu-
sion in our model such as the nature of prior relationships, i.e., the proportion of impor-
tant collaborators that the project leader had known prior to the problem solving
(colleagues previously known); and the extent of competition present between the MNC units
of the project leader and important collaborators (coopetition). Neither of these had a sig-
niﬁcant effect on our variables of interest and are not included in our presented model.
Subsidiary level controls. As the pursuit of creativity entails risk and uncertainty, we control
for unit risk taking propensity, adapting the measure established by Covin and Slevin (1989).
Similarly to the group level, we examined additional controls at the unit level – subsidi-
ary size (number of employees), subsidiary age, mode of establishment (i.e., greenﬁeld vs. acquisi-
tion). These variables were not signiﬁcant and did not change the direction and
signiﬁcance of our variables of interest, and are thus not included in our ﬁnal model.
MNC level controls. Some MNCs may provide a more supportive problem solving context
to help dissipate the negative connotations that facing non-routine problems can entail.
We therefore control for MNC normalization of problem solving, adapting Shepherd et al.’s
(2011) measure to the MNC problem solving context. We also tested additional controls
at the MNC level including logged transformations of the number of employees and turnover
(2012 US$) as proxies for MNC size, but found these variables were not signiﬁcant, and
they are not presented here.
An additional model that included controls for problem pressure, people involved, functional
diversity, unit risk taking propensity, and MNC normalization of problem solving on both the solution
creativity and opportunity formation variables was also created. As none of the controls had a
signiﬁcant effect on opportunity formation or impacted the direction or signiﬁcance of our
variables of interest they are not included in our ﬁnal model.[1]
469
Boundary Capabilities in MNCs
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

Data Analysis Method
To analyse our data we used partial least squares (PLS) which is a variance-based struc-
tural equation model (SEM) (Hair et al., 2014). We chose this technique because our
study is exploratory and PLS has been shown to be appropriate under these circumstan-
ces (Hair et al., 2013). In addition, PLS is suitable for small sample sizes of 30 to 100
cases (our data has 67 observations) (Reinartz et al., 2009). We used SmartPLS 3.0
(Ringle et al., 2015) to compute our model. Our analysis was carried out using the path
weighting scheme (Henseler et al., 2012).
RESULTS
We followed a two-stage process to assess our data and estimate our model. In the ﬁrst
stage, we examined item reliability and internal construct reliability as well as conver-
gent validity and discriminant validity. The item outer loadings for the measures of our
reﬂective constructs were all above the 0.7 suggested cut-off mark (Hair et al., 2014) (see
Table IV). As indicated in Table IV, our reﬂective measures all have construct reliability
values above 0.830, indicating their internal reliability is acceptable. In addition, we
examined the convergent validity of our reﬂective constructs. The average variance
extracted (AVE) values (see Table IV) are 0.635 and higher, which is above the 0.500
Table IV. Measurement model evaluation results
Constructs
Loading
Composite reliability
AVE
Solution creativity (SC)
0.839
0.635
Original and practical work (SC1)
0.845
Adaptive and practical work (SC2)
0.747
Creative work (SC3)
0.796
MNC knowledge transformation (KT)
0.933
0.822
Explain meaning of technical knowledge (KT1)
0.897
Sharing unit-speciﬁc knowledge (KT2)
0.896
Integrate knowledge from different units (KT3)
0.925
Opportunity formation (OF)
0.908
0.768
Used problem to explore new possibilities (OF1)
0.878
Used the problem to construct new ideas (OF2)
0.925
Problem was an opportunity to innovate(OF3)
0.823
Problem pressure (PP)
0.830
0.710
Problem exerts pressure on subsidiary (PP1)
0.891
Problem exerts pressure on organization (PP2)
0.791
Unit risk taking propensity (Risk)
0.927
0.809
Low vs. high risk projects (Risk1)
0.800
Wait and see vs. aggressive posture (Risk2)
0.953
Cautious behaviour vs. bold wide-ranging acts (Risk3)
0.936
MNC normalization of problem solving (NormPS)
0.931
0.820
Non-routine problems are considered ordinary (NormPS1)
0.758
Takes non-routine problems in its stride (NormPS2)
0.966
Non-routine problems are not extra-ordinary (NormPS3)
0.977
470
E. Tippmann et al.
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

critical value (Hair et al., 2014) and provides evidence of convergent validity. To check
for discriminant validity, we used the Fornell-Larcker criterion in which the correlations
of the variables are compared to the square root of the AVE values (Hair et al., 2014).
We detail the correlations (off-diagonal values) and the square root of the AVE values
(down the diagonal) in Table V. As can be seen, the AVE square root values are higher
than the correlations of the constructs which suggests that our constructs have discrimi-
nant validity. Further conﬁrmation of discriminant validity included examining the
cross-loadings of our indicators. We found that no indicator loaded higher with regards
to other constructs.
In the second stage, we created a model to test our hypotheses. To test for the signiﬁ-
cance of our parameters, we ran a 5000 sub-sample bootstrap with the no-sign changes
option. The relationship between MNC knowledge transformation and opportunity formation is
positive and signiﬁcant (ß 5 0.594, p < .001), which supports Hypothesis 1. In addition,
the relationship between opportunity formation and solution creativity is also positive and sig-
niﬁcant (ß 5 0.363, p < .001), giving support for Hypothesis 2. Overall, the model shows
a positive indirect effect between MNC knowledge transformation and solution creativity via
opportunity formation (total effect, ß 5 0.216, p < .001). Table VI details the path coefﬁ-
cients between each of our variables and t-values based upon the bootstrapping proce-
dure. The control variable for problem pressure is positive and signiﬁcant (ß 5 0.288,
p < .05), indicating that the more intense the pressure the more creative the solution
generated. The control variable for number of people involved is negative and signiﬁcant
(ß 5 20.289, p < .05), suggesting that the more people that are involved in solving the
problem the less creative the solution generated. The control variables for functional diver-
sity, unit risk taking propensity, and MNC normalization of problem solving were not signiﬁcant.
The variance explained for opportunity formation (R2 5 0.353) and solution creativity
(R2 5 0.300) suggest that the model has predictive relevance. In addition, we ran the
blindfolding procedure (Hair et al., 2014) to obtain Stone-Geisser Q2 statistics. The pos-
itives values of the Stone-Geisser Q2 statistics (0.234 and 0.146 respectively) indicate
that the model has predictive relevance. In addition, to test the signiﬁcance of the indi-
rect relationship between MNC knowledge transformation and solution creativity we calculated
the Sobel test statistic (2.946, p < .01, two-tailed).
Table V. Discriminant validity assessment
Construct
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1 Solution creativity
0.797
2 MNC knowledge transformation
0.111 0.907
3 Opportunity formation
0.409 0.594
0.876
4 Problem pressure
0.226 0.272
0.134
0.843
5 People involved
20.223 0.176 20.026
0.364
1.000
6 Functional diversity
0.099 0.098
0.044 20.107 20.095
1.000
7 Unit risk taking propensity
0.128 0.145
0.098
0.156 20.091 20.306 0.899
8 MNC normalization of problem solving
0.109 0.014 20.055
0.085 20.176 20.364 0.611 0.906
Note: Diagonal elements are square roots of AVEs, other elements are latent variable correlations.
471
Boundary Capabilities in MNCs
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

Post-Hoc Tests
To account for alternative explanations, we also tested a model that included a direct
effect between MNC knowledge transformation and solution creativity (results available from the
authors). As expected, the direct relationship was not signiﬁcant (ß 5 20.215, p ns), and
its inclusion in our model does not change the signiﬁcance and direction of our results.
Robustness checks including creating sub-samples of ICT and pharmaceutical indus-
try cases (i.e., removing the three cases from other industries), of Irish subsidiaries only
(removing the three cases from outside of Ireland), and including only those with a UK
or US parent (removing the four cases where the parent company was from Germany,
France and Sweden) respectively, strongly supported our hypotheses (results available
from the authors).
As a further test of the effect of MNC knowledge transformation on solution creativity via opportu-
nity formation we conducted the Preacher and Hayes (2004) bootstrap test for indirect effects.
The model includes both our variables of interest and our control variables. The results of
the analysis indicate a positive and signiﬁcant direct effect of MNC knowledge transformation on
opportunity formation and a positive and signiﬁcant direct effect of opportunity formation on solution
creativity. Importantly, the indirect effect of MNC knowledge transformation on solution creativity
via opportunity formation is also positive and signiﬁcant as zero is not included in the bias cor-
rected 95 per cent conﬁdence interval with a lower limit of 0.060 and an upper limit of
0.286 (full results of the analysis are available from the authors). We therefore conclude
that our model is robust with regard to both PLS analysis (Hair et al., 2014) and the
Preacher and Hayes (2004) bootstrap method of analysis.
DISCUSSION
Despite the importance of boundary spanning for the generation of innovative and crea-
tive outcomes, there are still major gaps in our understanding of how MNCs utilize,
coordinate and manage knowledge across their geographic locations (Andersson et al.,
Table VI. Structural model assessment
Endogenous constructs
R2
Stone-Geisser Q2
Opportunity formation
0.353
0.234
Solution creativity
0.300
0.146
Relation
Path coefﬁcient
t value (bootstrap)
MNC knowledge transformation ! Opportunity formation
0.594***
6.340
Opportunity formation ! Solution creativity
0.363***
3.337
Problem pressure ! Solution creativity
0.288*
2.090
People involved! Solution creativity
20.289*
2.226
Functional diversity! Solution creativity
0.122
0.942
Unit risk taking propensity! Solution creativity
0.002
0.011
MNC normalization of problem solving! Solution creativity
0.099
0.554
Note: * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001.
472
E. Tippmann et al.
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

2016; Meyer et al., 2011, p. 247). We need to understand not just how such ﬁrms inte-
grate their diverse knowledge across boundaries but how they can do so in a way which
unlocks its embedded value to achieve innovative and creative solutions. In response,
our approach to investigating knowledge transformation in MNCs and its impact on
solution creativity allows us to advance theory on boundary spanning and creativity in
the MNC.
MNC Knowledge Transformation and MNC Boundary Capability
Responding to the need to develop the speciﬁcities of boundary spanning in global
organizations, we draw on Carlile (2002, 2004) to suggest that the type of boundary
faced by subsidiary and headquarters actors when working together for problem solving
is often pragmatic in nature, requiring knowledge transformation. Developing the con-
cept of MNC knowledge transformation, as the extent to which collaborators from
across subsidiary and headquarters units propose and apply one another’s diverse
knowledge in new ways, prompts attention to the critical behavioural aspects of bound-
ary spanning collaboration. Speciﬁcally, it emphasizes how collaborators draw on and
synthesize expertise that is not only geographically distributed, but can be highly diverse
and invested in practice as MNCs nurture specialized knowledge pockets in different
institutional environments. Specifying MNC knowledge transformation, this study gives
attention to the types of actions and interactions at a micro-social level that in their com-
bination allow collaborators from various subsidiary and headquarters units to beneﬁt
from the diverse knowledge of the organization.
Other research concerned with boundary spanning in the MNC has focused on indi-
vidual boundary spanners (e.g., Barner-Rasmussen et al., 2014; Schotter and Beamish,
2011) and communities of practice (Tallman and Chacar, 2011). Our paper differs in its
approach, examining boundary spanning at the group level. Project groups are an
increasingly important form of organizing, especially for performing creative and inno-
vative tasks (Obstfeld, 2012). It is thus critical for our understanding of boundary span-
ning in global organizations to advance theory in this respect. In these temporary and
task-speciﬁc collaborative situations, MNCs often purposefully bring together individu-
als from different country units to beneﬁt from diverse knowledge. These situations,
however, put an onus on collaborators to effectively overcome the many challenges of
crossing boundaries to achieve the envisaged beneﬁts of realizing innovative and crea-
tive potential.
In this respect, our ﬁndings demonstrate that collaborators’ systematic actions can
surmount the challenges that spanning pragmatic boundaries in the MNC entails and
unleash creative potential. Our interest in collaborators’ actions and interactions at a
micro-social
level
thus
reveals
a
collective
accomplishment
underpinning
an
organization-level capability (Felin et al., 2012). Building on Carlile’s (2004) suggestion
that knowledge transformation is the most demanding, yet potentially most value adding
boundary spanning activity compared to the less complex activities of knowledge trans-
fer and translation, we propose that MNC knowledge transformation represents one
(but not the only) micro-foundation of a MNC boundary capability. Through repeated
and iterative actions and interactions, a MNC boundary capability allows the
473
Boundary Capabilities in MNCs
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

organization to not only access its diverse knowledge but to transform this knowledge
across its units to achieve innovative and creative outcomes.
The Value of Boundary Spanning: ‘Turning’ Problems into Opportunities
Our ﬁndings demonstrate that MNC knowledge transformation leads to the generation
of creative outcomes, albeit in a more complex way than previously considered. Prior lit-
erature on boundary spanning across functions in co-located settings points to the value
of knowledge transformation in allowing collaborators to synthesize diverse knowledge
in new ways (e.g., Carlile, 2004; Carlile and Rebentisch, 2003), but does not typically
explore problem formulation actions in detail. Addressing this oversight, we ﬁnd support
for a mediating effect: MNC knowledge transformation can lead to creative solutions
when problems are formed as opportunities. Our ﬁndings demonstrate that unlocking
the creative potential in problem solving requires collaborators to seek out and apply
their collective and diverse expertise when framing the problem. Although extant litera-
ture on problem solving emphasizes problem deﬁnition (Lyles, 1981; Lyles and Mitroff,
1980) and points towards the importance of introducing diversity in perspectives during
problem formulation to conceptualize the situation more comprehensively (Baer et al.,
2013), our ﬁndings suggest that the problem can also be considerably redeﬁned. MNC
knowledge transformation can generate creative solutions by facilitating alternative for-
mulations of the problem; it is a means to break out of ‘habitual’ problem deﬁnitions
(Ford, 1996) that too often constrain the attainment of truly novel and useful solutions.
By revealing this mediating relationship, our ﬁndings offer new insights into how the
inﬂuence of knowledge transformation is transmitted to enable the generation of crea-
tive outcomes. For the MNC, this ﬁnding offers interesting implications: problem formu-
lations can constrain subsidiary value creation if they are narrow and context-speciﬁc.
However, MNC knowledge transformation offers the possibility of generating a
reframed perspective on organizational challenges, revealing previously unforeseen
opportunities for not just ﬁrm value creation, but potentially for building entrepreneur-
ship across the MNC.
Creativity within the MNC
In environments where competition is increasingly based on novel ideas packaged in
innovative products, services or processes, creative solutions are required to rejuvenate
and sustain established ﬁrms. These solutions can be a source of ﬁrm advantage if they
unlock unique ideas and reveal value creating responses to usually complex and ill-
deﬁned challenges (Kim et al., 2013; Reiter-Palmon and Illies, 2004).
In most ﬁrms, creative responsibility is distributed across units and levels. Driven by
the geographic dispersion of operations and the need to tap into location-speciﬁc advan-
tages, it is recognized that creative potential is highly distributed within MNCs (Can-
twell and Mudambi, 2005; Nohria and Ghoshal, 1997) and achieving creative outcomes
is a critical subsidiary contribution to rejuvenating the MNC’s sources of advantage.
Despite the acceptance that subsidiaries can be engines for the generation of creative
solutions due to their capacity to combine knowledge in unexpected ways (Cantwell and
474
E. Tippmann et al.
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

Mudambi, 2005, 2011), there is a paucity of research investigating the different ways
such creative solutions are achieved.
Our research addresses this gap, clearly demonstrating how opportunity formation
operates as a mechanism to unlock the value of knowledge transformation and enables
subsidiaries to generate creative solutions. This sheds valuable light on a previously hid-
den relationship and shows that creative outcomes in the MNC can be the result of a
collective activity spanning different units. The collective framing of a problem as an
opportunity for the generation of creative solutions aligns well with suggestions that cre-
ativity can be a collective-level phenomenon arising through the interaction between
individuals (George, 2007; Hargadon and Bechky, 2006; Sonenshein, 2014). Although
competence creating subsidiaries may have a higher potential for creative solution
development compared to competence implementing subsidiaries (Cantwell and
Mudambi, 2005), our ﬁndings demonstrate that the development of creative solutions is
not conﬁned to a certain subsidiary type.
Opportunity Formation
Another contribution of our study is to theory on the phenomenon of opportunity.
Despite growing recognition that opportunities are the outcome of social construction
and are enacted subjectively (Alvarez and Barney, 2007; Alvarez et al., 2013), much of
the literature continues to treat opportunity related processes as a ‘black box’ (Alvarez
et al., 2013; Hansen et al., 2011). Our research shows that non-routine problems can be
used to trigger new ideas and possibilities when knowledge transformation occurs, i.e.,
collaborators working together can construct an opportunity from what was originally
an obstacle. Instead of focusing on individual differences in personality or cognitive abil-
ities, our ﬁndings suggest that collective boundary spanning activities matter, especially
collaborators’ engagement in knowledge transformation. This substantiates conjectures
that knowledge processes are critical to forming opportunities (Lumpkin and Lichten-
stein, 2005), suggesting rich potential for future studies to explore problem solving and
opportunity formation in a broader entrepreneurial context.
Implications for Practice
Although many managers are aware of the value of boundary spanning in generating
creative solutions, they may be less familiar with how to unlock the potential of knowl-
edge diversity. In the context of the MNC, where knowledge pockets are not only dis-
tributed but also highly specialized and invested in practice, converting diversity of
knowledge into tangible value is especially challenging. Our study provides several valu-
able insights for managers operating in such contexts.
MNCs rely on their networks of subsidiaries to recognize new opportunities and to
bring these to headquarters’ attention (Andersson et al., 2007). We show that for subsid-
iaries, opportunities can arise in unexpected places, when an entrepreneurial approach
is taken to shaping challenges. This is a valuable insight into alternative means for sub-
sidiaries to contribute to their MNC, especially for those subsidiary managers operating
in competence implementing subsidiaries, with little scope to engage in the autonomous
entrepreneurial behaviour typical of strategic initiative generation (Birkinshaw et al.,
475
Boundary Capabilities in MNCs
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

1998). In a similar vein, developing creative solutions to organizational challenges has
the potential to address a key tension within MNCs. On the one hand headquarters
expects its subsidiaries to put forward new ideas, but on the other hand each unit is
required to focus its resources and capabilities on achieving its speciﬁc mandate. Utiliz-
ing challenging or atypical situations to provide creative solutions for the organization
provides subsidiary managers with a valuable option to demonstrate the value of their
unit without moving too far outside of the assigned mandate.
In addition, our ﬁndings suggest a critical role for the MNC in setting a context that
supports not just the development of a boundary capability and knowledge transforma-
tion across its operations but also an entrepreneurial approach to problem solving to
encourage creative reshaping or reframing of problems (Hargadon and Bechky, 2006).
In this respect, the insight that opportunity formation is an underlying mechanism link-
ing knowledge transformation and the development of creative solutions offers impor-
tant guidance regarding the problem solving approach to adopt when creative solutions
are desired. We contend that how the problem is formulated can impact achievement of
creative outcomes. Problem formulation is often superﬁcial and lacks debate (Baer et al.,
2013; Lyles, 1981) – solution ﬁnding commences in a rush to implement remedies
quickly. Early efforts to transform knowledge are advisable as they can lead to new for-
mulations of the problem that open previously unconceived solution ideas.
It is important that executive managers recognize the value of attaining creative solu-
tions. Greater value creation and advantage to the organization can be achieved if prob-
lems are approached in a way which encourages the development of not just an effective
solution but one that produces a novel and useful outcome. For example, organizations
operating in the same industry often face similar business challenges. The capability to
generate creative solutions that competitors have not envisioned builds valuable and
rare resources (Kim et al., 2013), ultimately strengthening the ﬁrm’s competitive advant-
age. In addition, the causal ambiguity of forming opportunities, as implied by the com-
plex pattern and iterative nature of knowledge transformation activities at boundaries,
may in itself become a source of ﬁrm advantage (Alvarez et al., 2013). In this respect, for
MNCs, our results are encouraging regarding the ability of subsidiary driven problem
solving, particularly through boundary spanning, to create solutions that are not ‘just’
workable, but of high creative value.
Last but not least, our work clearly demonstrates the value of boundary capabilities to
support knowledge ampliﬁcation across the MNC. However, managers should not
underestimate the efforts required by collaborators to achieve effective knowledge trans-
formation. Understanding the speciﬁc expertise, technical language, styles and poten-
tially conﬂicting views of other collaborators requires both time and considerable effort,
but as our results show, it is critical to unlocking the beneﬁts of diverse MNC
knowledge.
Limitations and Avenues for Future Research
This study has limitations that create avenues for future research. As our study was con-
cerned with subsidiary driven problem solving processes, our sample does not include
problem solving projects initiated at the corporate or headquarters level. It may be the
476
E. Tippmann et al.
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

case that problems identiﬁed as requiring resolution at these levels exhibit higher pres-
sure and therefore pose more demands on knowledge transformation and opportunity
formation behaviours to lead to creative solutions. Future research can meaningfully
extend our arguments to these scenarios.
Our interest in examining the links between problem solving activities and creative
outcomes required sampling problem solving projects where solutions were imple-
mented. Although our sample exhibits good variation in the level of creative solutions
generated, our study may under-represent less formalized problem solving processes
and certainly excludes processes that were terminated early. As organizational problems
are typically only addressed after undergoing a stage of creeping awareness until a tip-
ping point is reached (Lyles, 1981; Lyles and Mitroff, 1980), more research is needed to
understand the inﬂuence of knowledge transformation during this very early phase of
problem formulation and how knowledge transformation can help ensure that the ‘right’
organizational challenges are prioritized for resolution. More work is also needed to
understand the iterative nature of problem solving.
In relation to boundary spanning in global organizations, our study was focused on
MNC knowledge transformation as the most critical boundary spanning activity in atyp-
ical situation. As outlined earlier, Carlile (2002, 2004) proposes two other boundary
spanning activities – knowledge transfer and knowledge translation. While there is con-
siderable research on knowledge transfer in the MNC, there is considerable scope for
research to further examine the translation and transformation of knowledge at seman-
tic and pragmatic boundaries, respectively. In addition, future research could explore
alternative mechanisms through which the beneﬁts of MNC knowledge transformation
are transmitted. Beyond opportunity formation, this may include the capacity of collab-
orators from across the MNC to agree on a joint problem deﬁnition that avoids the dan-
ger of powerful individuals or coalitions to pre-dominate (e.g., Baer et al., 2013) and
hence hinder the beneﬁt of knowledge transformation to materialize.
Our sampling strategy was broad as we chose MNCs and subsidiaries that exhibited
variation in organizational attributes. We also studied problem solving projects from
varied functional areas. This minimizes the likelihood that our ﬁndings are the result of
a certain organizational context, increasing the generalizability of our ﬁndings. How-
ever, our sample is largely focused on two industries (ICT and pharmaceutical) and sub-
sidiaries located in one country. Future work can meaningfully extend our ﬁndings to
other industries and locations. Although our sample size is relatively small, it is still sufﬁ-
cient to provide the necessary power to test our hypotheses and control for important
extraneous factors. However, it does not allow us to examine systematically all constella-
tions of extraneous factors.
Although we obtained information on solution creativity from an independent eval-
uator to reduce common method bias, this information was usually provided by a sub-
sidiary manager. While the subsidiary top managers’ relative closeness to current
solutions and high international exposure support their ability to answer these questions
accurately, corroboration with a headquarters’ evaluation, however, may allow an even
wider assessment of the newness and usefulness of the solution. We also implemented a
range of techniques to limit recall issues in relation to reporting on past projects. These
included a 12 months cut-off time-frame to include only processes of the recent past,
477
Boundary Capabilities in MNCs
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

focusing on speciﬁc activities surrounding a concrete event (speciﬁc problem solving pro-
ject), ensuring conﬁdentiality, detailed explanation of study beneﬁts and researcher
administration of the survey to ensure respondents reﬂected carefully on each question.
CONCLUSION
As the MNC represents an organizational setting characterized by high levels of knowl-
edge diversity, developing a boundary capability is not only critical for the generation of
creative solutions but also for MNC advantage. By showing that MNC knowledge trans-
formation can give rise to opportunity formation for the development of creative solu-
tions, this study advances our understanding of how to liberate the often untapped
potential of diverse knowledge within the MNC.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This study was funded by the Irish Research Council with co-funding from the European Commission
(Marie-Curie Fellowship). We are very grateful for the insightful comments of Phillip C. Nell, the three
reviewers, editors and participants at the paper development workshop at Ivey Business School.
NOTE
[1] When including the additional controls in the model the effect of our control for problem pressure on
solution creativity was no longer signiﬁcant.
REFERENCES
Aldrich, H. E. and Martinez, M. A. (2010). ‘Entrepreneurship as social construction: A multilevel evolu-
tionary approach’. In Acs, Z. J. and Audretsch, D. B. (Eds), Handbook of Entrepreneurship Research: An
Interdisciplinary Survey and Introduction. New York: Springer Science & Business Media, 387–427.
Alvarez, S. A. and Barney, J. B. (2007). ‘Discovery and creation: Alternative theories of entrepreneurial
action’. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, 1, 11–26.
Alvarez, S. A. and Barney, J. B. (2008). ‘Opportunities, organizations, and entrepreneurship’. Strategic
Entrepreneurship Journal, 2, 265–7.
Alvarez, S. A., Barney, J. B. and Anderson, P. (2013). ‘Forming and exploiting opportunities: The impli-
cations of discovery and creation processes for entrepreneurial and organizational research’. Organi-
zation Science, 24, 301–17.
Amabile, T. M. (1996). Creativity in Context: Update to ‘the Social Psychology of Creativit’. Boulder, CO:
Westview.
Ancona, D. G. and Caldwell, D. F. (1992). ‘Demography and design: Predictors of new product team
performance’. Organization Science, 3, 321–41.
Andersson, U., Forsgren, M. and Holm, U. (2007). ‘Balancing subsidiary inﬂuence in the federative
MNC: A business network view’. Journal of International Business Studies, 38, 802–18.
Andersson, U., Dasi, A., Mudambi, R. and Pedersen, T. (2016). ‘Technology, innovation and knowledge:
The importance of ideas and international connectivity’. Journal of World Business, 51, 153–62.
Baer, M., Dirks, K. T. and Nickerson, J. A. (2013). ‘Microfoundations of strategic problem formulation’.
Strategic Management Journal, 34, 197–214.
Barner-Rasmussen, W., Ehrnrooth, M., Koveshnikov, A. and M€akel€a, K. (2014). ‘Cultural and language
skills as resources for boundary spanning within the MNC’. Journal of International Business Studies, 45,
886–905.
Barreto, I. (2012). ‘Solving the entrepreneurial puzzle: The role of entrepreneurial interpretation in
opportunity formation and related processes’. Journal of Management Studies, 49, 356–80.
Bartlett, C. A. and Ghoshal, S. (1989). Managing Across Borders: The Transnational Solution. Boston, MA:
Harvard Business School Press.
478
E. Tippmann et al.
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

Bechky, B. A. (2003). ‘Sharing meaning across occupational communities: The transformation of under-
standing on a production ﬂoor’. Organization Science, 14, 312–30.
Beck, T. E. and Plowman, D. A. (2009). ‘Experiencing rare and unusual events richly: The role of mid-
dle managers in animating and guiding organizational interpretation’. Organization Science, 20,
909–24.
Berry, H. (2014). ‘Global integration and innovation: Multicountry knowledge generation within MNCs’.
Strategic Management Journal, 35, 869–90.
Birkinshaw, J., Ambos, T. and Bouquet, C. (2017). ‘Boundary spanning activities of corporate HQ exec-
utives: Insights from a longitudinal study’. Journal of Management Studies, 54, 422–54.
Birkinshaw, J., Hood, N. and Jonsson, S. (1998). ‘Building ﬁrm-speciﬁc advantages in multinational cor-
porations: The role of subsidiary initiative’. Strategic Management Journal, 19, 221–41.
Birkinshaw, J. and Ridderstrale, J. (1999). ‘Fighting the corporate immune system: A process study of
subsidiary initiatives in multinational corporations’. International Business Review, 8, 149–80.
Burgelman, R. A. (1983). ‘A process model of internal corporate venturing in the diversiﬁed major ﬁrm’.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 28, 223–44.
Cantwell, J. and Mudambi, R. (2005). ‘MNE competence-creating subsidiary mandates’. Strategic Manage-
ment Journal, 26, 1109–28.
Cantwell, J. and Mudambi, R. (2011). ‘Physical attraction and the geography of knowledge sourcing in
multinational enterprises’. Global Strategy Journal, 1, 206–32.
Carlile, P. R. (2002). ‘A pragmatic view of knowledge and boundaries: Boundary objects in new product
development’. Organization Science, 13, 442–55.
Carlile, P. R. (2004). ‘Transferring, translating, and transforming: An integrative framework for manag-
ing knowledge across boundaries’. Organization Science, 15, 555–68.
Carlile, P. R. and Rebentisch, E. S. (2003). ‘Into the black box: The knowledge transformation cycle’.
Management Science, 49, 1180–95.
Ciabuschi, F., Dellestrand, H. and Martın, O. M. (2011). ‘Internal embeddedness, headquarters involve-
ment, and innovation importance in multinational enterprises’. Journal of Management Studies, 48,
1612–39.
Collins, D. (2005). ‘A synthesis process model of creative thinking in music composition’. Psychology of
Music, 33, 193–216.
Covin, J. G. and Slevin, D. P. (1989). ‘Strategic management of small ﬁrms in hostile and benign envi-
ronments’. Strategic Management Journal, 10, 75–87.
Cyert, R. M. and March, J. G. (1963). Behavioral Theory of the Firm. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall
Inc.
D€orrenb€acher, C. and Gammelgaard, J. (2006). ‘Subsidiary role development: The effect of micro-
political headquarters–subsidiary negotiations on the product, market and value-added scope of
foreign-owned subsidiaries’. Journal of International Management, 12, 266–83.
Dougherty, D. (1992). ‘Interpretive barriers to successful product innovation in large ﬁrms’. Organization
Science, 3, 179–202.
Doz, Y. L., Santos, J. and Williamson, P. (2001). From Global to Metanational: How Companies Win in the
Knowledge Economy. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Dutton, J. E. and Ashford, S. J. (1993). ‘Selling issues to top management’. Academy of Management Review,
18, 397–428.
Eckhardt, J. T. and Shane, S. A. (2003). ‘Opportunities and entrepreneurship’. Journal of Management, 29,
333–49.
Enders, A., K€onig, A. and Barsoux, J. L. (2016). ‘Stop jumping to solutions!‘. Sloan Management Review,
57, 62–70.
Erkelens, R., van den Hooff, B., Huysman, M. and Vlaar, P. (2015). ‘Learning from locally embedded
knowledge: Facilitating organizational learning in geographically dispersed settings’. Global Strategy
Journal, 5, 177–97.
Felin, T., Foss, N. J., Heimeriks, K. H. and Madsen, T. L. (2012). ‘Microfoundations of routines and
capabilities: Individuals, processes, and structures’. Journal of Management Studies, 49, 1351–74.
Felin, T. and Zenger, T. R. (2016). ‘Crossroads: Strategy, problems, and a theory for the ﬁrm’. Organiza-
tion Science, 27, 222–31.
Ford, C. M. (1996). ‘A theory of individual creative action in multiple social domains’. Academy of Manage-
ment Review, 21, 1112–42.
Ford, C. M. (2002). ‘The futurity of decisions as a facilitator of organizational creativity and change’.
Journal of Organizational Change Management, 15, 635–46.
479
Boundary Capabilities in MNCs
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

Galbraith, J. (1973). Designing Complex Organizations. London: Addison-Westley Publishing Company.
Gavetti, G. and Levinthal, D. (2000). ‘Looking forward and looking backward: Cognitive and experien-
tial search’. Administrative Science Quarterly, 45, 113–37.
George, J. M. (2007). ‘Creativity in organizations’. Academy of Management Annals, 1, 439–77.
Ghemawat, P. (2001). ‘Distance still matters. The hard reality of global expansion’. Harvard Business
Review, 79, 137–47.
Ghoshal, S. and Bartlett, C. A. (1990). ‘The multinational corporation as an interorganizational net-
work’. Academy of Management Review, 15, 603–25.
Godart, F., Maddux, W., Shipilov, A. and Galinsky, A. (2015). ‘Fashion with a foreign ﬂair: Professional
experiences abroad facilitate the creative innovations of organizations’. Academy of Management Journal,
58, 195–220.
Gupta, A. K. and Govindarajan, V. (2000). ‘Knowledge ﬂows within multinational corporations’. Strategic
Management Journal, 21, 473–96.
Hair, J. F., Ringle, C. M. and Sarstedt, M. (2013). ‘Partial least squares structural equation modeling:
Rigorous applications, better results and higher acceptance’. Long Range Planning, 46, 1–12.
Hair, J. F. J., Hult, G. T. M., Ringle, C. and Sarstedt, M. (2014). A Primer on Partial Least Squares Structural
Equation Modeling (PLS-SEM). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hansen, D. J., Shrader, R. and Monllor, J. (2011). ‘Defragmenting deﬁnitions of entrepreneurial oppor-
tunity’. Journal of Small Business Management, 49, 283–304.
Hargadon, A. B. and Bechky, B. A. (2006). ‘When collections of creatives become creative collectives: A
ﬁeld study of problem solving at work’. Organization Science, 17, 484–500.
Henseler, J., Ringle, C. and Sarstedt, M. (2012). ‘Using partial least squares path modeling in advertising
research: Basic concepts and recent issues’. In Okazaki, S. (Ed.), Handbook of Research on International
Advertising. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing, 252–76.
Huber, G. P. and Power, D. J. (1985). ‘Retrospective reports of strategic-level managers: Guidelines for
increasing their accuracy’. Strategic Management Journal, 6, 171–80.
Kim, N., Im, S. and Slater, S. F. (2013). ‘Impact of knowledge type and strategic orientation on new
product creativity and advantage in high-technology ﬁrms’. Journal of Product Innovation Management,
30, 136–53.
Kogut, B. and Zander, U. (1993). ‘Knowledge of the ﬁrm and the evolutionary theory of the multina-
tional corporation’. Journal of International Business Studies, 24, 625–45.
Kostova, T. and Zaheer, S. (1999). ‘Organizational legitimacy under conditions of complexity: The case
of the multinational enterprise’. Academy of Management Review, 24, 64–81.
Lawrence, P. and Lorsch, J. (1967). Organizations and Environments: Managing Differentiation and Integration.
Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Leonard-Barton, D. (1995). Wellsprings of Knowledge: Building and Sustaining the Sources of Innovation. Boston,
MA: Harvard Business Press.
Leonardi, P. M. (2011). ‘Innovation blindness: Culture, frames, and cross-boundary problem construction
in the development of new technology concepts’. Organization Science, 22, 347–69.
Levina, N. and Vaast, E. (2005). ‘The emergence of boundary spanning competence in practice: Implica-
tions and use of information systems’. MIS Quarterly, 29, 335–63.
Lopez-Vega, H., Tell, F. and Vanhaverbeke, W. (2016). ‘Where and how to search? Search paths in
open innovation’. Research Policy, 45, 125–36.
Lumpkin, G. T. and Lichtenstein, B. B. (2005). ‘The role of organizational learning in the opportunity-
recognition process’. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 29, 451–72.
Luo, Y. (2005). ‘Toward coopetition within a multinational enterprise: A perspective from foreign subsid-
iaries’. Journal of World Business, 40, 71–90.
Lyles, M. A. (1981). ‘Formulating strategic problems: Empirical analysis and model development’. Strategic
Management Journal, 2, 61–75.
Lyles, M. A. and Mitroff, I. I. (1980). ‘Organizational problem formulation: An empirical study’. Adminis-
trative Science Quarterly, 25, 102–19.
Madjar, N., Greenberg, E. and Chen, Z. (2011). ‘Factors for radical creativity, incremental creativity,
and routine, noncreative performance’. Journal of Applied Psychology, 96, 730–43.
McGrath, R. G. (2001). ‘Exploratory learning, innovative capacity, and managerial oversight’. Academy of
Management Journal, 44, 118–31.
Meyer, K. E., Mudambi, R. and Narula, R. (2011). ‘Multinational enterprises and local contexts:
The opportunities and challenges of multiple embeddedness’. Journal of Management Studies, 48,
235–52.
480
E. Tippmann et al.
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

Mintzberg, H. and Westley, F. (2001). ‘Decision making: It’s not what you think’. Sloan Management
Review, 42, 89–93.
Mitchell, R. K., Mitchell, J. R. and Smith, J. B. (2008). ‘Inside opportunity formation: Enterprise failure,
cognition, and the creation of opportunities’. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, 2, 225–42.
Mors, M. L. (2010). ‘Innovation in a global consulting ﬁrm: When the problem is too much diversity’.
Strategic Management Journal, 31, 841–72.
Mudambi, R. (2011). ‘Hierarchy, coordination, and innovation in the multinational enterprise’. Global
Strategy Journal, 1, 317–23.
Mudambi, R., Mudambi, S. M. and Navarra, P. (2007). ‘Global innovation in MNCs: The effects of
subsidiary self-determination and teamwork’. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 24, 442–55.
Mudambi, R. and Swift, T. (2009). ‘Professional guilds, tension and knowledge management’. Research
Policy, 38, 736–45.
Nelson, R. R. and Winter, S. G. (1982). An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change. Cambridge, MA: The
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Newell, A. and Simon, H. A. (1972). Human Problem Solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Nickerson, J., Yen, C. J. and Mahoney, J. T. (2012). ‘Exploring the problem-ﬁnding and problem-solving
approach for designing organizations’. Academy of Management Perspectives, 26, 52–72.
Nickerson, J. A. and Zenger, T. R. (2004). ‘A knowledge-based theory of the ﬁrm – The problem-
solving perspective’. Organization Science, 15, 617–32.
Nohria, N. and Ghoshal, S. (1997). The Differentiated Network: Organizing Multinational Corporations for Value
Creation. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Nonaka, I. (1994). ‘A dynamic theory of organizational knowledge creation’. Organization Science, 5,
14–37.
Noorderhaven, N. and Harzing, A. W. (2009). ‘Knowledge-sharing and social interaction within MNEs’.
Journal of International Business Studies, 40, 719–41.
Nutt, P. C. (1984). ‘Types of organizational decision processes’. Administrative Science Quarterly, 29, 414–50.
Nutt, P. C. (1992). ‘Formulation tactics and the success of organizational decision making’. Decision Scien-
ces, 23, 519–40.
Nutt, P. C. (1993). ‘The formulation processes and tactics used in organizational decision making’. Orga-
nization Science, 4, 226–51.
Nutt, P. C. (2004). ‘Expanding the search for alternatives during strategic decision-making’. Academy of
Management Executive, 18, 13–28.
Nutt, P. C. (2005). ‘Search during decision making’. European Journal of Operational Research, 160,
851–76.
Obstfeld, D. (2012). ‘Creative projects: A less routine approach toward getting new things done’. Organi-
zation Science, 23, 1571–92.
Oldham, G. R. and Cummings, A. (1996). ‘Employee creativity: Personal and contextual factors at
work’. Academy of Management Journal, 39, 607–34.
Papadakis, V. M., Lioukas, S. and Chambers, D. (1998). ‘Strategic decision-making processes: The role
of management and context’. Strategic Management Journal, 19, 115–47.
Parker, A. and Tippmann, E. (2016). ‘Utilizing diverse knowledge for problem solving in the MNC: A
network mobilization perspective’. In Humphreys, J. (Ed.), Proceedings of the Seventy-Sixth Annual Meeting
of the Academy of Management. Online ISSN: 2151-6561.
Pawlowski, S. D. and Robey, D. (2004). ‘Bridging user organizations: Knowledge brokering and the
work of information technology professionals’. MIS Quarterly, 28, 645–72.
Perry-Smith, J. E. and Shalley, C. E. (2003). ‘The social side of creativity: A static and dynamic social
network perspective’. Academy of Management Review, 28, 89–106.
Preacher, K. J. and Hayes, A. F. (2004). ‘SPSS and SAS procedures for estimating indirect effects in sim-
ple mediation models’. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 36, 717–31.
Reinartz, W., Haenlein, M. and Henseler, J. (2009). ‘An empirical comparison of the efﬁcacy of
covariance-based and variance-based SEM’. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 26, 332–44.
Reiter-Palmon, R. and Illies, J. J. (2004). ‘Leadership and creativity: Understanding leadership from a
creative problem-solving perspective’. Leadership Quarterly, 15, 55–77.
Ringle, C., Wende, S. and Becker, J. M. (2015). SmartPLS3. Boenningstedt: SmartPLS GmbH. Available
at http://www.smartpls.com (Accessed 1 July 2016).
Rugman, A. M., Verbeke, A. and Wenlong, Y. (2011). ‘Re-conceptualizing Bartlett and Ghoshal’s classi-
ﬁcation of national subsidiary roles in the multinational enterprise’. Journal of Management Studies, 48,
253–77.
481
Boundary Capabilities in MNCs
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies

Sarasvathy, S. D., Dew, N., Velamuri, S. R. and Venkataraman, S. (2010). ‘Three views of entrepre-
neurial opportunity’. In Acs, Z. J. and Audretsch, D. B. (Eds), Handbook of Entrepreneurship Research: An
Interdisciplinary Survey and Introduction. New York: Springer Science & Business Media, 77–96.
Schotter, A. and Beamish, P. W. (2011). ‘Performance effects of MNC headquarters subsidiary conﬂict
and the role of boundary spanners: The case of headquarter initiative rejection’. Journal of Interna-
tional Management, 17, 243–59.
Schotter, A., Mudambi, R., Doz, Y. and Gaur, A. (2017). ‘Boundary spanning in global organizations’.
Journal of Management Studies, 54, 403–21.
Scott, P., Gibbons, P. and Coughlan, J. (2010). ‘Developing subsidiary contribution to the MNC: Subsid-
iary entrepreneurship and strategy creativity’. Journal of International Management, 16, 328–39.
Shepherd, D. A., Patzelt, H. and Wolfe, M. (2011). ‘Moving forward from project failure: Negative emo-
tions, affective commitment, and learning from the experience’. Academy of Management Journal, 54,
1229–59.
Simon, H. A. (1973). ‘The structure of ill structured problems’. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 4, 181–201.
Simon, H. A. and Hayes, J. R. (1976). ‘The understanding process: Problem isomorphs’. Cognitive
Psychology, 8, 165–90.
Spradlin, D. (2012). ‘Are you solving the right problem? ’. Harvard Business Review, 90, 84–93.
Sonenshein, S. (2014). ‘How organizations foster the creative use of resources’. Academy of Management
Journal, 57, 814–48.
Szulanski, G. (1996). ‘Exploring internal stickiness: Impediments to the transfer of best practice within
the ﬁrm’. Strategic Management Journal, 17, 27–43.
Tallman, S. and Chacar, A. S. (2011). ‘Knowledge accumulation and dissemination in MNEs: A
practice-based framework’. Journal of Management Studies, 48, 278–304.
Tippmann, E., Sharkey Scott, P. and Mangematin, V. (2012). ‘Problem solving in MNCs: How local
and global solutions are (and are not) created’. Journal of International Business Studies, 43, 746–71.
Tippmann, E., Sharkey Scott, P. and Mangematin, V. (2014). ‘Subsidiary managers’ knowledge mobili-
zations: Unpacking emergent knowledge ﬂows’. Journal of World Business, 49, 431–43.
Tsai, W. (2002). ‘Social structure of “coopetition” within a multiunit organization: Coordination, compe-
tition, and intraorganizational knowledge sharing’. Organization Science, 13, 179–90.
van Wijk, R., Jansen, J. J. P. and Lyles, M. A. (2008). ‘Inter- and intra-organizational knowledge trans-
fer: A meta-analytic review and assessment of its antecedents and consequences’. Journal of Manage-
ment Studies, 45, 830–53.
Volkema, R. J. (1983). ‘Problem formulation in planning and design’. Management Science, 29, 639–52.
482
E. Tippmann et al.
V
C 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and Society for the Advancement of Management Studies
