Supply Chain Forum: An International Journal
ISSN: 1625-8312 (Print) 1624-6039 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/tscf20
The inﬂuences of boundary spanning capabilities
and long–term orientation on opportunism in
inter–ﬁrm relationships
Thoa Xuan Thi Pham, Kodo Yokozawa & Nguyen Ngoc Anh
To cite this article: Thoa Xuan Thi Pham, Kodo Yokozawa & Nguyen Ngoc Anh (2024) The
inﬂuences of boundary spanning capabilities and long–term orientation on opportunism in
inter–ﬁrm relationships, Supply Chain Forum: An International Journal, 25:2, 213-228, DOI:
10.1080/16258312.2023.2286694
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/16258312.2023.2286694
Published online: 20 Dec 2023.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 202
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=tscf20
The influences of boundary spanning capabilities and long–term orientation 
on opportunism in inter–firm relationships
Thoa Xuan Thi Pham
a, Kodo Yokozawa
b and Nguyen Ngoc Anh
c
aFaculty of Business, FPT University, Hanoi, Vietnam; bDepartment of Business Administration, Yokohama National University, Yokohama, 
Japan; cDepartment of Economics and Management, VNU International School, Vietnam National University Hanoi, Hanoi, Vietnam
ABSTRACT
Opportunism is a common issue in inter – firm relationships, which increases transaction costs, 
impairs firm performance and supply chain efficiency, and deteriorates relationship quality. 
Previous studies have intensively investigated factors influencing opportunism but overfocusing 
on the organisational level. Recently, supply chain researchers have called for identifying factors 
influencing opportunism at the individual level to gain a more comprehensive understanding of 
opportunism. Based on transaction cost theory, resource dependence theory, and boundary 
spanning theory, this study seeks to advance the emerging research stream on opportunism at 
the individual level by investigating how buyer agents’ boundary spanning capabilities and firms’ 
long – term relationship orientation can help manage supplier agents’ opportunism. Using 
a cross – sectional data set of 406 buyer agents from manufacturing companies collected from 
February to April 2021 in Japan, we tested a set of hypotheses through regression and conditional 
process analyses. Our findings suggest that buyer agents’ strategic communication and firms’ 
long – term relationship orientation are critical factors that reduce supplier agents’ opportunism.KEYWORDS 
Inter–firm relationship; 
opportunism; boundary 
spanning capability; long– 
term orientation; Japan
Introduction
In today’s global competition and uncertainty, busi -
ness companies face numerous issues, including 
opportunistic behaviour or opportunism in inter – 
firm relationships (Han et al. 2022 ; Wang, Huo, and 
Tian 2021 ). Opportunism is defined as ‘self – interest 
seeking with guile’ (e.g. lying, cheating, distorting 
facts) by human actors in business relationships 
(Williamson 1985 , 47). Opportunism increases transac -
tion costs (Dahlstrom and Nygaard 1999 ), impairs firm 
performance and relationship quality (Williamson  
1985 ), and hinders supply chain efficiency (Daultani 
et al. 2015 ). Thus, the reduction of opportunism in 
inter – firm relationships has drawn considerable atten -
tion from researchers and practitioners.
Previous studies on inter – firm relationships 
have primarily examined factors influencing organi -
sational – level opportunism, where opportunism is 
attributed to and managed by companies 
(Bhattacharya, Singh, and Nand 2015 ; Han et al.  
2022 ; Handley and Benton 2012 ; Huo et al. 2018 ; 
Parkhe 1993 ; Wang et al. 2016 ; Yang et al. 2021 ). 
However, an emerging trend focuses on individual 
opportunism, highlighting the role of buyer agents 
as boundary spanners of buyer firms in managing 
suppliers’ opportunistic behaviours during business 
transactions (Gelderman, Semeijn, and Verhappen  2020 ; Hawkins, Lewin, and Amos 2012 ; Hawkins, 
Pohlen, and Prybutok 2013 ; Srinivasan and 
Srivastava 2012 ; Tangpong, Hung, and Ro 2010 ).
To effectively manage business relationships with 
suppliers and mitigate their opportunistic behaviours, 
buyer agents must possess strong boundary spanning 
capabilities (BSCs), which include purchasing knowl -
edge, communication skills, and compromise ability 
(Zhang, Viswanathan, and Henke 2011 ). These BSCs 
are particularly important during the pre – contract 
stage, where buyer agents utilise them to analyse rele-
vant information and negotiate contract terms with 
suppliers. This information includes product details 
(design, quality, alternatives), delivery specifications 
(just – in–time, schedule), cost factors (raw materials, 
production, taxes, exchange rates), and supplier cap-
abilities (alternative options, reputation) (Akrout and 
Diallo 2017 ). In this stage, buyers are vulnerable to 
suppliers’ opportunistic behaviours, such as inflating 
costs. BSCs help buyer agents mitigate these risks 
(Zhang, Viswanathan, and Henke 2011 ).
Furthermore, BSCs continue to be crucial in the 
post – contract stage for buyer agents to control sup-
pliers’ opportunistic behaviours. For instance, when 
there are sudden increases in raw material prices, sig-
nificant changes in exchange rates, or disruptions in 
product delivery due to adverse weather conditions, 
CONTACT Nguyen Ngoc Anh 
 anhngocnguyen@vnu.edu.vn 
 Department of Economics and Management, VNU International School, Vietnam 
National University Hanoi, Hanoi, VietnamSUPPLY CHAIN FORUM: AN INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL 
2024, VOL. 25, NO. 2, 213–228 
https://doi.org/10.1080/16258312.2023.2286694
© 2023 Kedge Business School 
suppliers often attempt to renegotiate terms in their 
favour. In such situations, buyer agents’ purchasing 
knowledge and skills are vital in understanding the 
situation and developing negotiation strategies to 
adjust contracts with suppliers, thereby avoiding dis-
advantages for the buyer company (Dowell, Morrison, 
and Heffernan 2015 ; Pan and Choi 2016 ). However, 
individual opportunism in inter – firm relationships 
has been overlooked in previous literature (Pham, 
Yokozawa, and Anh 2022 ; Tangpong, Hung, and Ro  
2010 ). Individual opportunism is critical to consider 
because individual agents – i.e. buyer and supplier 
agents – are primarily responsible for conducting and 
managing business transactions; they have many 
opportunities to perform opportunistically (Hawkins, 
Lewin, and Amos 2012 ). In many cases, opportunistic 
behaviours in business exchanges that damage firm 
performance and cooperation between firms are inten -
tionally performed by individual agents rather than 
companies (Lyons, Krachenberg, and Henke 1990 ). 
Thus, this study is a part of the emerging trend focus -
ing on individual opportunism.
Additionally, only a limited number of studies have 
empirically operationalised and tested the role of 
boundary spanning capabilities (BSCs) in managing 
opportunism. transaction cost theory (TCT) and 
resource dependence theory (RDT) highlight the sig-
nificance of knowledge limitations regarding products, 
markets, competitors, and communication skills as 
major factors hindering individual agents’ effective 
control over their counterparts’ opportunistic beha -
viours (Williamson 1985 ). Moreover, knowledge is con-
sidered a crucial resource that enables a party to exert 
influence and shape the behaviours of other parties 
within supply chains (Pfeffer and Salancik, 1978 ). 
However, there have been few empirical studies that 
have operationalised and tested the propositions put 
forth by TCT and RDT.
On the other hand, existing research on boundary 
spanning theory (BST) has already operationalised rele-
vant knowledge and skills for buyer agents involved in 
business exchanges through the concept of BSCs. 
These BSCs encompass professional purchasing knowl -
edge, compromise ability, and strategic communica -
tion, which have been shown to play a significant role 
in facilitating business exchanges and sustaining 
inter – firm relationships (Vesalainen, Rajala, and 
Wincent 2020 ; Zhang, Viswanathan, and Henke 2011 ; 
Zhang, Wu, and Henke 2015 ). Hence, this study aims to 
investigate the role of buyer agents’ BSCs in managing 
supplier agent opportunism.
Moreover, there is a lack of studies that have elabo -
rated on the integrated framework of individual oppor -
tunism developed by previous research, which 
emphasised the effects of organisational factors as 
contextual moderating conditions that can enhance 
or reduce the role of individual factors in controlling individual opportunism (Gelderman, Semeijn, and 
Verhappen 2020 ; Hawkins, Pohlen, and Prybutok  
2013 ). Therefore, this study aims to address this gap 
by considering the role of long – term orientation (LTO) 
between buyer and supplier firms as an organisational 
contingency factor that could potentially enhance the 
impact of buyer agents’ BSCs on supplier agents’ 
opportunism. Numerous studies have confirmed the 
role of LTO in inter – firm relationships, such as redu -
cing transaction costs (Williamson 1985 ), facilitating 
information exchanges (Dyer and Chu 2011 ; Lee et al.  
2018 ), fostering trust (Chung, Sternquist, and Chen  
2006 ), promoting collaboration (Yunus and 
Kurniawan 2015 ), and creating a cooperative environ -
ment (Gundlach, Achrol, and Mentzer 1995 ; Lui and 
Ngo 2012 ) among business partners. Thus, to enrich 
relevant theories and to provide practical implications, 
we address the following research question: To what 
extent do buyer agents’ BSCs and LTO between buyer 
and supplier firms impact supplier agent opportunism 
and how?
To address the research question, this study col-
lected data from a survey by 406 purchasing agents 
in Japanese manufacturing companies. Conditional 
process analysis is applied, which is ‘an analytical 
strategy that integrates mediation and moderation 
analysis intending to examine and test hypotheses 
about how mechanisms vary as a function of con-
text or individual differences’ (Hayes and Rockwood  
2020 , 1). In this study, we test the main effects of 
buyer agents’ boundary spanning capabilities on 
supplier agents’ opportunism and test the moderat -
ing effects of how the main effects vary in the 
context of long – term orientation between buyer 
and supplier companies.
This study makes four potential contributions. 
First, we extend TCT, RDT, and the literature on 
factors influencing opportunism in inter – firm rela-
tionships by empirically examining opportunism at 
the individual level. Second, our study enriches BST 
by empirically verifying the influence of buyer 
agents’ BSCs in controlling opportunistic behaviours 
from supplier agents. Third, we also contribute to 
the emerging research trend on individual opportu -
nism by considering LTO between buyer and sup-
plier firms as an organisational factor that may 
enhance the effectiveness of buyer agents’ BSCs in 
controlling supplier agents’ opportunism. Fourth, 
we also enrich our understanding of how LTO is 
important in Japanese culture by testing the pro-
posed relationships in Japanese manufacturing 
companies.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. 
In the next section, we provide a literature review 
about factors influencing individual opportunism in 
inter – firm relationships and the role of buyer agents’ 
BSCs in managing inter – firm relationships. Next, we 214
 T. X. T. PHAM ET AL.
explain how we developed the hypotheses, explaining 
how buyer agents can effectively use their BSCs and 
firms’ LTO to mitigate supplier agent opportunism. 
Next, we address the methodology and results. 
Following are the conclusions where we present theo -
retical contributions and implications for practitioners. 
The final section is about limitations and future 
research.
Literature review
Factors influencing individual opportunism in 
inter – firm relationships
Both individual and organisational factors have an 
impact on individual opportunism. In terms of indi -
vidual factors, the cooperativeness and honesty of 
individual agents have been found to influence 
their engagement in opportunistic behaviours 
(Hawkins, Lewin, and Amos 2012 ; Hawkins, Pohlen, 
and Prybutok 2013 ; Tangpong, Hung, and Ro 2010 ). 
Moreover, individual agents’ perceptions of their 
counterparts, including perceiving them as under -
mining their honour or demonstrating opportunistic 
behaviours, can positively influence their decision to 
engage in opportunistic behaviours in response 
(Gelderman, Semeijn, and Verhappen 2020 ).
On the other hand, organisational factors also play 
a significant role. Relational norms between buyer and 
supplier companies have been found to have 
a negative influence on the occurrence of opportunis -
tic behaviours among their agents (Tangpong, Hung, 
and Ro 2010 ). Additionally, the power dynamics 
between buyer and supplier companies can impact 
individual agents’ opportunism, with agents from 
more powerful companies more likely to engage in 
opportunistic behaviours towards agents from less 
powerful companies (Hawkins, Pohlen, and Prybutok  
2013 ). Furthermore, the organisational environment 
created by companies can also affect individual agents’ 
opportunism. For instance, a workplace that promotes 
cooperative ethical values can reduce the likelihood of 
agents behaving opportunistically (Hawkins, Pohlen, 
and Prybutok 2013 ). Conversely, the conduct of man -
agers and leaders, such as engaging in opportunistic 
leadership or displaying wilful ignorance, can increase 
agents’ opportunism (Hawkins, Lewin, and Amos 2012 ; 
Hawkins, Pohlen, and Prybutok 2013 ).
Furthermore, the interaction effects between indivi -
dual and organisational factors play a crucial role in 
managing individual agents’ opportunism. Relational 
norms between buyer and supplier firms alone cannot 
effectively reduce individual agents’ opportunism 
unless those agents exhibit cooperativeness 
(Tangpong, Hung, and Ro 2010 ). Similarly, the pre-
sence of honesty and integrity among individual agents may not be sufficient to decrease their like-
lihood of engaging in opportunistic behaviours if 
their managers and leaders display high levels of 
opportunistic behaviours or if the company does not 
prioritise ethical conduct (Hawkins, Lewin, and Amos  
2012 ; Hawkins, Pohlen, and Prybutok 2013 ). The inter -
action between individual and organisational factors 
highlights the complexity of managing opportunism 
and emphasises the importance of considering both 
sets of factors simultaneously.
Role of buyer agents’ BSCs in managing inter – 
firm relationships
The importance of individual agents’ knowledge and 
skills in facilitating inter – firm relationships and per-
formance has also been recognised in BST (Doney and 
Cannon 1997 ). According to BST, individual agents 
who represent their firms in business exchanges with 
partner firms are referred to as boundary spanners. In 
the context of business exchanges with supplier firms, 
buyer agents serve as typical examples of boundary 
spanners and play crucial roles in fostering relation -
ships with individuals from supplier firms, as well as 
improving the overall performance of the supply chain 
(Adams 1976 ; Aldrich and Herker 1977 ; Doney and 
Cannon 1997 ). These buyer agents utilise their knowl -
edge and skills to bridge the gap between their own 
organisation and the supplier firms, ensuring effective 
communication, collaboration, and relationship 
management.
There are three BSCs that buyer agents need to 
effectively carry out business transactions with suppli -
ers: (1) strategic communication capability: The effec -
tiveness of buyer agents in presenting their firm’s 
strategic intention and goals to suppliers (Ireland and 
Webb 2007 ; Perrone, Zaheer, and McEvily 2003 ); (2) 
professional knowledge: The knowledge possessed 
by buyer agents that enables them to competently 
carry out their job responsibilities (Doney and 
Cannon 1997 ); and (3) ability to reach compromise 
with suppliers: The effectiveness of buyer agents in 
mediating and overcoming differences that arise 
between their firms and the suppliers they interact 
with (Friedman and Podolny 1992 ).
Previous literature has examined the effectiveness 
of buyer agents’ BSCs in building trust between them 
and supplier agents and between buyer firms and 
supplier firms (Doney and Cannon 1997 ; MacDuffie 
and Helper 2006 ; Zhang, Viswanathan, and Henke  
2011 ; Zhang, Zheng, and Li 2019 ). Buyer agents with 
a high level of strategic communication skills and 
knowledge can increase suppliers’ willingness to invest 
in their firms (Zhang, Wu, and Henke 2015 ) and sup-
plier embeddedness (Cai et al. 2021 ). Professional SUPPLY CHAIN FORUM: AN INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL
 215
knowledge helps buyer agents understand and inte -
grate the knowledge shared by suppliers to reinforce 
cooperation values (Teigland and Wasko 2003 ). BSCs 
are critical for buyer agents to identify and attract the 
best suppliers, implement coordination processes, 
enhance internal and external interactions, and 
develop tight bonds (Tchokogué and Merminod  
2021 ). The summary of the research on the impacts 
of BSCs in managing inter – firm relationships is pre-
sented in Table 1.
In sum, the literature review highlights three 
main points. First, individual opportunism is influ -
enced by both individual and organisational fac-
tors, in which organisational factors are conditional 
factors that strengthen or weaken the role of indi -
vidual factors in reducing individual opportunism. 
Second, there is a lack of empirical studies exam -
ining the role of buyer agents’ BSCs in managing 
supplier agents’ opportunism. Third, BST investi -
gates buyer agents’ knowledge and skills in 
inter – firm relationships and operationalises their 
knowledge and skills using three types of BSCs: 
professional purchasing knowledge, compromise 
ability, and strategic communication. While these 
capabilities are crucial in managing supplier rela -
tionships, there is limited understanding of how 
they can effectively control supplier agents’ oppor -
tunism. Therefore, it is necessary to empirically 
investigate the impact of buyer agents’ BSCs on 
supplier agents’ opportunism to elaborate on the 
fundamental propositions of TCT and RDT and to 
enrich knowledge of the roles of buyer agents’ 
BSCs in BST.
Hypotheses development
Impact of buyer agents’ professional purchasing 
knowledge on supplier agents’ opportunism
Buyer agents can leverage their professional knowl -
edge to effectively manage their working relationships 
with supplier agents. Firstly, a strong knowledge foun -
dation allows buyer agents to negotiate favourable 
contracts with suppliers as they are well – informed 
about crucial terms and conditions (Bals et al. 2019 ). 
Additionally, buyer agents with comprehensive pro-
duct knowledge can accurately assess product value 
and production costs, making it difficult for supplier 
agents to engage in opportunistic behaviours (Revilla 
and Knoppen 2015 ).
Secondly, a high level of knowledge equips 
buyer agents with the ability to negotiate effec -
tively in unexpected situations. Buyer agents’ 
knowledge is crucial in obtaining a clear under -
standing of the circumstances, enabling them to 
avoid any disadvantages for their companies 
(Revilla and Knoppen 2015 ).Thirdly, a strong knowledge base empowers buyer 
agents to establish cooperative ties with suppliers. In 
inter – firm relationships, exchanges of knowledge and 
skills are often integral components. Therefore, sup-
plier agents are more likely to cooperate and collabo -
rate with knowledgeable buyer agents, as they 
recognise the opportunity to learn and benefit from 
their expertise (Barbat 2011 ).
Overall, buyer agents’ professional knowledge plays 
a vital role in contract negotiations, managing unfore -
seen circumstances, and fostering cooperative rela-
tionships with suppliers, thereby reducing the 
likelihood of opportunistic behaviours.
Hypothesis 1. Buyer agents’ professional purchasing 
knowledge reduces supplier agents’ opportunism.
Impact of buyer agents’ compromise ability on 
supplier agents’ opportunism
Compromise ability is a crucial attribute for buyer 
agents in effectively managing supplier agents’ 
opportunistic behaviours. As intermediaries 
between buyer and supplier firms, buyer agents 
play a pivotal role in establishing and maintaining 
cooperative relationships (Vesalainen, Rajala, and 
Wincent 2020 ). Compromise ability enables buyer 
agents to reduce conflicts and address interest mis-
matches that may arise between themselves and 
supplier agents, as well as between the buyer and 
supplier firms (Zhang, Viswanathan, and Henke  
2011 ). By mitigating conflicts and interest discre -
pancies, business exchanges can operate smoothly, 
leading to increased satisfaction among supplier 
agents and others within supplier firms, thereby 
reducing the likelihood of opportunistic behaviours 
(Zhang, Viswanathan, and Henke 2011 ).
Moreover, buyer agents with strong compromise 
ability can foster an environment where supplier 
agents feel understood and valued. This sense of 
understanding and care enhances trust and respect 
between buyer agents and supplier agents, creating 
a conducive atmosphere for cooperation and redu -
cing the occurrence of opportunistic behaviours (Cai 
and Yang 2008 ). When supplier agents perceive that 
their interests and concerns are acknowledged and 
taken into account by buyer agents, they are more 
motivated to engage in collaborative and trust -
worthy behaviours.
In summary, compromise ability is a critical attribute 
for buyer agents in managing supplier agents’ oppor -
tunistic behaviours. It helps in conflict resolution, 
addressing interest mismatches, fostering satisfaction, 216
 T. X. T. PHAM ET AL.
Table 1. Summary of research on the impact of BSCs in managing inter – firm relationships.
AuthorsResearch 
type Methodology and sampleInter – firm relationship 
performanceEffects of BSCs on 
inter – firm relationship performance
Au and 
Fukuda 
(2002 )Empirical - Questionnaire survey administered to 232 
expatriates in Japan and English – speaking 
countries 
- Regression analysis- Expatriates’ role 
ambiguity 
- Expatriates’ role benefits 
- Expatriates’ use of 
community resources 
- Expatriates’ power 
- Boundary spanners’ job 
satisfactionBSCs help expatriates gain more role benefits, 
utilise community resources, and reduce 
feelings of ambiguity. In addition, BSCs 
help boundary spanners gain more power 
and job satisfaction in their own 
companies.
Teigland 
and 
Wasko 
(2003 )Empirical - Questionnaire survey administered to 83 
information technology services and 
consulting companies in Europe 
- Structural equation modelling- Creativity 
- Integrating knowledgeBoundary spanning communication positively 
influences creativity and boundary 
spanners’ performance in integrating 
knowledge across organisational 
boundaries.
Zhang 
et al. 
(2011 )Empirical - Questionnaire survey administered to 345 
buyers in the US automotive industry and 
143 buyers in the European food industry 
- Structural equation modelling analysis- Suppliers’ trust in agents 
- Suppliers’ trust in firmsBuyer agents’ BSCs, in the form of strategic 
communication with supplier firms, help 
increase trust between buyer and supplier 
firms, while buyer agents’ professional 
purchasing knowledge and compromise 
ability help reinforce supplier firms’ trust in 
buyer agents.
Zhang 
et al. 
(2015 )Empirical - Questionnaire survey administered to 198 
buyers in the US and 181 buyers in Europe 
- Structural equation modelling analysis- Communication 
- Trustworthiness 
- Willingness to investBSCs, in terms of professional knowledge and 
strategic communication, help enhance 
communication quality between spanners’ 
firms and supplier firms, which in turn 
increases spanners’ firms’ trustworthiness 
and supplier firms’ willingness to invest.
Huang 
et al. 
(2016 )Empirical - Questionnaire survey administered to 225 
manufacturer – distributor dyads in China 
- Structural equation modelling analysis- Relationship quality 
- Relationship trust 
- Relationship satisfaction 
- Relationship commitmentBoundary spanning roles have significant 
influences on inter – organisational 
relationships. The effectiveness of 
boundary spanners in processing 
information and external representation 
helps boost communication and 
cooperation and reduce conflict between 
organisations. This improves relationship 
quality, trust, satisfaction, and commitment 
in inter – organisational relationships.
Cai et al. 
(2017 )Empirical - Questionnaire survey administered to 277 
phone manufacturers in China 
- Path analysis- Inter – firm collaboration 
- Inter – firm conflictBoundary spanners’ interactions and 
capabilities positively impact the 
development of interpersonal ties among 
boundary spanners, which helps 
strengthen inter – firm collaboration and 
reduce inter – firm conflict.
Schotter 
et al. 
(2017 )Conceptual 
modelMeta – analysis literature review and 
conceptual model development- Operational diversity: 
global activities, global 
value chain, inter – form 
ecosystem 
- Organisational 
capabilities: system 
effectiveness, process 
improvement, cost 
efficienciesA sense of honour and identity, strategic 
decision – making, and the abilities, skills, 
and experiences of individual boundary 
spanners are critical to boosting the 
operational diversity and capabilities of 
organisations in the global supply chain.
Dekker 
et al. 
(2019 )Empirical - Questionnaire survey administered to 200 
firms in French 
- Process regression analysis- Collaboration scope 
- Firm performanceBSCs help significantly improve firm 
performance in business exchanges in 
terms of on – time delivery, offer quality, 
innovation, and profit margins. Further, 
boundary spanners’ effectiveness when 
performing their jobs in business 
exchanges helps enhance the positive 
impact of narrow – scope collaborations in 
firm performance.
Son et al. 
(2019 )Empirical - Questionnaire survey administered to 344 
purchasing agents in Korean 
manufacturing firms 
- Hierarchical regression analysisRelationship performance Boundary spanners need to be able to act as 
mediators between their focal firms and 
partner firms. The capacity to influence 
one’s counterparts in information, decision, 
profit, and risk sharing is critical to 
facilitating collaborative supply chain 
relationships.
Zhang 
et al. 
(2019 )Empirical - Questionnaire survey administered to 287 
manufacturing firms in China 
- Two – stage least squares regressionTrust restoration Individual boundary spanners have important 
roles in repairing relationships in business 
exchanges after conflicts and opportunism.
Collien 
(2021 )Conceptual Meta – analysis - Power 
- Knowledge sharing 
- Cross – cultural 
collaborationSpanning capabilities such as communication, 
knowledge, and compromise ability are 
critical for individual spanners to gain 
power and to effectively use that power to 
drive knowledge sharing and cross – 
cultural collaboration.
(Continued )SUPPLY CHAIN FORUM: AN INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL
 217
and building trust, thereby reducing the likelihood of 
opportunistic behaviours in inter – firm relationships.
Hypothesis 2: Buyer agents’ compromise ability 
reduces supplier agents’ opportunism.
Impact of buyer agents’ strategic communication 
on supplier agents’ opportunism
Strategic communication plays a crucial role for buyer 
agents in effectively managing supplier agents’ oppor -
tunistic behaviours. Buyer agents with strong strategic 
communication capabilities are able to effectively 
communicate buyer firms’ purchasing strategies and 
plans to supplier firms, facilitating a better understand -
ing of buyer firms by supplier agents and others within 
supplier firms (Makaoui and Aloui 2015 ; Zhang, Wu, 
and Henke 2015 ). For instance, buyer agents engage in 
communication with supplier agents regarding buyer 
firms’ plans to expand or streamline product lines, or 
their desire to introduce changes to product designs. 
Such information is valuable for suppliers to plan their 
manufacturing schedules, production processes, and 
technology investments in order to establish long – 
term cooperation with the buyers (Zhang, 
Viswanathan, and Henke 2011 ). These collaborative 
planning efforts foster closer working relationships 
between suppliers and buyers, reducing the likelihood 
of opportunistic behaviours (Zhang, Viswanathan, and 
Henke 2011 ).
Furthermore, effective communication helps to 
build trust between supplier and buyer agents, creat -
ing a positive environment where supplier agents 
appreciate the relationship and are less inclined to 
engage in opportunistic behaviours (Zhang, Zheng, 
and Li 2019 ). By maintaining open and transparent 
lines of communication, buyer agents can establish 
a sense of trust and mutual understanding with supplier agents, leading to a stronger commitment to 
the relationship and a reduced intention to act 
opportunistically.
In summary, strategic communication is critical for 
buyer agents in effectively managing supplier agents’ 
opportunistic behaviours. By effectively conveying 
purchasing strategies and plans, fostering collabora -
tive planning efforts, and building trust, buyer agents 
can establish cooperative relationships and mitigate 
the likelihood of opportunistic behaviours in inter – 
firm exchanges.
Hypothesis 3: Buyer agents’ strategic communica -
tion capability reduces supplier agents’ opportunism.
Moderating role of LTO
Indeed, the opportunism of individual agents is not 
solely influenced by individual factors, but also by 
moderating effects from the strength of inter – firm 
relationships (Gelderman, Semeijn, and Verhappen  
2020 ; Hawkins, Lewin, and Amos 2012 ; Hawkins, 
Pohlen, and Prybutok 2013 ; Tangpong, Hung, and Ro  
2010 ). In this study, we consider LTO between buyer 
and supplier firms as a crucial contextual factor that 
enhances the effectiveness of buyer agents’ Balanced 
Scorecards (BSCs) in managing supplier agents’ 
opportunism.
In a business relationship, LTO refers to the desire 
and value that an economic actor places on establish -
ing a long – term bond with a specific exchange part -
ner (Ryu, Park, and Min 2007 ). When LTO is high, buyer 
and supplier firms consider each other as essential 
partners and engage in more frequent and strategic 
collaborations. This may involve spending more time 
discussing manufacturing plans, product development 
strategies, and innovative ideas (Lee et al. 2018 ). As 
a result, buyer agents operating in such conditions are Table 1. (Continued).
AuthorsResearch 
type Methodology and sampleInter – firm relationship 
performanceEffects of BSCs on 
inter – firm relationship performance
Vesalainen 
et al. 
(2020 )Empirical - Mixed – methods design: Questionnaire 
survey administered to 349 individual 
purchasers in Finnish manufacturing 
companies and follow – up interviews with 
20 purchasers. 
- Cluster analysis for the survey data and 
cross – case analysis for the interview dataPurchaser agents’ 
persuasive orientations 
(relational, authoritarian, 
and competitive)Purchaser agents, as boundary spanners in 
business exchanges, need to have a high 
level of spanning capabilities to gain 
relational, authoritarian, and competitive 
advantages when working with suppliers.
Cai et al. 
(2021 )Empirical - Questionnaire survey administered to 225 
purchasing managers in China 
- Path analysis- Counterparts’ trust in 
spanners 
- Personal closeness with 
their counterparts 
- Counterparts’ firms’ trust 
in boundary spanners’ 
firmsIndividual spanners with a high level of BSCs 
have close personal ties with their 
counterparts. This helps deepen trust 
between themselves and their 
counterparts, as well as between their own 
and their counterparts’ firms.218
 T. X. T. PHAM ET AL.
in a favourable business climate to work closely with 
supplier agents and effectively communicate and com -
promise with both parties.
The presence of a strong LTO facilitates the devel -
opment of a cooperative and collaborative environ -
ment, promoting open communication, mutual 
understanding, and trust between buyer and supplier 
agents. Buyer agents with high LTO are more likely to 
engage in long – term relationship building and 
engage in behaviours that reduce opportunistic ten-
dencies among supplier agents. The strength of the 
buyer – supplier relationship, influenced by LTO, 
amplifies the impact of buyer agents’ BSCs in mana -
ging and mitigating supplier agents’ opportunism.
Hypothesis 4a: LTO between buyer and supplier 
firms enhances the role of buyer agents’ professional 
knowledge in reducing supplier agents’ opportunism.
Hypothesis 4b: LTO between buyer and supplier 
firms enhances the role of buyer agents’ compromise 
ability in reducing supplier agents’ opportunism.
Hypothesis 4c: LTO between buyer and supplier 
firms enhances the role of buyer agents’ strategic com -
munication capability in reducing supplier agents’ 
opportunism.
The hypotheses are illustrated in Figure 1.
Research methodology
Sampling and data collection
This study collected data by surveying Japanese man -
ufacturing companies, where LTO is a crucial competi -
tive advantage (Dyer and Chu 2003 , 2011 ; Sako and 
Helper 1998 ). By developing long – term relationships 
with business partners, companies can enhance supply 
chain integration and collaboration (Dyer and Chu  
2011 ), improve communication and information shar -
ing (Chung, Sternquist, and Chen 2006 ), improve the manufacturing process (Clark and Fujimoto 1991 ), and 
increase human and capital assets (Aoki and Wilhelm  
2017 ). Hence, in the context of Japanese manufactur -
ing companies, examining how LTO between firms can 
help (as a contextual factor) individual buyer agents 
effectively use their BSCs to control supplier agent 
opportunism is necessary.
The target participants in the survey were purchas -
ing staff in the sales and planning sections of manu -
facturing companies in Japan responsible for business 
activities with suppliers. As purchasing staff generally 
represent buyer firms in business transactions with 
suppliers’ sales staff, they are important in managing 
suppliers’ opportunism (Zhang, Viswanathan, and 
Henke 2011 ). Further, a purchasing staff member 
usually works with more than one sale staff member 
from one supplier firm. Thus, we asked purchasing staff 
to consider the supplier company with the highest 
transaction value they were dealing with and the per-
son from the supplier company they contacted most 
frequently.
To recruit participants, we cooperated with GMO 
Research (https://gmo–research.com/ ), a professional 
research company. They offer a platform accessed by 
over 40 million individuals. When participating in 
research, individuals are awarded incentive points, 
redeemable for gift cards, cash, or merchandise.
Data collection proceeded in two stages. The 
first entailed a pre – screening survey to recruit 
participants who matched our criteria. Qualified 
participants needed to work in Japanese manufac -
turing companies’ sales and planning sections. 
They had to work or have worked as buyer agents 
in inter – firm business transactions. In the second 
stage, GMO Research opened its survey platform 
for selected participants. The company required 
participants to log in to the survey platform 
using their member ID verification code; thus, 
each participant could complete the survey only 
once (Schoenherr, Ellram, and Tate 2015 ). Further, 
the question items were presented in random 
order, and we provided reverse questions to 
H3
Strategic c ommunicationCompromiseabilityProfessi onalpurchasing knowledge
Supplier 
agents’
opportuni smBuyer and supplier firms’ 
long-term orie ntation
Buyer agents’  boundary 
spannin g capability
H2H1
Figure 1. Conceptual model.SUPPLY CHAIN FORUM: AN INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL
 219
prevent unengaged responses and ensure objec -
tivity (ibid.).
Data were collected from February to April 2021. 
There were 413 samples, and after screening to 
remove outliers, we obtained a dataset of 406 usable 
samples, which reached the rule of thumb for the 
sample size for a moderation model (Nunnally 1978 ). 
The sample profile is provided in the Appendix .
Scale measurement
We adapted instruments from the literature to mea -
sure constructs in the conceptual model. 
Opportunism scales included 10 items adapted 
from Carson et al. (2006 ), Gundlach et al. (1995 ), 
and Heide et al. (2007 ), measuring the extent to 
which a buyer agent perceives that a supplier 
agent displays opportunistic behaviours. The sample 
items were ‘This agent violated contractual terms 
for their own benefit’, ‘This agent violated informal 
agreements for their own benefit’, and ‘This agent 
altered facts to drive a better deal’.
Buyer agents’ BSC measures were adapted from 
Zhang et al. (2011 ). Professional purchasing knowl -
edge was measured with four items indicating the 
extent to which a buyer agent has knowledge about 
products, suppliers’ capability, competitors, and the 
market. Compromise ability was measured with three 
items indicating buyer agents’ ability to reach equita -
ble solutions for both sides, considering suppliers’ 
interests. The three items of strategic communication 
capability measured a buyer agent’s effectiveness in 
conveying their firm’s purchasing plans and strategies 
to the supplier firm and explaining the buyer firm’s 
suggestions regarding the programme/contract or 
agreements to the supplier firm. Sample items were ‘I 
have knowledge about the supplier firm’s capabilities 
(e.g. quality, timely delivery, safety standards)’, ‘I gen -
erally strive to reach solutions that are equitable to 
both the supplier firm and my firm when differences 
arise’, and ‘I am effective at explaining my firm’s pur-
chasing strategy to the supplier firm’.
Six items adapted from Chen et al. (2011 ) were 
used to measure LTO. These items measured the 
extent to which a buyer firm has the intention and 
willingness to maintain and develop a long – term 
relationship with a supplier firm. Sample items were 
‘We focus on long – term goals in this relationship’ 
and ‘Maintaining a long – term relationship with 
this supplier is important to us’.
The items were translated from English to 
Japanese and then back – translated to determine 
the accuracy of the translation (Huo et al. 2018 ). 
Respondents were required to evaluate the extent 
to which they agreed with the statements on a five – point Likert scale ranging from 1 (strongly 
disagree) to 5 (strongly agree).
Results
Reliability and validity
Reliability
We used SPSS and AMOS software to analyse the 
data. We used the following procedure suggested 
by Narasimhan and Jayaram (1998 ). First, confirma -
tory and exploratory factor analyses were used to 
test the reliability of measurement (Gorsuch 1983 ). 
We generated standard factor loadings for each 
measurement item showing the percentage of 
the variable explained by the item, and if an 
item had a standard factor loading less than 0.5, 
it was removed. Then, we calculated the Kaiser – 
Meyer–Olkin (KMO) value to measure the sampling 
adequacy for each variable. Composite reliability 
(CR) and Cronbach’s α were used to measure the 
internal consistency of scale items. The KMO value 
for compromise ability was above 0.6, while the 
KMO value for all other scales was above 0.8. The 
CR for all constructs was above 0.7. As the rule of 
thumb for KMO and CR values is 0.6 and 0.7, 
respectively, the sampling was adequate, or the 
proportion of variance may have been caused by 
high underlying factors (Nunnally 1978 ). The 
Cronbach’s α of all scales was greater than 0.7, 
demonstrating the internal consistency and relia -
bility of the items and constructs (Hair et al. 1995 ). 
In addition, correlations for all pairs of variables 
were calculated. Table 2 presents the correlation 
matrix, CR, Cronbach’s α, and KMO values.
Validity
A model fit index was used to test the validity of the 
model, that is, the fits between the observed data 
and a particular probability distribution (Schumacker 
and Lomax 2010 ). First, the chi – square test with χ2 
and χ2/df indicators was conducted to compare the 
observed data and expected results. The results 
showed that χ2/df = 2.342, which was less than 5, 
indicating a good benchmark. Next, the overall fit 
indices for model evaluation were calculated, includ -
ing the Comparative Fit Index (CFI), Normed Fit Index 
(NFI), Incremental Fit Index (IFI), Tucker – Lewis Index 
(TLI), and Relative Fit Index (RFI). The results showed 
that CFI = 0.913, NFI = 0.858, IFI = 0.913, TLI = 0.905, 
and RFI = 0.845. Values above 0.8 indicate a good 
model fit (Hu and Bentler 1999 ); all indicators in 
this study ranged from 0 to 1. Finally, the Root 
Mean Square Error of Approximation (RMSEA) and 
Standardised Root Mean Square Residual (SRMR) 
were used to assess how far from perfect our 
model was. The indicators should range from 0 to 220
 T. X. T. PHAM ET AL.
1; higher values reflect poorer fits. Our data showed 
that RMSEA = 0.058 and SRMR = 0.0697, both less 
than 0.07; thus, our model had an acceptable fit 
level (Cho et al. 2020 ).
Hypotheses testing
After analysing reliability and validity, linear regression 
and conditional process analyses were used to test the 
direct and moderating effects, respectively (Hayes  
2017 ). The analytical results are presented in Table 3 
and Figure 2 below.
Regarding main effects, Hypothesis 1 suggested 
that buyer agents’ professional knowledge reduces 
supplier agents’ opportunism, but our results showed 
a positive relationship (β = 1.968; p < 0.001). This effect can occur in some situations. For example, buyer 
agents are knowledgeable about raw materials and 
product values. Therefore, if products are not made 
from the best raw materials, but suppliers still want 
to sell at a high price, they would lie about the materi -
als to get their desired price.
Similarly, Hypothesis 2, which suggested that buyer 
agents’ compromise ability reduces supplier agents’ 
opportunism (β = 7.933; p < 0.001), was not supported. 
One possible explanation for this unexpected outcome 
is that in business exchange negotiations, it is assumed 
that suppliers always act out of self – interest, whereby 
they want to sell their product and benefit as much as 
they can (Williamson 1985 ). Thus, if buyer agents act as 
middlemen and try to reach a compromise regarding 
suppliers’ requirements, they may inadvertently create Table 2. Correlations, reliability, and validity.
Constructs 1. 2. 3. 4. 5.
1. Opportunism 1
2. Strategic communication ability −0.203*** 1
3. Long-term orientation −0.287*** 0.727*** 1
4. Professional knowledge −0.152** 0.948*** 0.672*** 1
5. Compromise ability −0.165** 0.963*** 0.742*** 0.911*** 1
Cronbach’s α 0.938 0.838 0.885 0.854 0.719
CR 0.938 0.838 0.888 0.861 0.714
KMO 0.946 0.680 0.895 0.858 0.680
N = 406; **p < 0.010; ***p < 0.001; CR = composite reliability; KMO = Kaiser – Meyer–Olkin value.
Table 3. Results of linear regression and conditional process analysis.
Hypothesis Direct effects Coefficient β Evaluation
H1 Professional knowledge -> Opportunism 1.968*** Not supported
H2 Ability to reach compromise -> Opportunism 7.933*** Not supported
H3 Strategic communication -> Opportunism −7.548*** Supported
Hypothesis Moderating effects of LTO Coefficient β Evaluation
H4a Professional knowledge -> Opportunism −0.078* Partially supported
H4b Compromise ability -> Opportunism −0.084** Partially supported
H4c Strategic communication -> Opportunism −0.153* Supported
*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.
Strategic c ommunicationCompromise abilityProfessi onal knowledge
Supplier 
agents’ 
opportuni smBuyer and sup plier firms’ 
long-term orie ntation
Buyer agents’  boundary 
spannin g capability
β= -0.153*
β= 7.933***
Figure 2. Data analysis results.SUPPLY CHAIN FORUM: AN INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL
 221
more favourable conditions that the suppliers can then 
exploit.
Hypothesis 3 implies that buyer agents’ strategic 
communication reduces supplier agents’ opportunism. 
Our findings strongly support Hypothesis 3 (β =  
−7.548; p < 0.001). The results align with previous stu-
dies emphasising the importance of strategic commu -
nication in managing healthy inter – firm relationships 
(Zhang, Viswanathan, and Henke 2011 ; Zhang, Wu, and 
Henke 2015 ; Zhang, Zheng, and Li 2019 ). A buyer 
agent’s strategic communication capability provides 
a supplier agent with information about the buyer 
firm’s future purchasing plans and strategies. This 
enables the supplier agent and others from their firm 
to understand the buyer firm and determine the neces -
sary preparation for cooperation (Ireland and Webb  
2007 ). In other words, buyer agents with good strate -
gic communication capabilities will be able to effec -
tively communicate with suppliers and foster close 
cooperation with supplier agents and between their 
firms and supplier firms, helping reduce supplier 
agents’ opportunistic behaviours.
Regarding interaction effects, Hypothesis 4a, which 
proposed that LTO between a buyer firm and 
a supplier firm enhances the role of buyer agents’ 
professional knowledge in reducing supplier agents’ 
opportunism, was partially supported as LTO changed 
the effect of professional knowledge on opportunism 
from positive to negative (β = −0.078; p < 0.05). 
Similarly, our findings partially supported Hypothesis 
4b because the data analysis implied that LTO between 
a buyer firm and a supplier firm changed the role of 
buyer agents’ compromise ability from increasing to 
reducing supplier agents’ opportunism (β = −0.084; p  
< 0.01). However, Hypothesis 4c was supported (β =  
−0.153; p < 0.05), which means the role of buyer 
agents’ strategic communication capability in reducing supplier agents’ opportunism will be stronger if the 
buyer and supplier firms have a long – term relation -
ship orientation.
The moderation effects aligned with the literature 
(Lee et al. 2018 ; Ryu, Park, and Min 2007 ). LTO is not 
only necessary for business relationship management 
between buyer and supplier companies but also for 
the relationships between their buyer agents and sup-
plier agents (Hakansson 1982 ) because LTO between 
the two companies will create a working atmosphere 
for their agents that then helps shape the relationship 
between them (Hawkins, Lewin, and Amos 2012 ). 
When a buyer company expresses the intention for 
long – term cooperation, a supplier agent understands 
that the relationship with the buyer agent will be 
ongoing, which helps the supplier agent feel secure; 
as such, the supplier agent will be less likely to act 
opportunistically (Hawkins, Pohlen, and Prybutok  
2013 ).
In addition, Figure 3 uses graphs to show the inter -
action effects between LTO and professional knowl -
edge, compromise ability, and strategic 
communication capability. In Figure 3a,b,c the depen -
dent variable opportunism is placed on the vertical 
axis, with the independent variables – professional 
knowledge, compromise ability, and strategic commu -
nication capability – on the horizontal axis. In each 
figure, two graph lines are displayed; the solid line 
represents the low LTO case, and the dashed line 
represents the high LTO case.
In Figure 3a, the solid line is above the dashed line, 
which means that for the same level of professional 
knowledge, the high LTO case will result in lower 
opportunism than the high LTO case (Aiken, West, 
and Reno 1991 ). Figure 3b shows that the solid line 
lies above the dashed line; thus, with the same levels of 
compromise ability, the high LTO case will lead to 
(a) (b) (c) 11.522.533.544.55
Low level of
knowledgeHigh level of
knowledgeOpportunism
11.522.533.544.55
Low compromise
abilityHigh compromise
abilityOpportunism
11.522.533.544.55
Low strategic
communicationHigh strategic
communicationOpportunism
Figure 3. Moderating effects of LTO in the relationship between: (3a) opportunism and level of knowledge. (3b) opportunism and 
compromise ability. (3c) opportunism and strategic communication.222
 T. X. T. PHAM ET AL.
lower opportunism than the low LTO case (Aiken, 
West, and Reno 1991 ).
In Figure 3c, the solid line (low LTO) is also above 
the dashed line (high LTO), which means that with the 
same levels of strategic communication, if there is 
a high LTO, the level of opportunism will be lower 
than the low LTO (Aiken, West, and Reno 1991 ). 
Moreover, the graphs on Figure 3c show that the 
relationship between buyer agents’ strategic commu -
nication and opportunism is negative in the high LTO 
but positive in the low LTO. The result, even more 
emphasises the role of LTO in motivating strategic 
communication’s effectiveness in controlling 
opportunism.
Prior studies have shown that when communicating 
with business partners, companies need to consider 
carefully why (not) sharing information and knowledge 
and what information and knowledge to share with 
whom because that will affect companies’ competitive 
advantage, interdependence, and bargaining power in 
the business relationships (Kembro and Näslund 2014 ; 
Kembro, Selviaridis, and Näslund 2014 ). What informa -
tion and knowledge to share with business partners 
depends on certain contextual factors (Carr and 
Kaynak 2007 ). Our study shows that LTO is one of the 
important contextual factors.
In strategic communication, buyer agents will 
exchange with supplier agents important information 
such as future purchasing strategies, innovation and 
new technologies application strategies, and inten -
tions to implement new supply chain policies (Zhang, 
Viswanathan, and Henke 2011 ). If the buyers and sup-
pliers have LTO for their business relationships, such 
strategic communication will be effective and bring 
many benefits, for example, enhancing competitive 
advantages for both parties, reducing transaction 
costs, and both parties can achieve their goals in the 
sales and purchasing transactions (Du et al. 2012 ; 
Zhang, Viswanathan, and Henke 2011 ). Therefore, sup-
plier agents tend to cooperate with buyer agents 
instead of behaving opportunistically.
However, providing important confidential infor -
mation can cause certain risks to buyers if the 
buyers and suppliers do not have LTO 
(Yigitbasioglu 2010 ). When there is no intention to 
build a long – term relationship, supplier agents can 
take advantage of provided information from buyer 
agents to act opportunistically, such as forcing 
prices, exaggerating their product values and sup-
ply capacities to meet buyers’ expectations, or they 
can make excessive requirements for contract terms, 
or even ask to change the contract for their own 
advantages (Chung, Sternquist, and Chen 2006 ).
In sum, the main results in this study imply that 
buyer agents’ strategic communication generally 
negatively impacts supplier agents’ opportunism; 
however, buyer agents’ strategic communication needs to be combined with the LTO between buyer 
and supplier firms to create an effective mechanism for 
controlling opportunism.
Conclusions
This study aimed to investigate the impact of buyer 
agents’ BSCs and LTO between buyer and supplier 
firms on supplier agent opportunism, as the mechan -
isms through which these fact. To achieve this, a survey 
was conducted among 406 purchasing staff in the 
sales and planning sections of manufacturing compa -
nies in Japan. Regression and conditional process ana-
lyses were employed to evaluate the main effects of 
BSCs on opportunism and the interaction effects 
between BSCs and LTO in managing opportunism. 
The results reveal that among the three types of 
BSCs, strategic communication plays a crucial role in 
helping buyer agents reduce the risk of opportunistic 
behaviours from supplier agents. Moreover, LTO 
between the buyer and supplier companies signifi -
cantly enhanced the effectiveness of BSCs in reducing 
supplier agents’ opportunistic behaviours. Based on 
these findings, this study makes the following 
contributions.
Theoretical contributions
First, by examining individual – level opportunism, this 
study extends TCT, RDT, BST, and the literature on 
opportunism in inter – firm relationships. The current 
research trend has emphasised the individual level of 
analysis, but there is still lack of sufficient studies on 
individual opportunism (Gelderman, Semeijn, and 
Verhappen 2020 ; Hawkins, Lewin, and Amos 2012 ; 
Hawkins, Pohlen, and Prybutok 2013 ; Tangpong, 
Hung, and Ro 2010 ). This study answers the call for 
further research on individual opportunism by investi -
gating the factors influencing individual supplier 
agents’ opportunism. Our findings confirm the need 
for research on individual opportunism and highlight 
the importance of individual agents in managing 
opportunistic behaviours in business exchanges 
between companies.
Second, this study enriches the literature on factors 
influencing opportunism by explaining the correlation 
between BSCs and opportunism. The effects of BSCs in 
controlling opportunism are fundamental assumptions 
of TCT and RDT (Williamson 1985 ; Pfeffer and Salancik  
1978 ), but limited research has provided detailed ela-
boration on this relationship. Our study complements 
these theories by operationalising BSCs as buyer 
agents’ professional purchasing knowledge, compro -
mise ability, and strategic communication (Zhang, 
Viswanathan, and Henke 2011 ) and testing their effects 
on supplier agents’ opportunism.SUPPLY CHAIN FORUM: AN INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL
 223
Third, this study extends the understanding of the 
integrated framework in previous studies regarding 
the interaction effects between organisational and 
individual factors in managing individual opportunism 
in business exchanges (Gelderman, Semeijn, and 
Verhappen 2020 ; Hawkins, Lewin, and Amos 2012 ; 
Hawkins, Pohlen, and Prybutok 2013 ). In this study, 
we propose a mechanism where LTO between buyer 
firms and supplier firms is an organisational factor that 
can interact with individual factors such as buyer 
agents’ BSCs, to effectively mitigate supplier agents’ 
opportunism. By doing so, this study confirms the 
direct relationship between LTO and opportunism 
that was observed in previous studies and contributes 
to the research field by further explaining the bound -
ary condition of LTO in controlling opportunism.
Implications for practitioners
Our results also suggest three implications for profes -
sionals working in sales and purchasing sections and 
who are involved in inter – firm relationship manage -
ment in manufacturing companies in Japan. First, 
buyer agents should develop their strategic commu -
nication skills. These skills enable buyer agents to 
effectively communicate with supplier agents regard -
ing buyer firms’ desires and interests in long – term 
plans. Such communication is critical for reducing sup-
plier agents’ opportunistic behaviours. Second, while 
purchasing professional knowledge and ability to com -
promise are important, they alone cannot help control 
supplier agents’ opportunistic behaviours without 
a long – term cooperation orientation between parties. 
Third, LTO is critical in business exchanges as it helps 
sustain a healthy cooperative environment where BSCs 
can effectively control opportunism.
Limitations and future research
It is important to consider the findings in the con-
text of certain limitations. First, the specific types of 
buyer – supplier relationships in supply chains were 
not clarified in detail. The dynamics, technology, 
and product exchanges in distributor – maker and 
maker – supplier relationships may differ, leading to 
variations in opportunistic behaviours and the 
mechanisms to effectively control them. Second, 
our data only represented the buyer side, without 
considering potential differences in perceptions 
about relationship quality among suppliers. Third, 
our hypotheses were tested using cross – sectional 
data, limiting our ability to provide detailed expla -
nation of how, when and why BSCs and LTO can 
results in opportunistic behaviours. Fourth, we con-
sidered opportunism as a multidimensional con -
struct, taking into different manifestations of 
opportunistic behaviours.Future research can further elaborate on our 
findings by focusing on specific positions within 
the buyer – supplier relationship in supply chains, 
such as distributor – maker, or maker – supplier 
relationships. Additionally, data collection should 
be collected from both the buyer and supplier per-
spectives to mitigate bias and measurement falla -
cies when assessing dyadic constructs. Moreover, 
future research can employ experimental methods 
or develop measurements for each type of oppor -
tunism to examine the effects of different spanning 
capabilities on various opportunism. Such research 
endeavours can offer valuable insights into how 
BSCs can help reduce opportunism.
Acknowledgments
This research has been generously funded by the Japan 
Society for the Promotion of Science Grant KAKENHI 
[23K01507]. The authors would like to take this opportunity 
to convey their sincere thanks to anonymous reviewers for 
their helpful comments that greatly improved the original 
submission.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the 
author(s).
ORCID
Thoa Xuan Thi Pham 
 http://orcid.org/0000-0003-0689- 
4175
Kodo Yokozawa 
 http://orcid.org/0000-0001-8755-5671
Nguyen Ngoc Anh 
 http://orcid.org/0000-0002-0383-7880
References
Adams, S. J. 1976 . “The Structure and Dynamics of Behavior in 
Organizational Boundary Roles.” In Handbook of Industrial 
and Organizational Psychology , edited by Dunnette, M. D., 
1225–1274. Chicago, USA: Rand McNally.
Aiken, L. S., S. G. West, and R. R. Reno. 1991 . Multiple 
Regression: Testing and Interpreting Interactions . 
California, USA: Sage.
Akrout, H., and M. F. Diallo. 2017 . “Fundamental 
Transformations of Trust and Its Drivers: A Multi-Stage 
Approach of Business-To-Business Relationships.” 
Industrial Marketing Management 66 (October 2017): 
159–171. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2017.08. 
003 .
Aldrich, H., and D. Herker. 1977 . “Boundary Spanning Roles 
and Organization Structure.” Academy of Management 
Review 2 (2): 217–230. https://doi.org/10.5465/amr.1977. 
4409044 .
Aoki, K., and M. Wilhelm. 2017 . “The Role of Ambidexterity in 
Managing Buyer-Supplier Relationships: The Toyota Case.” 
Organization Science 28 (6): 1080–1097. https://doi.org/10. 
1287/orsc.2017.1156 .224
 T. X. T. PHAM ET AL.
Au, K. Y., and J. Fukuda. 2002 . “Boundary Spanning Behaviors 
of Expatriates.” Journal of World Business 37 (4): 285–296. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1090-9516(02)00095-0 .
Bals, L., H. Schulze, S. Kelly, and K. Stek. 2019 . “Purchasing and 
Supply Management (PSM) Competencies: Current and 
Future Requirements.” Journal of Purchasing & Supply 
Management 25 (5): 100572. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
pursup.2019.100572 .
Barbat, V. 2011 . “Exploratory Study of Buyer-Supplier 
Relationships in a Context of Constrained (or Restricted) 
Purchases.” Supply Chain Forum: An International Journal 
12 (2): 46–56. https://doi.org/10.1080/16258312.2011. 
11517259 .
Bhattacharya, A., P. J. Singh, and A. A. Nand. 2015 . 
“Antecedents of Buyer Opportunistic Behavior in 
Outsourcing Relationships.” International Journal of 
Production Economics 166 (August 2015): 258–268. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpe.2015.03.011 .
Cai, S., M. Jun, X. Wang, and Z. Yang. 2021 . “On Boundary 
Spanners and Interfirm Embeddedness: The Role of 
Guanxi Institution in China.” Journal of Purchasing & 
Supply Management 27 (1): 100–671. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.pursup.2021.100671 .
Cai, S., M. Jun, and Z. Yang. 2017 . “The Effects of Boundary 
spanners’ Personal Relationships on Interfirm 
Collaboration and Conflict: A Study of the Role of Guanxi 
in China.” The Journal of Supply Chain Management 53 (3): 
19–40. https://doi.org/10.1111/jscm.12132 .
Cai, S., and Z. Yang. 2008 . “Development of Cooperative 
Norms in the Buyer ‐Supplier Relationship: The Chinese 
Experience.” The Journal of Supply Chain Management 
44 (1): 55–70. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-493X.2008. 
00045.x .
Carr, A. S., and H. Kaynak. 2007 . “Communication Methods, 
Information Sharing, Supplier Development and 
Performance-An Empirical Study of Their Relationships.” 
International Journal of Operations & Production 
Management 27 (3/4): 346–370 doi: 10.1108/ 
01443570710736958 .
Carson, S. J., A. Madhok, and T. Wu. 2006 . “Uncertainty, 
Opportunism, and Governance: The Effects of Volatility 
and Ambiguity on Formal and Relational Contracting.” 
Academy of Management Journal 49 (5): 1058–1077 
doi:10.5465/amj.2006.22798187 .
Chen, Z., Y. Huang, and B. Sternquist. 2011 . “Guanxi Practice 
and Chinese Buyer-Supplier Relationships: The Buyer’s 
Perspective.” Industrial Marketing Management 40 (4): 
569–580 doi:10.1016/j.indmarman.2010.12.013 .
Cho, G., H. Hwang, M. Sarstedt, and C. M. Ringle. 2020 . “Cutoff 
Criteria for Overall Model Fit Indexes in Generalized 
Structured Component Analysis.” Journal of Marketing 
Analytics 8 (4): 189–202 doi:10.1057/s41270-020-00089-1 .
Chung, J. E., B. Sternquist, and Z. Chen. 2006 . “Retailer-Buyer 
Supplier Relationships: The Japanese Difference.” Journal 
of Retailing 82 (4): 349–355 doi:10.1016/j.jretai.2006.08. 
008.
Clark, K. B., and T. Fujimoto. 1991 . Product Development 
Performance . Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Collien, I. 2021 . “Concepts of Power in Boundary Spanning 
Research: A Review and Research Agenda.” International 
Journal of Management Reviews 23 (4): 443–465 doi:10. 
1111/ijmr.12251 .
Dahlstrom, R., and A. Nygaard. 1999 . “An Empirical 
Investigation of Ex Post Transaction Costs in Franchised 
Distribution Channels.” Journal of Marketing Research 
36 (2): 160–170 doi:10.1177/002224379903600202 .Daultani, Y., S. Kumar, O. S. Vaidya, and M. K. Tiwari. 2015 . 
“A Supply Chain Network Equilibrium Model for 
Operational and Opportunism Risk Mitigation.” 
International Journal of Production Research 53 (18): 
5685–5715 doi:10.1080/00207543.2015.1056325 .
Dekker, H., C. Donada, C. Mothe, and G. Nogatchewsky. 2019 . 
“Boundary Spanner Relational Behavior and 
Inter-Organizational Control in Supply Chain 
Relationships.” Industrial Marketing Management 77 
(February 2019): 143–154. doi:10.1016/j.indmarman.2018. 
11.010 .
Doney, P. M., and J. P. Cannon. 1997 . “An Examination of the 
Nature of Trust in Buyer-Seller Relationships.” Journal of 
Marketing 61 (2): 35–51 doi: 10.1177/ 
002224299706100203 .
Dowell, D., M. Morrison, and T. Heffernan. 2015 . “The 
Changing Importance of Affective Trust and Cognitive 
Trust Across the Relationship Lifecycle: A Study of 
Business-To-Business Relationships.” Industrial Marketing 
Management 44:119–130 doi:10.1016/j.indmarman.2014. 
10.016 .
Du, T. C., V. S. Lai, W. Cheung, and X. Cui. 2012 . “Willingness to 
Share Information in a Supply Chain: A Partnership-Data- 
Process Perspective.” Information & Management 49 (2): 
89–98 doi:10.1016/j.im.2011.10.003 .
Dyer, J., and W. Chu. 2003 . “The Role of Trustworthiness in 
Reducing Transaction Costs and Improving Performance: 
Empirical Evidence from the United States, Japan, and 
Korea.” Organization Science 14 (1): 57–68 doi:10.1287/ 
orsc.14.1.57.12806 .
Dyer, J., and W. Chu. 2011 . “The Determinants of Trust in 
Supplier-Automaker Relations in the US, Japan, and Korea: 
A Retrospective.” Journal of International Business Studies 
42 (1): 28–34 doi:10.1057/jibs.2010.48 .
Friedman, R. A., and J. Podolny. 1992 . “Differentiation of 
Boundary Spanning Roles: Labor Negotiations and 
Implications for Role Conflicts.” Administrative Science 
Quarterly 37 (1): 28–47. doi:10.2307/2393532 .
Gelderman, C. J., J. Semeijn, and M. Verhappen. 2020 . 
“Buyer Opportunism in Strategic Supplier 
Relationships: Triggers, Manifestations and 
Consequences.” Journal of Purchasing & Supply 
Management 26 (2): 100–581 doi: 10.1016/j.pursup. 
2019.100581 .
Gorsuch, R. L. 1983 . Factor Analysis . New Jersey, USA: 
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Gundlach, G. T., R. S. Achrol, and J. T. Mentzer. 1995 . “The 
Structure of Commitment in Exchange.” Journal of 
Marketing 59 (1): 78–92 doi: 10.1177/ 
002224299505900107 .
Hair, J. F., Jr., R. E. Anderson, R. L. Tatham, and W. C. Black. 
1995 . Multivariate Data Analysis with Readings . 4th ed. New 
Jersey, USA: Prentice Hall.
Hakansson, H. 1982 . International Marketing and Purchasing 
of Industrial Goods: An Interaction Approach . New Jersey, 
USA: John Wiley and Sons.
Handley, S. M., and W. C. Benton Jr. 2012 . “The Influence 
of Exchange Hazards and Power on Opportunism in 
Outsourcing Relationships.” Journal of Operations 
Management 30 (1–2): 55–68 doi: 10.1016/j.jom.2011. 
06.001 .
Han, Z., R. B. Handfield, B. Huo, and Y. Tian. 2022 . “Effects of 
Power Use in Buyer-Supplier Relationships: The 
Moderating Role of Communication.” Industrial Marketing 
Management 102 (April 2022): 45–57. doi:10.1016/j.indmar 
man.2022.01.001 .SUPPLY CHAIN FORUM: AN INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL
 225
Hawkins, T. G., J. E. Lewin, and C. Amos. 2012 . “The Influence 
of Leader Opportunism in B2B Exchange.” Journal of 
Business Research 65 (8): 1112–1118 doi:10.1016/j.jbusres. 
2011.08.021 .
Hawkins, T. G., T. L. Pohlen, and V. R. Prybutok. 2013 . “Buyer 
Opportunism in Business-To-Business Exchange.” 
Industrial Marketing Management 42 (8): 1266–1278 
doi:10.1016/j.indmarman.2013.05.022 .
Hayes, A. F. 2017 . Introduction to Mediation, Moderation, and 
Conditional Process Analysis, Second Edition: A Regression- 
Based Approach . New York, USA: Guilford Press.
Hayes, A. F., and N. J. Rockwood. 2020 . “Conditional Process 
Analysis: Concepts, Computation, and Advances in the 
Modeling of the Contingencies of Mechanisms.” The 
American Behavioral Scientist 64 (1): 19–54 doi:10.1177/ 
0002764219859633 .
Heide, J. B., K. H. Wathne, and A. I. Rokkan. 2007 . “Interfirm 
Monitoring, Social Contracts, and Relationship Outcomes.” 
Journal of Marketing Research 44 (3): 425–433 doi:10.1509/ 
jmkr.44.3.425 .
Huang, Y., Y. Luo, Y. Liu, and Q. Yang. 2016 . “An Investigation 
of Interpersonal Ties in Interorganizational Exchanges in 
Emerging Markets: A Boundary-Spanning Perspective.” 
Journal of Management 42 (6): 1557–1587 doi:10.1177/ 
0149206313511115 .
Hu, L. T., and P. M. Bentler. 1999 . “Cutoff Criteria for Fit 
Indexes in Covariance Structure Analysis: Conventional 
Criteria versus New Alternatives.” Structural Equation 
Modeling: A Multidisciplinary Journal 6 (1): 1–55 doi:10. 
1080/10705519909540118 .
Huo, B., Y. Ye, X. Zhao, J. Wei, and Z. Hua. 2018 . 
“Environmental Uncertainty, Specific Assets, and 
Opportunism in 3PL Relationships: A Transaction Cost 
Economics Perspective.” International Journal of 
Production Economics 203 (September 2018): 154–163. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijpe.2018.01.031 .
Ireland, R. D., and J. W. Webb. 2007 . “A Multi-Theoretic 
Perspective on Trust and Power in Strategic Supply 
Chains.” Journal of Operations Management 25 (March 
2007): 482–497. doi:10.1016/j.jom.2006.05.004 .
Kembro, J., and D. Näslund. 2014 . “Information Sharing in 
Supply Chains, Myth or Reality? A Critical Analysis of 
Empirical Literature.” International Journal of Physical 
Distribution & Logistics Management 44 (3): 179–200 
doi:10.1108/IJPDLM-09-2012-0287 .
Kembro, J., K. Selviaridis, and D. Näslund. 2014 . “Theoretical 
Perspectives on Information Sharing in Supply Chains: 
A Systematic Literature Review and Conceptual 
Framework.” Supply Chain Management: An International 
Journal 19 (5/6): 609–625 doi:10.1108/SCM-12-2013-0460 .
Lee, G., G. C. Shin, D. W. Hwang, P. Kuper, and M. Kang. 2018 . 
“How manufacturers’ Long-Term Orientation Toward 
Suppliers Influences Outsourcing Performance.” Industrial 
Marketing Management 74 (October 2018): 288–297. 
doi:10.1016/j.indmarman.2018.07.003 .
Lui, S. S., and H. Y. Ngo. 2012 . “Drivers and Outcomes of 
Long-Term Orientation in Cooperative Relationships.” 
British Journal of Management 23 (1): 80–95 doi:10.1111/j. 
1467-8551.2010.00719.x .
Lyons, T. F., A. R. Krachenberg, and J. W. Henke. 1990 . “Mixed 
Motive Marriages: What’s Next for Buyer-Supplier 
Relations?” Sloan Management Review 31 (3): 29–36.
MacDuffie, J. P., and S. Helper. 2006 . The Firm as Collaborative 
Community: Reconstructing Trust in the Knowledge 
Economy . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Makaoui, N., and A. Aloui. 2015 . “The Effect of 
Communication Channels on buyers’ Cooperative Behavior.” Supply Chain Forum: An International Journal 
16 (2): 48–59 doi:10.1080/16258312.2015.11673828 .
Narasimhan, R., and J. Jayaram. 1998 . “Causal Linkages in 
Supply Chain Management: An Exploratory Study of 
North American Manufacturing Firms.” Decision Sciences 
29 (3): 579–605 doi:10.1111/j.1540-5915.1998.tb01355.x .
Nunnally, J. C. 1978 . Psychometric Theory . 2nd ed. New York, 
USA: McGraw Hill Book Company.
Pan, A., and T. M. Choi. 2016 . “An Agent-Based 
Negotiation Model on Price and Delivery Date in 
a Fashion Supply Chain.” Annals of Operations 
Research 242 (2): 529–557 doi: 10.1007/s10479-013- 
1327-2 .
Parkhe, A. 1993 . “Strategic Alliance Structuring: A Game 
Theoretic and Transaction Cost Examination of Interfirm 
Cooperation.” Academy of Management Journal 36 (4): 
794–829 doi:10.5465/256759 .
Perrone, V., A. Zaheer, and B. McEvily. 2003 . “Free to Be 
Trusted? Organizational Constraints on Trust in Boundary 
Spanners.” Organization Science 14 (4): 422–439 doi:10. 
1287/orsc.14.4.422.17487 .
Pfeffer, J., and G. R. Salacik. 1978 . Intercorporate Relations: The 
Structural Analysis of Business . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press.
Pham, T., K. Yokozawa, and N. Anh. 2022 . “Unexplored 
Antecedents of Agent Opportunism in Buyer-Supplier 
Relationships: An Interviewed-Based Exploratory Study.” 
Operations and Supply Chain Management: An 
International Journal 15 (3): 373–385 doi: 10.31387/ 
oscm0500353 .
Revilla, E., and D. Knoppen. 2015 . “Building Knowledge 
Integration in Buyer-Supplier Relationships: The Critical 
Role of Strategic Supply Management and Trust.” 
International Journal of Operations & Production 
Management 35 (10): 1408–1436 doi:10.1108/IJOPM-01- 
2014-0030 .
Ryu, S., J. E. Park, and S. Min. 2007 . “Factors of Determining 
Long-Term Orientation in Interfirm Relationships.” Journal 
of Business Research 60 (12): 1225–1233 doi: 10.1016/j. 
jbusres.2006.09.031 .
Sako, M., and S. Helper. 1998 . “Determinants of Trust in 
Supplier Relations: Evidence from the Automotive 
Industry in Japan and the United States.” Journal of 
Economic Behavior and Organization 34 (3): 387–417 
doi: 10.1016/S0167-2681(97)00082-6 .
Schoenherr, T., L. M. Ellram, and W. L. Tate. 2015 . “A Note 
on the Use of Survey Research Firms to Enable 
Empirical Data Collection.” Journal of Business 
Logistics 36 (3): 288–300 doi: 10.1111/jbl.12092 .
Schotter, A. P., R. Mudambi, Y. L. Doz, and A. Gaur. 2017 . 
“Boundary Spanning in Global Organizations.” Journal of 
Management Studies 54 (4): 403–421 doi: 10.1111/joms. 
12256 .
Schumacker, R. E., and R. G. Lomax. 2010 . A Beginner’s Guide 
to Structural Equation Modeling . 3rd ed. New York, USA: 
Routledge Academic.
Son, B. G., B. C. Ha, and T. H. Lee. 2019 . “Small and Medium ‐ 
Sized enterprises’ Collaborative Buyer-Supplier 
Relationships: Boundary Spanning Individual 
Perspectives.” Journal of Small Business Management 
57 (3): 966–988 doi:10.1111/jsbm.12423 .
Srinivasan, M., and P. Srivastava. 2012 . “The Role of the 
Salesperson in Building Trust and Collaboration in 
Buyer-Seller Relationships.” Supply Chain Forum: An 
International Journal 13 (2): 22–38 doi:10.1080/16258312. 
2012.11517290 .226
 T. X. T. PHAM ET AL.
Tangpong, C., K. T. Hung, and Y. K. Ro. 2010 . “The Interaction 
Effect of Relational Norms and Agent Cooperativeness on 
Opportunism in Buyer-Supplier Relationships.” Journal of 
Operations Management 28 (5): 398–414 doi:10.1016/j.jom. 
2009.12.001 .
Tchokogué, A., and N. Merminod. 2021 . “The Purchasing 
Department’s Leadership Role in Developing and 
Maintaining a Preferred Customer Status.” Journal of 
Purchasing & Supply Management 27 (2): 100–686 doi:10. 
1016/j.pursup.2021.100686 .
Teigland, R., and M. M. Wasko. 2003 . “Integrating Knowledge 
Through Information Trading: Examining the Relationship 
Between Boundary Spanning Communication and 
Individual Performance.” Decision Sciences 34 (2): 261– 
286 doi:10.1111/1540-5915.02341 .
Vesalainen, J., A. Rajala, and J. Wincent. 2020 . “Purchasers as 
Boundary Spanners: Mapping Purchasing agents’ 
Persuasive Orientations.” Industrial Marketing 
Management 84 (January 2020): 224–236. doi:10.1016/j. 
indmarman.2019.07.007 .
Wang, K., B. Huo, and M. Tian. 2021 . “How to Protect Specific 
Investments from Opportunism: A Moderated Mediation 
Model of Customer Integration and Transformational 
Leadership.” International Journal of Production 
Economics 232 (February 2021): 107–938. doi:10.1016/j. 
ijpe.2020.107938 .
Wang, M., Q. Zhang, Y. Wang, and S. Sheng. 2016 . “Governing 
Local Supplier Opportunism in China: Moderating Role of 
Institutional Forces.” Journal of Operations Management 46 
(September 2016): 84–94. doi:10.1016/j.jom.2016.07.001 .
Williamson, O. E. 1985 . The Economic Institutions of 
Capitalism . New York, USA: Free Press Collier Macmillan.Yang, L., B. Huo, M. Tian, and Z. Han. 2021 . “The Impact of 
Digitalization and Inter-Organizational Technological 
Activities on Supplier Opportunism: The Moderating Role 
of Relational Ties.” International Journal of Operations & 
Production Management 41 (7): 1085–1118 doi:10.1108/ 
IJOPM-09-2020-0664 .
Yigitbasioglu, O. M. 2010 . “Information Sharing with Key 
Suppliers: A Transaction Cost Theory Perspective.” 
International Journal of Physical Distribution & Logistics 
Management 40 (7): 50–578 doi: 10.1108/ 
09600031011072000 .
Yunus, E. N., and T. Kurniawan. 2015 . “Revealing Unsuccessful 
Collaboration: A Case of Buyer-Supplier Relationship in the 
Pharmaceutical Industry.” Supply Chain Forum: An 
International Journal 16 (2): 14–28 doi:10.1080/16258312. 
2015.11673826 .
Zhang, C., S. Viswanathan, and J. W. Henke. 2011 . “The 
Boundary Spanning Capabilities of Purchasing Agents 
in Buyer-Supplier Trust Development.” Journal of 
Operations Management 29 (4): 318–328 doi: 10.1016/j. 
jom.2010.07.001 .
Zhang, C., F. Wu, and J. W. Henke. 2015 . “Leveraging 
Boundary Spanning Capabilities to Encourage Supplier 
Investment: A Comparative Study.” Industrial Marketing 
Management 49 (August 2015): 84–94. doi: 10.1016/j. 
indmarman.2015.04.012 .
Zhang, C., X. V. Zheng, and J. J. Li. 2019 . “Is Collaboration 
a Better Way to Develop Trust After Opportunism? 
Distinguishing Firm and Boundary Spanner 
Opportunism.” Industrial Marketing Management 82 
(October 2019): 38–51. doi: 10.1016/j.indmarman.2019. 
02.018 .SUPPLY CHAIN FORUM: AN INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL
 227
Appendix Sample profiles
Characteristics Number %
Manufacturing industry Grocery 46 11.3
Fibre products 15 3.7
Pulp, paper 4 1.0
Chemistry 42 10.3
Pharmaceuticals 31 7.6
Petroleum and coal products 9 2.2
Rubber product 7 1.7
Glass, earth and stone products 10 2.5
Steel 5 1.2
Non-ferrous metal products 15 3.7
Metal products 17 4.2
Machine 44 10.8
Electrical equipment 67 16.6
Transportation equipment 20 4.9
Precision mechanical equipment 35 8.6
Other products 39 9.7
Total 406 100%
Size of companies (number of employees) 1–10 19 4.7
11–100 93 22.9
101–200 35 8.6
201–300 31 7.6
301–400 18 4.4
401–500 12 3.0
More than 500 198 48.8
Total 406 100%
Percentage of mutual capital between buyer and supplier company No capital 323 79.6
Less than 20% 26 6.4
20–40% 34 8.4
40–60% 13 3.2
60–80% 3 0.7
More than 80% 7 1.7
Total 406 100%
Respondents’ gender Men 223 55
Women 183 45
Total 406 100%
Respondents’ job level Executives 39 9.7
Manager 85 20.9
Section manager 122 30.0
Unit manager 79 19.5
General employee 78 19.2
Other professionals, special jobs, etc. 3 0.7
Total 406 100%
Respondents’ age (years) 15–19 0 0.0
20–29 11 2.7
30–39 60 14.8
40–49 111 27.3
50–59 155 38.2
60–69 69 17.0
Above 70 0 0.0
Total 406 100%
Respondents’ years of experience as buyers Less than 5 129 31.8
5–9 68 16.7
10–14 53 13.1
15–19 38 9.4
20–24 42 10.3
25–29 26 6.4
30–34 24 5.9
More than 35 26 6.4
Total 406 100%228
 T. X. T. PHAM ET AL.