IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 71, 2024 1073
Shared Mental Models and Boundary Management
Activities in New Product Development: A
Perspective on Multiteam Systems
Yang Lei , Xiaosong Wu , and James Jiang
Abstract —Multiteam systems (MTSs) have been increasingly
adopted as an organizational form to manage large-scale projects.
However, new product development (NPD) in the MTSs structure
entails challenges with respect to achieving efﬁciency due to in-
terteam coordination challenges. Shared mental models (SMMs)
within a single team have been found to facilitate intrateam co-
ordination; however, further exploration is needed as to whether
SMMs within MTSs can improve interteam coordination among
component teams and, if so, what mechanisms underlie this. The
present article examines the theoretical underpinning of the im-
pacts of SMMs among component team leaders on MTSs’ NPD
efﬁciency, and further considers the impact of external conditions
of requirement uncertainty, the most common external situation
during NPD. Using survey data from 110 information technology
development MTSs and drawing on boundary management per-
spective, the results reveal that SMMs among component team lead-
ers positively affect NPD efﬁciency by managing the MTSs bound-
ary, i.e., through boundary entrainment and boundary buffering
activities at the system level. In addition, we ﬁnd that requirement
uncertainty plays a vital role in determining the nature of this
relationship. Taken together, our ﬁndings highlight the importance
of the role of SMMs among component team leaders in facilitating
NPD efﬁciency in MTSs settings.
Index Terms —Boundary management perspective, multiteam
systems (MTSs), new product development (NPD) efﬁciency,
requirement uncertainty, shared mental models (SMMs) theory.
Manuscript received 18 May 2021; revised 2 September 2021, 10 November
2021, and 4 January 2022; accepted 7 January 2022. Date of publication 24
February 2022; date of current version 29 November 2023. This work was
supported in part by the Key Program of NSFC-FRQSC Joint Project under
Grant 72061127002, in part by the NSFC project under Grant 72032006,
Grant 71731009, and Grant 92146005, in part by the Ministry of Science and
Technology of the Taiwan under Grant 109-2410-H-002 -074 -MY3, in part by
the National Center for Applied Mathematics Shenzhen under Grant 518055,
and in part by the Shenzhen Key Research Base in Arts and Social Sciences
(Intelligent Management and Innovation Research Center-IMIDRC, SusTech,
Shenzhen). Review of this manuscript was arranged by Department Editor L.
Santiago. (Yang Lei and Xiaosong Wu are co-ﬁrst authors.) (Corresponding
author: James Jiang.)
Yang Lei is with the Department of Information Systems and Management
Engineering, College of Business, Southern University of Science and Technol-
ogy, Shenzhen 518055, China (e-mail: leiy@sustech.edu.cn).
Xiaosong Wu is with the Department of Innovation Management, Tsinghua
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Shenzhen 518071, China (e-mail:
xiaosongw@outlook.com).
James Jiang is with the Department of Business Administration, College
of Management, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan (e-mail:
jjiangmis@gmail.com).
This article has supplementary material provided by the au-
thors and color versions of one or more ﬁgures available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2022.3147905.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TEM.2022.3147905I. INTRODUCTION
IN today’s business environment, with large-scale projects
and the complexities of work demand increasing to such
an extent that many are beyond the management capacity of a
single team, organizations are turning toward multiteam systems
(MTSs) to accomplish multifaceted tasks [1]. An MTS is “two
or more teams that interface directly and interdependently in
response to environmental contingencies toward the accom-
plishment of collective goals” [2]. For example, in new product
development (NPD), various component teams are called upon
to work interdependently with other component teams [3], and
they may involve at different stages of the whole NPD process
as Team A’s work may rely on what Team B has done. One
of the most signiﬁcant challenges for NPD, as for other MTSs’
projects, is project efﬁciency, as cost overrun and schedule over-
run are common [4] due to issues such as resource limitations,
distinct component team objectives, and increasing demand for
coordination [5]. Unlike in standalone teams, where intrateam
collaboration is required, MTSs require more interteam coor-
dination to combine the efforts of various component teams
responsible for operational task execution [6], which can be
particularly challenging given that there exist signiﬁcant dif-
ferences in component teams’ routines and thought-worlds [7].
Ideally, what inﬂuences a successful team would also inﬂuence
a successful MTS. However, this may not be the reality since
the processes that make teams successful may not be the same
processes that facilitate successful MTSs [8].
Indeed, MTSs have been considered as a unique level of anal-
ysis that prior traditional team-level theory is unable to fully ex-
plain [9], [10]. A few studies have devoted initial efforts to under-
stand the determinants of interteam coordination in MTSs, such
as intrapersonal functional diversity, nonleader level boundary
spanning (interpersonal interactions among members), and the
overall MTSs leadership [1], [6], [11]–[13]. While these studies
broaden our knowledge on the interteam coordination in MTSs,
others point out the component team leaders, acting as the
bridge connecting component team with the MTS, would be
an important facilitator for the coordination within MTSs [14].
However, there lacks empirical studies along this line to enrich
our knowledge. According to the coordination literature that
highlights the crucial role of a shared cognition of individuals in
facilitating coordination [15], we posit that a shared cognition
among each component team leader of an MTS should be helpful
for enabling interteam coordination.
0018-9391 © 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on May 30,2026 at 09:56:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
1074 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 71, 2024
The shared mental models (SMMs) theory has been adopted
to explain intrateam coordination mechanisms that makes team-
work efﬁciently [16]. It proposes that SMMs, which refer to the
knowledge shared by members of a team when cooperating on
team tasks [17], are strong predictors of team efﬁciency because
of the contribution they make to internal team coordination [18].
However, whether SMMs in the MTSs have the same effect
remains unclear. In the MTSs that are structured according to two
levels, the component-team level and the system level [8], [10],
the SMMs are distinct in their meanings. At the component-team
level, SMMs entail that team members in a same team organize
their knowledge of speciﬁc team tasks, equipment, roles, goals,
and abilities in a similar fashion, which allow them to anticipate
others’ actions in the same component. At the system level,
SMMs refer to that each component team leader, who is the
representative of each component team’ project-based under-
standing, has a clear understanding of other teams’ progresses
and the information about the knowledge repertoire that other
component teams hold, through which they could coordinate
behaviors accordingly. The differences between SMMs at the
two levels include the fact that subjects at the system level
utilize different project management processes, have their own
team values, and pursue their own proximal goals [19], which is
not the case for team members within a single team [1]. Thus,
although the effects of SMMs at the component-team level on
intrateam coordination could be understood by the implications
of prior single team studies [20], existing literature has shed little
light on the inﬂuence of SMMs at the system level, i.e., SMMs
among component team leaders, on the efﬁciency of MTSs’
project considering the challenging problems of interteam coor-
dination. In addition, prior literature has found that the inﬂuence
of SMMs on team efﬁciency and team performance is through
the enhanced team process [18]. However, whether such ﬁndings
ﬁt the MTSs context have not been empirically tested. Therefore,
it is crucial to investigate whether SMMs among component
team leaders have a signiﬁcant impact on interterm coordination
as well as NPD efﬁciency—and, if so, how.
To answer the question, we ﬁrst look deeply at the mechanisms
of SMMs on NPD efﬁciency by adopting a boundary man-
agement perspective. The boundary management perspective,
which emphasizes that a team should facilitate both entrainment
activities within its borders and buffering activities outside
its borders, serves as a solid theoretical foundation for us to
understand how various kinds of information are processed
in team process [21]. Speciﬁcally, entrainment is an inward-
oriented information processing activity, referring to adjusting
the pace or cycle of an activity to match or synchronize with
that of another activity within a team [22], while buffering is
an outward-oriented information processing activity that a team
undertakes to ﬁlter external interference, such as change in the
external environment [23]. Similarly, for a project that requires
between-team coordination and encounters speciﬁc require-
ments from external customers, the MTSs as a whole should not
only facilitate entrainment activities among component teams
but also buffer change in the external environment at the system
level. In addition, the MTS-based complex NPD often face with
requirement uncertainty, which has been found as one important
contingent factor to inﬂuence the effectiveness of SMMs [24].However, we still have little empirical examination on the effect
of requirement uncertainty on SMMs at the system level.
To sum up, this article aims to explain the effect of SMMs
among MTSs leader team on NPD efﬁciency from the boundary
management perspective under requirement uncertainty. Be-
cause a high degree of information-processing complexity is
inherent in MTSs work, both within and outside the MTSs, a
leader team that is comprised of component team leaders is often
formed, and is overseen by the MTSs leader. The leader team
serves to handle aspects that require coordination among the
component teams or exchanges with the external environment
beyond the MTSs [11], wherein the MTSs leader is responsible
for the overall progress of the MTSs project and for commu-
nicating with customers, while the leaders of component teams
are responsible for the progress of their own tasks.
Our article makes several contributions to theory. First, we
contribute to the NPD literature by empirically investigating
the antecedents of NPD efﬁciency from the MTSs perspective.
While a few conceptual studies have proposed its implications
for NPD [25], [26], empirical evidence of the MTSs perspective
in the project management disciplines is still underexplored
[27]. This article thus adds to the emerging MTSs literature and
provides a foundation for future researchers to focus on investi-
gating NPD efﬁciency, or any other project efﬁciency, from an
MTSs perspective. Thus, practitioners, who are currently focus-
ing on improving single-team efﬁciency in large-scaled projects,
are suggested to manage such projects from such a perspective,
that is to improve the overall efﬁciency of the MTSs. Second,
this article expands SMMs theory into the MTSs setting and
provides a preliminary theoretical framework for establishing
a speciﬁc MTSs–SMMs theory by investigating SMMs at the
system level (e.g., SMMs among component team leaders) and
the underlying mechanisms. Speciﬁcally, our article provides
insight into the mediating role of MTSs process, namely both
the entrainment and buffering mechanisms at the system level,
conﬁrming their distinct effects in promising MTSs-based NPD
efﬁciency. Therefore, rather than focusing on each component
team’s proximal goals distinctly, component team leaders are
suggested also to have a clear understanding of other teams’
progress and specializations to keep interterm coordination. In
addition, component teams within an MTSs should keep in pace
with each other and also protect the whole project from external
inﬂuence. Third, this article shows how requirement uncertainty
inﬂuences the relationship between SMMs and NPD in an MTS
setting, thereby emphasizing the importance of considering
requirement uncertainty in order to determining the effects of
SMMs on boundary management. Thereby, besides managing
within MTSs activities, the whole MTSs should assess the
level of requirement uncertainty. Especially when requirement
uncertainty is high, SMMs show a greater power in determining
NPD efﬁciency.
II. T HEORETICAL FOUNDATION
A. MTSs Perspective on New Product Development
Prior articles have identiﬁed several features that distinguish
MTSs from traditional standalone teams [2], [8]: ﬁrst, MTSs
are composed of at least two component teams, each of which
Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on May 30,2026 at 09:56:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
LEI et al. : SHARED MENTAL MODELS AND BOUNDARY MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES IN NEW PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT 1075
has its own proximal goals. Second, component teams share a
common goal—that is, completing the overall MTSs’ project.
Third, the structure or conﬁguration of an MTS is determined
by its goals, which are organized into a hierarchy with proximal
team goals at the lowest level and distal MTSs’ goals at the
highest level. Fourth, component teams have input, process, or
outcome interdependence with at least one other team in the
MTSs.
Conceptual studies have emphasized the importance of re-
searching MTSs as a unique level of analysis [19], and have rec-
ognized the crucial role of interterm coordination among various
component teams in MTSs. Subsequently, scholars devote their
efforts in researching the antecedents of interterm coordination
in the MTSs context. First, leadership of the MTSs has been
identiﬁed as a crucial determinant of interterm coordination
within an MTS. For example, DeChurch and Marks [11] ﬁnd that
MTSs functional leadership is positively related with interteam
coordination, which further inﬂuence MTSs performance.
Luciano et al. [28] proposed that strategic leadership system
is positively related to MTSs performance. In addition, besides
examining the inﬂuence of MTSs leaders, a personal perspec-
tive is adopted to investigate how component team members
inﬂuence the interteam coordination. For example, De Vries et
al.[6] studied how intrapersonal functional diversity of com-
ponent team members inﬂuence MTSs performance through
interteam coordination, of which they documented a positive
result. Ziegert et al. [12] and Dietrich et al. [13] documented
that interpersonal interactions among MTSs members would
beneﬁt the entire MTSs performance. Although these articles
have broadened our knowledge on the interteam coordination in
MTSs, it is still lack of knowledge on how component team
leaders play their roles. This article aims to ﬁll this gap by
introducing the role of SMMs in MTSs leader team, involving
MTSs leaders and component team leaders.
NPD lies beyond the managing capacity of a single team;
instead, the NPD process has been considered by organizational
scholars to entail an MTS structure that usually involves multiple
skilled component teams [29], including manufacturing, design,
sales, etc. For example, NPD in IT ﬁrms involves a hardware
team, a software team, a customer support team, an accounting
and ﬁnance team, and so on [30]. The question of how to improve
NPD efﬁciency—that is, to increase speed and reduce cost—
has long been subject to attention from scholars in the ﬁelds of
project management. For example, Jaber et al. [31] investigated
the crucial role of efﬁcient collaborative decisions within teams
in improving NPD projects, while Choi and Phan [32] explored
how a ﬁrm’s exploration and exploitation activities inﬂuence
NPD performance. In addition, in a meta-analysis, Chen et al.
[33] indicated that factors such as team leadership and internal
integration play crucial roles in improving NPD efﬁciency.
However, as noted above, although extant research has broad-
ened our understanding on NPD, most articles have been con-
ducted at the single team or organizational level. We posit that
ignoring MTSs nature of the NPD may hinder both academics
and practitioners to have a complete picture. We believe that it
is necessary to investigate the inﬂuencing factors of NPD efﬁ-
ciency from an MTS perspective in which multiple componentteams work together. Within the ﬁelds of project management,
the adoption of the MTSs perspective is in its infancy [27].
With a few conceptual papers on investigation of NPD from the
MTSs perspective [25], limited empirical studies have used it to
investigate NPD in terms of component team leaders’ behaviors
and interteam collaborations on large-scale projects.
B. Shared Mental Models Theory
Mental models, which are deﬁned as the “mechanism whereby
humans are able to generate descriptions of system purpose and
form, explanations of system functioning and observed system
states” [34], help people to describe, explain, and predict events
in their environment. Consequently, as individuals are often
organized into teams to accomplish tasks, SMMs have been
proposed to explain team functioning. SMMs are deﬁned as the
knowledge shared by members of a team when cooperating on
team tasks [9]. The idea is that team performance improves if
team members have a shared understanding of the task that is to
be performed and of the teamwork involved.
Deeply, prior articles point out that SMMs are a complex
cognitive concept which includes two major domains—task-
related SMMs and team-related SMMs—where teams develop
both teamwork and taskwork track behavior [35]. Speciﬁcally,
task-related SMMs refer to the shared understanding of the
team’s speciﬁc work/task, such as their predictions, judgment
criteria, and perceptions of progress regarding the task [18].
Team-related SMMs entail shared understanding on team struc-
ture including team members’ constitution, skills, and team
expertise distribution, which is beneﬁcial for any members to
coordinate and cooperate with other teammates to accomplish
the work [18].
Prior articles have established that the impact of SMMs on
team processes and performance is robust at the single-team
level [36]. In the MTSs structure, the SMMs will be more
important but complex, reﬂected at two aspects, respectively,
levels and components. First, SMMs could be achieved into
two levels. At the component-team level, SMMs entail team
members organizing their knowledge of speciﬁc team tasks,
equipment, roles, goals, and abilities, which allow them to antic-
ipate others’ actions in the same component team. At the system
level, SMMs refer to that each component team leader has a clear
understanding of other teams’ tasks, actions, and then coordinate
behaviors accordingly. We do believe that the SMMs literature
provides insight to the effects of SMMs at the component-team
level, but is not suitable for explaining the effect of SMMs at
the system level. However, limited empirical studies have been
conducted to explore the impacts of SMMs at the system level on
MTSs performance, despite several conceptual and case studies
[37], [38].
Therefore, this article seeks to broaden our knowledge by
examining the inﬂuence of SMMs at the system level, i.e., SMMs
among component team leaders. In addition, following prior
articles [35], we conceptualize SMMs at the system level in
the MTSs structure as a second-order construct, including both
task-related and team-related SMMs. This extension is reason-
able because component team leaders in the context of NPD
Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on May 30,2026 at 09:56:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
1076 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 71, 2024
need to share component team development progress and report
the problems with those of interdependent component teams as
well as MTSs leaders for coordination and cooperation [11],
which means that even though component teams may commit
to their local component team work [6], they still need to make
sure their task and activities compatible to others. Therefore, we
would like to deﬁne the system-level task-related SMMs as each
component team leader has a clear shared understanding of in-
terdependent teams’ work progress, procedures, and policies. In
addition, component teams facing development problems need
to scout expertise around the MTSs, which make it necessary for
component team leaders to recognize the expertise of other teams
and locate them when required. Thus, system-level team-related
SMMs are deﬁned as each component team leader has a clear
shared understanding of other teams’ expertise and the whole
MTSs expertise distribution.
C. Boundary Management
1) Information-Processing Approach of Boundary Manage-
ment: This article adopted the information-processing approach
to understand the boundary management in the MTSs context.
While the literature has pointed out three different approaches
to manage boundary, information-processing boundary, inter-
pretive boundary, and political boundary [39], information-
processing boundary has been studied as the dominant view used
to describe managing boundaries in product development [40].
Such approach emphasizes the importance of boundary man-
agement issues, both within-team boundary activities, known
as entrainment, and outside-team boundary activities, known
as buffering, for predicting team performance. Speciﬁcally, en-
trainment is an inward-oriented activity, which is conceptualized
as the work pace and cycle alignment of one given component
teams to the MTS-level “pace givers” (e.g., project-level mile-
stones and associated reviews) and also adjustment with other
component teams [41], thereby coordinating cycles and pace
within a team; buffering is an outward-oriented activity, which
focuses on the information processing of external environment,
including absorbing useful knowledge and protecting the team
from external interference [23]. For example, in order to achieve
a shared goal, a team must orchestrate its interrelated actions and
responses [22] and maintain its boundaries [42].
The MTSs boundary management faces both internal in-
formation processing and external information processing, as
well. Speciﬁcally, the MTSs need to not only synchronize cy-
cles and pace between component teams, but also protect the
MTSs project from external interference. Indeed, two levels of
information-processing boundaries exist: the system boundary,
which delineates the whole MTSs from its external environment;
and the component team boundary, which separates a component
team from others within the MTSs. Prior article on standalone
team studies has investigated the inﬂuence of boundary entrain-
ment [43] and boundary buffering [23] activities on performance
and efﬁciency. Such literature may help us to understand the
boundary management problem at the component team level.
However, boundary management at the system level in an MTS
structure has received limited attention. In addition, consideringrapid changes that occur in the external environment, such as
requirement uncertainty from customers, it is crucial for MTSs
to set appropriate boundaries. Therefore, our article seeks to ﬁll
this gap and broaden our knowledge along this line.
2) Requirements Uncertainty: Team boundary activities may
also be challenged by the level of uncertainty, i.e., uncertainty of
information that the team faces in the external environment. In
the NPD context, this is also a signiﬁcant issue, as it is common
for customers to change their requirements about the product’s
function, size, or shape, or even to decide to suspend the project
at any point in the development lifecycle in response to a
dynamic environment [44]. From the information-processing
perspective, requirements uncertainty refers to the asymmetric
information between necessary information that need to identify
customers’ requirements and the amount of information pos-
sessed by the MTSs [45]. Further, three important dimensions
of requirement uncertainty has been identiﬁed: requirement
instability, which refers to the extent of changes in customers’
requirements along the project life cycle; requirement diversity,
which relates to distinct requirements among customers; and
requirement analyzability, which refers to the extent to which
customers’ needs can be converted to a set of requirement
speciﬁcations [46]. However, while the moderating effect of
uncertainty has been investigated in traditional team context
[23], [24], [47], we still have little empirical examination on the
effect of requirement uncertainty on SMMs at the system level.
Considering that high level of requirement uncertainty may lead
to more information to be processed, a higher level of SMMs may
alleviate such external interference through encouraging more
boundary management activities. Therefore, we argue that re-
quirement uncertainty may moderate the relationships between
SMMs and boundary management activities at the system level.
In summary, we would expect that information-processing
approach of boundary management provides a solid theoretical
foundation to investigate how the SMMs among component
team leaders achieve NPD efﬁciency through enhancing bound-
ary management activities under level of requirement uncer-
tainty.
III. H YPOTHESES DEVELOPMENT
Drawing on SMMs theory, we focus on SMMs among compo-
nent team leaders. Adopting information-processing approach
of boundary management perspective, we propose two different
mechanisms, namely entrainment and buffering at the system
level, to explain how SMMs among component team leaders in-
ﬂuence NPD efﬁciency under levels of requirement uncertainty.
The detailed hypothesis development is shown in Fig. 1.
A. SMMs and NPD Efﬁciency
We posit that the SMMs in the MTS leader team involving
leaders of component teams and MTS leader would positively
inﬂuence the overall outcome of an MTS—that is, NPD efﬁ-
ciency. In an MTS setting, many of the tasks are interdependent.
When the leaders of component team have a high level of SMMs,
they could grasp more information on other teams’ progress, and
have the information of how and who to effectively handover
Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on May 30,2026 at 09:56:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
LEI et al. : SHARED MENTAL MODELS AND BOUNDARY MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES IN NEW PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT 1077
Fig. 1. Research model.
the deliverables. As a result, they will more readily work on
interdependent tasks, which improve the outcomes of the MTSs.
For example, for an MTS software product development project,
the software development team needs to rely on the results
of the design team, while the testing team relies on the work
of the software development team. If the SMMs among these
component teams are high, such that each team is aware of the
information of the others’ IT module deliverables and related
handover procedure, they would be more readily to follow-up,
thus improving the overall development efﬁciency. In addition, if
the structure of knowledge, i.e., each component team is aware of
the other teams’ expertise, is shared, when one team encounters
difﬁculties in solving problems, they could get help immediately
by ﬁnding the right helper, which would also facilitate the
develop efﬁciency. Therefore, we put forward the following
hypothesis:
H1: SMMs in an MTS leader team are positively associated with
NPD efﬁciency.
B. SMMs, System Entrainment, and NPD Efﬁciency
As we illustrated above, in a complex NPD project, each
component team is responsible for a portion of subtasks that are
interrelated according to complexity and professional require-
ments [48]. This task complementary creates interdependency
among the component teams in terms of business knowledge,
development practices, testing data, system development doc-
umentation, quality metrics, and deliverables handover [49].
A high degree of SMMs among leaders of component teams
means interdependent component teams for different IT mod-
ule development could follow standard and agreed procedures
and policies to handover the IT module deliverables, which
can improve temporal coordination (entrainment) as the shared
knowledge and information could reduce the communication
cost and improve the efﬁciency of inward-oriented information
processing activities [50]. For example, on the one hand, entrain-
ment involves ﬁtting with the rhythm of other component teams
[22]. This ﬁt is more likely to be achieved if the leaders of each
component team are “on the same page” regarding the speciﬁcs
of their associated IT modules delivered by other component
teams and knowing other component teams’ expertise [51].
Speciﬁcally, only after component team leaders share a common
understanding of the interdependent task, it is possible for them
to adapt their behaviors to ﬁt with each other. In addition,the shared understanding of MTSs knowledge (e.g., the whole
MTSs schedule) distribution and component teams expertise
(e.g., ﬁnd the professional members for solving problems as
soon as possible) can also help to direct each component team
to align with each other’s schedule and talent/resource usage
for reducing any interteam conﬂict and time waste [52], which
have been both found to have a negative inﬂuence on entrainment
activities [53]. This is particularly the case in the context of NPD,
which can involve multiple component teams with a common
goal but different values. Thus, we propose that a high degree
of SMMs among the leaders of component teams in general
improves entrainment at the system level in an MTS.
We also posit that entrainment activities at the system level
could improve NPD efﬁciency. First, with more entrainment
activities, each component team will have greater capability to
back other teams up, which has been shown to have a posi-
tive inﬂuence on overall project efﬁciency [54]. In addition,
entrainment activities can ease the learning process within an
MTS, which beneﬁts performance [55]. Component teams can
learn from each other more easily by using entrainment activities
to generate new ideas. Consequently, by recombining existing
knowledge with new ideas, an MTS for NPD can bring new
levels of innovation to organization products and services. For
example, Burt [56] suggested that those who are adept at in-
novating through a recombination of knowledge have a “vision
advantage” over others in the organization. He also suggested
that this vision advantage comes from bridging structural gaps in
an organization’s communication network. Therefore, entrain-
ment activities (e.g., collaboration) can further improve NPD
efﬁciency. On the basis of these considerations, we posit that
SMMs among leaders of component teams will improve NPD
efﬁciency because they strengthen entrainment activities at the
system level. In summary:
H2a: SMMs in an MTS leader team are positively associated with
entrainment activities at the system level.
H2b: Entrainment activities are positively associated with NPD
efﬁciency.
H2c: Entrainment activities mediate the positive effect of SMMs
in an MTS leader team on NPD efﬁciency.
C. SMMs, System Buffering, and NPD Efﬁciency
In addition to entrainment activities, and in response to the
increased complexity of work tasks and changing environmental
conditions, an MTS must increasingly conduct buffering activi-
ties across its boundaries and actively manage relationships with
external stakeholders [42]. We posit that SMMs in MTS leader
team could help the MTSs to accurately determine whether
external inputs are beneﬁcial or necessary for the MTSs and
then more cohesively respond to external inputs. In a complex IT
NPD project, the MTSs may encounter unwanted inﬂuences and
interruptions from the external environment. For example, MTSs
may be inﬂuenced by ambassador activities from top levels of
the organization [57] and unreasonable IT requirements from the
customers. Thus, the MTS leader team would protect the MTS
project from these interferences and requirements in order to
maintain the pace of the MTSs as a whole [58]. When the leaders
of component teams share a high degree of share common goals
Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on May 30,2026 at 09:56:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
1078 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 71, 2024
regarding the overall MTSs, they are clearer on what the MTSs
and each component team needs or do not need from outside the
MTSs. Thus, the SMMs could enhance the MTSs’ ability to pro-
cess external information [59], conducting buffering activities to
protect the MTSs from unwanted inﬂuences and interruptions.
With a low degree of SMMs among component leaders, the
MTSs will be vulnerable to external inﬂuences with distinct
component team goals and each component team leaders may
not conduct buffering for avoiding prevent beneﬁcial and impor-
tant information ﬂowing into the MTSs. Thus, we hypothesize
that SMMs among leaders of component teams are positively
associated with buffering activities at the system level.
We believe that buffering activities at the system level further
improve NPD efﬁciency, as studies have found that buffering
activities enhance team performance [60], [61]. In an MTS
context, especially for NPD, buffering activities not only protect
component teams from external interference so that these teams
can move quickly, but also increase the quality and success
of the product. For example, when faced with unreasonable
changes or unexpected requirements from customers, buffering
can strengthen the boundaries against such external interference
and create a protected internal atmosphere for the component
teams, thereby accelerating NPD. Therefore, we hypothesize
that buffering at the system level is positively associated with
NPD efﬁciency. On the basis of the foregoing discussion, we
also propose that SMMs among leaders of component teams in
the MTSs will improve NPD efﬁciency because they enhance
buffering activities at the system level.
H3a: SMMs in an MTS leader team are positively associated with
buffering activities at the system level.
H3b: Buffering activities are positively associated with NPD
efﬁciency.
H3c: Buffering activities mediate the positive effect of SMMs in
an MTS leader team on NPD efﬁciency.
D. Moderating Effects of Requirement Uncertainty
Requirement uncertainty will improve the effect of SMMs
on the entrainment and buffering by creating more additional
coordination and buffering task from the perspective of infor-
mation processing, which enhance the role of SMMs. In this
article, requirement uncertainty includes the requirement insta-
bility, diversity, and analyzability [46]. When the requirement
instability is high, it means customer will frequently change
their IT requirements [47]. In this situation, the MTSs could
either follow or refuse the changed requirements. If the MTSs
follow the changed requirements, then each component team
needs to adapt its own team works/tasks and schedules to the
new global IT requirements and further coordinate with each
other [62], which requires more additional entrainment to attain
this adaption and coordination. As above, the SMMs provide
established and agreed coordination procedures for component
team and enable more entrainment activities. Therefore, the
higher requirement instability, the more additional entrainment
activities will be enabled by established and agreed coordination
procedures via SMMs. On the other hand, if the MTSs refuse the
IT requirements changes (e.g., due to high cost and risk for this
change), especially for unreasonable requirements, the MTSsneed to conduct more additional buffering to protect the MTSs
and components teams to respond to changes. As above, the
SMMs provide established and agreed guidance on determining
how and who to buffer. Thus, the higher requirement instability,
the more buffering enabled by the same SMMs.
When the requirement diversity is high, it means inconsistent
and even conﬂicting requirements to be proposed by a group
of users [63]. In this case, the MTSs need to work on solving
any requirement conﬂicts by additional entrainment or buffering
these conﬂicting requirements, asking the group of users to
discuss by themselves for working out a more consistent IT
requirement. Similarly, the additional entrainment or buffering
demands created by the requirement diversity will enhance the
role of SMMs on realizing more entrainment and buffering ac-
tivities. When the requirement unanalyzability is high, it means
the requirements proposed by customers are ambiguous and
hard to be translated into detailed speciﬁcations [64]. Then,
the MTSs in whole need are to fully utilize the expertise of
different component teams and integrate them to translate part
of the IT requirements. For those too ambiguous requirements,
necessary buffering is also required to conduct for requiring the
customers for further clarity. Studies have shown that uncertainty
increases the demand for a high level of information processing
[65]. To cope with such demand, the MTSs should enhance
its information-processing capabilities by means of cultivat-
ing SMMs among component team leaders. Thus, alignment
between information-processing demands and capabilities pro-
duces better outcomes [66]. Similarly, Mathieu et al. [18] argued
that SMMs are more important for coordination in an MTS when
workload, time pressure, or external requirement uncertainty are
high. In the face of changing customer requirements frequently,
workload will increase and a low degree of SMMs may present a
barrier to component teams predicting each other’s information
and resource requirements. Given the above considerations, we
propose the ﬁnal pair of hypotheses:
H4a: Requirement uncertainty positively moderates the relationship
between SMMs in an MTS leader team and entrainment activities at
the system level.
H4b: Requirement uncertainty positively moderates the relation-
ship between SMMs in an MTS leader team and buffering activities
at the system level.
IV. M ETHODOLOGY
A. Samples and Data Collection
To test the above hypotheses, we collected data using a
matched-pair ﬁeld survey. The samples for the survey comprised
IT development MTSs within IT ﬁrms located in China. Given
that complex IT systems or software development tasks are often
carried out in the form of MTSs and suffer from requirement
changes, we believe that focusing on NPD in the context of
IT development is appropriate for testing our hypotheses. With
the support of a known IT association, the survey targeted 500
IT companies in China chosen at random. Of the companies
invited in our research project, 320 agreed. A questionnaire
package, including a cover letter with instructions, the survey,
and postage-paid return envelopes, was sent to each ﬁrm’s
Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on May 30,2026 at 09:56:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
LEI et al. : SHARED MENTAL MODELS AND BOUNDARY MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES IN NEW PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT 1079
coordinator. To avoid potential correlation errors among multi-
ple MTSs in the same company, we asked each company to base
its responses on only one recently completed IT development
project that took the form of an MTS, regardless of the project’s
success or failure.
To minimize the risk of common method variance, the
matched-pair survey was conducted using a multisource re-
search design targeting two types of respondents: MTS leaders
and component team leaders. The MTS leaders, who assemble
a leader team consisting of all component team leaders, are re-
sponsible for NPD efﬁciency, team-related SMMs, and buffering
at the system level, because they are in charge of the overall
IT development MTSs. The component team leaders account
for signiﬁcant portions of the speciﬁc development task by
coordinating with other team leaders, and are more familiar with
the level of between-team entrainment achieved and the extent of
task-related SMMs. Furthermore, their greater familiarity with
any requirement changes in IT development puts them in a
good position to answer questions about the level of require-
ment uncertainty faced by the MTSs. Accordingly, two types of
separate and conﬁdential questionnaire were sent to each type of
respondent; these are the asked speciﬁc MTS-related questions
and questions on the respondents’ demographic characteristics.
Matching the different informants’ separate responses with
unique identiﬁcation numbers yielded 132 matched responses.
Of those, 22 surveys were discarded because of incomplete
responses and outliers (two cases with cook distance values
above 0.6), and the ﬁnal sample consisted of the remaining 110
observations. Thus, the usable response rate was 22%, which
is comparable to other studies using a matched-pair survey
with senior executives [67]. In order to examine the degree
of potential bias, we used late respondents as surrogates for
a sample of nonrespondents and compared the differences in
the means for early and late respondents. The results showed
no signiﬁcant differences between early respondents and late
respondents in relation to the key constructs. The demographics
of sampled ﬁrms, MTS, MTS leaders, and component team
leaders are summarized in the table of Online Appendix A.
B. Measurement Development
The contextual operationalization of the research constructs
serves as a starting point for developing the measurement scale.
Existing validated measures of requirement uncertainty and
NPD efﬁciency were adopted, and requirement uncertainty as a
second-order construct was measured via its three dimensions—
requirement instability, requirement diversity, and requirement
unanalyzability [46]. For the two types of boundary activities,
entrainment and buffering at the system level, existing measures
were adapted to suit our context of IT development in an MTS.
Given the lack of a suitable scale for measuring SMMs at the
system level, including team-related and task-related compo-
nents, we developed new measures (see online Appendix B for
the items). Our development of SMMs began with collecting
original items from numerous prior articles. We ﬁrst identiﬁed
the frame of SMMs measurement to summarize two strategies:
One is to directly ask for the extent of the mental models tobe shared. Another is to assume that the mental model will be
widely shared, such that less effort during coordination should
be expected. Both strategies require identifying the knowledge
content of the mental model that should be focused on. In this
article, we adopted the ﬁrst strategy for our team-related mental
model and considered the expertise distribution and who grasps
what expertise as the knowledge content of the mental model,
based on the work of [68]. On the other hand, we adopted the
second strategy for our task-related mental model measurement,
and considered the knowledge of different dimensions of IT
product complexity that requires collaboration as the content of
task-related SMMs, based on [69]. In combining and adapting
these previous related measures, we made sure that our measures
incorporated both task- and team-related SMMs. We originally
developed 15 items, which we reduced to six through a three-
round expert review process (interviews with 2 IT managers, 10
sorters in two-step Q-sorting, and a pilot study). All items were
worded such that they referred to the MTS, not the individual
or single team, because the critical measure is the perceived
degree to which mental models are shared among the leader
team. In our model, SMMs are a second-order factor with two
task- and team-related SMMs as formative ﬁrst-order factors.
The organizational and MTSs characteristics of organization
size, MTSs size, and MTSs duration were included as important
controls for potential alternative explanations for the hypoth-
esized relationships. All measurement items were scored on a
ﬁve-point Likert scale (1 =very weak or strongly disagree, 5 =
very strong or strongly agree).
To ensure the validity of these adapted and self-developed
measures in the context of an IT development MTSs, and to
capture unambiguously the domain of each construct, all items
were reﬁned through a process of expert review. The survey
was translated into Chinese by one of the researchers, and the
translation was checked by a second researcher ﬂuent in both
English and Chinese. Two experienced managers responsible
for an IT development MTS reviewed the Chinese version of the
survey for clarity, and helped to modify any problematic items
and improve content validity. To improve the face validity and
convergent validity, two-step Q-sorting was conducted to ensure
that all facets of the relevant construct were included and that
the items for each construct were convergent [70]. Two separate
rounds of sorting (with ﬁve sorters in each round) classiﬁed
the previously generated items on the basis of their similarity
to deﬁnitions and descriptions of the underlying construct cate-
gories. In the ﬁrst round, the accuracy rate for item-to-construct
deﬁnition classiﬁcations was around 80%. After minor correc-
tions based on agreement between the sorters’ classiﬁcations,
the modiﬁed items were classiﬁed by a different group of ﬁve
sorters in the second round, during which 90% of the items
were successfully classiﬁed into the intended constructs. These
improvements indicate that face validity and convergent validity
were established. Conﬁdent that the items were reliable, we
proceeded to pilot test the survey on a convenience sample of 20
MTS leaders who had experience of managing a customized
complex IT development MTSs. The items were minimally
modiﬁed based on feedback from this pilot study. All the ﬁnal
measurement items are listed in Online Appendix B.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on May 30,2026 at 09:56:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
1080 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 71, 2024
TABLE I
CORRELATION MATRIX AMONG DIRECTLY OBSERVED CONSTRUCTS
Note: N =110. The diagonal elements in this correlation matrix are the square root of the average variance extracted; ∗p<0.05.
V. D ATAANALYSIS AND RESULTS
Ordinary least squares (OLS) analysis was used to test the
hypotheses. Before the OLS analysis, we used the latent factor
score approach to compute a single indicator for our two com-
posite constructs, requirement uncertainty, and SMMs. We ﬁrst
tested the validity of the measurements of the directly observed
ﬁrst-order constructs of SMMs and the ﬁrst-order constructs of
requirement uncertainty to assess whether their factor structures
were valid for the proposed conceptual model. Next, we cal-
culated the latent factor scores of each ﬁrst-order construct of
requirement uncertainty and SMMs. Finally, we calculated the
single indicator of requirement uncertainty and SMMs using
their respective ﬁrst-order construct factor scores and repeating
the latent factor score approach.
A. Measurement Model
We began by assessing the reliability and validity of our
measurement instrument, testing 1) item reliability, 2) construct
reliability, and 3) measurement validity. First, all factor load-
ings were above the acceptable threshold (0.70). Second, the
Cronbach’s alpha values for the constructs consisting of multiple
indicators were higher than the recommended threshold (0.70).
These results conﬁrmed that all of the formative multi-indicator
constructs had satisfactory reliability (see Online Appendix C
for details of the reliability analysis). Third, the validity of all
measurements was tested using an explorative factor analysis
with principal component analysis (see Online Appendix C
for the cross-loadings). All the items loaded more highly on
the intended construct than on any other construct, providing
evidence of discriminant and convergent validity among the
multi-indicator constructs. Table I shows the correlations among
constructs.
We tested discriminant validity using the average variance
extracted (A VE). Discriminant validity is inferred when the
square root of each construct’s A VE is higher than the correlation
of the construct to other latent variables [71]. All of the diagonal
values in Table I, which are the square roots of each construct’s
A VE, were much higher than the construct’s correlations with
other constructs. These results provide additional evidence ofdiscriminant validity among the multi-indicator constructs. LIS-
REL 8.7 software was then used to run a conﬁrmatory factor
analysis (CFA) for the measurement model. The CFA model
ﬁt indices of the measurement model were within accepted
guidelines, conﬁrming the goodness of ﬁt of our measurement
model (chi-square =281.12; df =247; incremental ﬁt index,
0.97; non-normed ﬁt index, 0.97; comparative ﬁt index, 0.97). In
addition, the root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA)
was 0.036; an RMSEA of less than 0.08 is considered practical
evidence of good model ﬁt [72].
On the basis of these validity results for the directly observed
research constructs, the SMMs construct and requirement un-
certainty are, respectively, formed using the latent factor scores,
their ﬁrst-order constructs as their new formative indicators, and
further used for further hypothesis tests.
B. Hypothesis Testing
1) Testing of Main and Mediating Effects: The hypothesized
relationship of the main and mediating effects in the research
model was tested using Model 4 of the PROCESS macro of
SPSS 20.0. All control variables were included in the model.
After 5000 times of bootstrapping, the results for the main effects
and mediating effects are computed to be reported in Table II.
(As we found no signiﬁcant effect for the control variables, these
results are not included.)
First, there was a signiﬁcant effect of SMMs on NPD efﬁ-
ciency without involving entrainment and buffering at the system
level (β=0.392, p<0.05), providing support for our H1.
Second, there was a signiﬁcant effect of SMMs on both system
entrainment ( β=0.388, p<0.05) and system buffering ( β=
0.269, p<0.05). Thus, H1a and H2a are supported. Third, there
was a signiﬁcant effect of both system entrainment ( β=0.422,
p<0.05) and system buffering (β=0.275, p<0.05) on NPD
efﬁciency, which provides support for H1b and H2b. Finally, in
the presence of both system entrainment and system buffering,
the effect of SMMs on NPD efﬁciency was reduced, although it
was still signiﬁcant. Taken together, these results indicate that
both system entrainment ( β=0.164, p<0.05) and system
buffering ( β=0.074, p<0.05) act as two important mediators
Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on May 30,2026 at 09:56:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
LEI et al. : SHARED MENTAL MODELS AND BOUNDARY MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES IN NEW PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT 1081
TABLE II
RESULTS OF TESTING FOR MAIN AND MEDIATING EFFECTS
Notes: S =signiﬁcant.
TABLE III
HIERARCHICAL REGRESSION MODEL
Note: Number of observations (n) is 110. All path coefﬁcients are standardized. The value in each parenthesis is the standard error. ∗p<0.05.
between SMMs and NPD efﬁciency. Thus, H1c and H2c are
supported.
2) Test of Moderating Effects: The hypothesized relationship
for the moderating effects in the research model was tested by
means of hierarchical regression analysis with OLS using SPSS
20.0. We ﬁrst incorporated the control variables, independent
variables, moderators, and interaction term into our research
model to check the variance of the two mediators as dependent
variables. Then, we assessed the signiﬁcance level of the model
by calculating the increased explained variance and F hierarchi-
cal value [73]. Last, three models were formed for each mediator
as the dependent variable, as shown in Table III.
In Model 1, the three control variables (organization size,
MTSs size, and MTSs duration) have an insigniﬁcant effect on
both system entrainment and system buffering. Model 2 explainsthe signiﬁcant effect of SMMs on both system entrainment and
system buffering in the complex IT development MTS. SMMs
thus positively inﬂuence both system entrainment and system
buffering. In Model 3, requirement uncertainty has signiﬁcant
and positive moderating effects on both the relationship between
SMMs and system entrainment ( β=0.23, p<0.05), and the
relationship between SMMs and system buffering ( β=0.23, p
<0.05). These signiﬁcant moderating effects are further veriﬁed
by the signiﬁcance level of the F hierarchical value. Thus, H4a
and H4b are supported.
VI. D ISCUSSION
The results conﬁrm all of our hypotheses: ﬁrst, SMMs among
leaders of component teams in an MTS are positively associated
Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on May 30,2026 at 09:56:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
1082 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 71, 2024
with NPD efﬁciency, through the two system-level boundary
management activities in MTSs structure. This ﬁnding reveals
that when the leaders of each component team share information
about their own team’s actions on the task, as well as those of
other component teams within the MTSs, the MTSs will conduct
more boundary management activities at the system level—that
is, entrainment and buffering activities—which in turn improve
the efﬁciency of the whole MTSs.
Second, our results emphasize the importance of the two
boundary management activities at the system level. From the
interterm process perspective, entrainment is an inward-oriented
information processing activity that keep each component team
in pace, and buffering is an outward-oriented information pro-
cessing activity that keep the MTSs away from external in-
terference. In addition, it is worth noting that the mediating
effects of both boundary entrainment and boundary buffering are
only partial. This indicates that besides these two system-level
boundary management activities, there may exist other variables
that link SMMs among team leaders to MTSs efﬁciency. For
example, a higher level of SMMs among component team
leaders may improve the MTSs commitment of all component
teams, which is beneﬁcial for MTS performance [74]. In addi-
tion, the interteam process within an MTS—that is, boundary
management activities at the component-team level—may be
inﬂuenced by the SMMs among team leaders and further impact
NPD efﬁciency.
The ﬁnding that requirement uncertainty positively moderates
the relationships between SMMs and entrainment and buffering
is in accordance with those of previous qualitative studies [18].
The positive effects of SMMs on boundary entrainment and
buffering activities exist only when requirement uncertainty is
high. As mentioned above, when customer demand is more
uncertain, the MTSs need not only to process more information
but also to cope with extra work and time pressure. Thus, SMMs
among the leaders of component teams have a greater impact in
situations of high requirement uncertainty, while in situations
of low requirement uncertainty, SMMs among component team
leaders are less important but still signiﬁcantly contribute to both
boundary management activities.
A. Theoretical Implications
The ﬁndings of our article have several theoretical contri-
butions. First, our article contributes to the NPD literature by
broadening understanding of the antecedents of NPD efﬁciency
from a single-team perspective to an MTS perspective. As the
MTS perspective has been characterized as a unique level of
analysis in organizations [7], [75], a few conceptual studies
have proposed its implications for NPD [25], [26]. However,
a lack of relevant empirically MTSs research has hindered a
comprehensive understanding of certain topics. Given that the
MTSs perspective is relatively novel in project management
areas [27], this article adds to the emerging MTSs literature
and encourages future researchers to focus on improving NPD
efﬁciency from an MTS perspective.
Second, our article has implications for the body of knowl-
edge on SMMs in terms of adapting SMMs theory to an MTSperspective. SMMs theory has been widely adopted to predict
NPD performance at the team level [20]. Even with growing
acknowledgment in the literature, as well as in practice, of
the importance of MTSs in NPD projects, there have been
limited empirical attempts to examine SMMs in relation to NPD
efﬁciency at the system level. Our article adapts SMMs theory
to the MTS level of analysis and differentiates SMMs at the two
levels of an MTS structure; therein, we ﬁnd evidence that SMMs
among leaders of component teams can improve NPD efﬁciency.
Given the unique characteristics of MTSs, our article represents
an initial empirical effort to extend the application of SMMs the-
ory, and provides a point of reference for its future development.
This has wider implications for the application of SMMs theory,
especially in the operations management discipline. In addition,
by adopting an information processing approach on boundary
management, our research provides a more comprehensive pic-
ture of the mechanism by which SMMs at the system level
inﬂuence NPD efﬁciency. While prior articles have documented
the direct effects of SMMs on team performance [76], less effort
has been dedicated to investigating the underlying mechanisms
[77]. By extending the boundary management perspective to the
system level of the MTSs context, our ﬁndings document that
both entrainment and buffering activities at the system level play
mediating roles between SMMs among the leaders of component
teams and NPD efﬁciency. Consequently, we claim that the
boundary management perspective provides an important and
useful theoretical framework for supplementing SMMs theory
and enriching behavior operations research.
Finally, this article contributes to the literature on uncertainty
in the ﬁelds of project management. We incorporate and test
how requirement uncertainty inﬂuences the relationship between
SMMs and NPD at the system level. Although the literature
has emphasized that requirement uncertainty is an important
contingency factor in teamwork and performance [24], very few
studies have empirically tested its contingent role in the relation-
ship between SMMs and NPD efﬁciency. Therefore, this article
advances knowledge of how the relationship between SMMs
and NPD efﬁciency changes with the degree of external uncer-
tainty. Building on theoretical discussions in previous research
regarding how SMMs operation relates to task demand, our
article provides strong empirical evidence that SMMs among the
leaders of component teams in MTSs become more important
when customer demand is highly unpredictable and less effective
when requirement uncertainty is low.
B. Practical Implications
In addition to its theoretical implications, this article has a
number of practical implications for managers and team lead-
ers of MTSs. First, the positive relationship between SMMs
among leaders of component teams in an MTS and NPD efﬁ-
ciency emphasizes the importance of SMMs at the system level.
While most project leaders are currently focusing on improving
single-team efﬁciency, it is recommended that large-scale IT
project managers should provide leaders of component teams
with ample opportunities to establish SMMs. SMMs cannot be
constructed automatically; it takes time to start working together,
Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on May 30,2026 at 09:56:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
LEI et al. : SHARED MENTAL MODELS AND BOUNDARY MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES IN NEW PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT 1083
to gather teamwork experience, and to learn from mistakes.
For example, Xiang et al. [76] found that awareness and man-
agement of other people’s emotions are crucial antecedents of
SMMs. Therefore, large-scale project managers are suggested
to encourage each component team leader to become involved
in more extra-role and off-job activities, which are beneﬁcial for
establishing SMMs.
Second, in a large-scale project involving MTSs, such as
NPD, boundary management activities are crucial for success.
It is recommended that large-scale project managers encourage
both coordination within MTSs and adaptation to the outside
environment. Within the MTSs boundary, entrainment activities
at the system level should be emphasized as this may help to
improve the efﬁciency of the overall MTSs. For example, project
managers should focus on the cycle, pace, dominant rhythms,
and time orientation of each component team to enact successful
entrainment [22]. In addition, a balance of boundary buffering
activities should be encouraged [23] because these protect the
team from external inﬂuence and allow useful knowledge to be
absorbed. Therefore, practices to implement buffering activities
must be established, and should include metrics to determine
their efﬁcacy.
Third, the results of our article have practical implications
for large-scale project managers with respect to requirement
uncertainty from customers. We ﬁnd that when requirement
uncertainty is high, the effects of SMMs among component team
leaders are more signiﬁcant. Therefore, although requirement
uncertainty may not be explicit, the MTS leader should assess
it, to the best of their ability, at the beginning of the MTSs
project. In addition, because of the dynamic characteristic of
requirement uncertainty, the MTS leader is suggested to continue
to assess requirement uncertainty at different stages of the MTSs
project.
C. Limitations and Future Research
This article is subject to several limitations that should be
considered in future research. First, the results are based on
data from a sample of Chinese ﬁrms. Data collection from a
single culture limits the generalization of research ﬁndings to
other cultures, and future articles should seek to take account of
cultural differences. Second, our data collection methodology
limits further investigation of the dynamic nature of large-scale
projects, which project management scholars regard as explain-
ing the different boundary activities required and the changes
to their relative importance during the project life cycle [42].
For example, when the interdependence of each component
team becomes more reciprocal, the uncertainty between compo-
nent teams increases. Therefore, a longitudinal research design
would provide stronger evidence with respect to whether the
relationships identiﬁed in our article vary over the stages of a
large-scale project. Third, we conﬁrmed the signiﬁcance role
of SMMs among team leaders of component teams in leading
to NPD efﬁciency; however, we did not explore the different
functioning of SMMs among component team leaders, such as
the accuracy and similarity of SMMs [78], [79]. As prior articles
have revealed that SMMs are crucial within standalone teams,future research could further broaden our knowledge of SMMs
within the MTSs structure by speciﬁcally focusing on that angle.
Last, this article investigated the mediating effects of bound-
ary management activities at the system level in an MTS struc-
ture. Such boundary management activities—entrainment and
buffering activities—are crucial in enhancing NPD efﬁciency.
However, our article is subject to two limitations in this re-
gard: On the one hand, we did not investigate the boundary
management activities at the component team level, of which
future research could have a deeper investigation; on the other
hand, prior articles have documented that there exist different
knowledge boundaries in the NPD process [39]. For example,
Carlile [80] identiﬁed three types of knowledge boundary: an
information-processing boundary that emphasizes the transfer of
knowledge; an interpretive boundary that emphasizes the trans-
lation of knowledge; and a political boundary that emphasizes
the transformation of knowledge. This article only focuses on
the ﬁrst type of knowledge boundary between cross-functioning
teams (component teams), and emphasizes information process-
ing. Therefore, we encourage future articles to further augment
this line of research by considering the other two types of
knowledge boundary.
VII. C ONCLUSION
In summary, this article investigates the effects of SMMs
among component team leaders on NPD efﬁciency through
enhanced entrainment and buffering activities at the system
level of MTSs under levels of requirement uncertainty, based on
information-processing lens of boundary management. It ﬁnds
that SMMs among component team leaders are positively related
with the two boundary management activities at the system level,
which in turn improve NPD efﬁciency. In addition, the effects
of SMMs are more pronounced in situations of high require-
ment uncertainty. These ﬁndings not only enrich our knowledge
along the project management and NPD literature, but also offer
greater clarity regarding how NPD could be achieved efﬁciency
for practitioners.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Murase, D. R. Carter, L. A. DeChurch, and M. A. Marks, “Mind the
gap: The role of leadership in multiteam system collective cognition,”
Leadership Quart. , vol. 25, pp. 972–986, 2014.
[2] J. E. Mathieu, M. A. Marks, and S. J. Zaccaro, Multi-Team Systems .
London, U.K.: Sage, 2001.
[3] A. O’Sullivan, “Interpersonal boundary spanning for supplier integration
in complex NPD,” IEEE Trans. Eng. Manage. , to be published, doi:
10.1109/TEM.2020.2999042 .
[ 4 ] S .H .H a n ,S .Y u n ,H .K i m ,Y .H .K w a k ,H .K .P a r k ,a n dS .H .L e e ,
“Analyzing schedule delay of mega project: Lessons learned from Korea
train express,” IEEE Trans. Eng. Manage. , vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 243–256,
May 2009.
[5] J. Kˇ reˇcková, D. M. Kennedy, H. Brožová, and J. Rydval, “Project man-
agement communication planning: An improved optimization model with
additional recipients and individualized weights,” IEEE Trans. Eng. Man-
age., to be published, doi: 10.1109/TEM.2020.2973643 .
[6] T. A. De Vries, J. R. Hollenbeck, R. B. Davison, F. Walter, and G. S.
Van Der Vegt, “Managing coordination in multiteam systems: Integrating
micro and macro perspectives,” Acad. Manage. J. , vol. 59, pp. 1823–1844,
2016.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on May 30,2026 at 09:56:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
1084 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT, VOL. 71, 2024
[7] S. J. Zaccaro, M. A. Marks, and L. DeChurch, Multiteam Systems: An
organization Form for Dynamic and Complex Environments .N e wY o r k ,
NY, USA: Routledge, Taylor & Francis, 2012.
[8] R. Asencio and L. A. DeChurch, “Assessing collaboration within and be-
tween teams: A multiteam systems perspective,” in Innovative Assessment
of Collaboration , A. von Davier, M. Zhu, and P. Kyllonen, Eds. Cham,
Switzerland: Springer, 2017, pp. 37–50.
[9] O. Brown, N. Power, and S. M. Conchie, “Communication and coordi-
nation across event phases: A multi-team system emergency response,” J.
Occupat. Org. Psychol. , vol. 94, pp. 591–615, 2021.
[10] M. M. Luciano, L. A. DeChurch, and J. E. Mathieu, “Multiteam systems: A
structural framework and meso-theory of system functioning,” J. Manage. ,
vol. 44, pp. 1065–1096, 2018.
[11] L. A. DeChurch and M. A. Marks, “Leadership in multiteam systems,” J.
Appl. Psychol. , vol. 91, pp. 311–329, 2006.
[12] J. C. Ziegert, A. P. Knight, C. J. Resick, and K. A. Graham, “Addressing
performance tensions in multiteam systems: Balancing informal mecha-
nisms of coordination within and between teams,” Acad. Manage. J. ,t ob e
published.
[13] P. Dietrich, J. Kujala, and K. Artto, “Inter-team coordination patterns and
outcomes in multi-team projects,” Project Manage. J. , vol. 44, pp. 6–19,
2013.
[14] R. B. Davison, J. R. Hollenbeck, C. M. Barnes, D. J. Sleesman, and D.
R. Ilgen, “Coordinated action in multiteam systems,” J. Appl. Psychol. ,
vol. 97, pp. 808–824, 2012.
[15] P. B. Lowry, T. L. Roberts, and N. C. Romano, Jr, “What signal is your in-
spection team sending to each other? Using a shared collaborative interface
to improve shared cognition and implicit coordination in error-detection
teams,” Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Stud. , vol. 71, pp. 455–474, 2013.
[16] J. A. Cannon-Bowers and E. Salas, “Reﬂections on shared cognition,” J.
Org. Behav. , vol. 22, pp. 195–202, 2001.
[17] J. A. Cannon-Bowers, E. Salas, and S. A. Converse, Shared Mental Models
in Expert Team Decision Making . Hillsdale, NJ, USA: Erlbaum, 1993.
[18] J. E. Mathieu, T. S. Heffner, G. F. Goodwin, E. Salas, and J. A. Cannon-
Bowers, “The inﬂuence of shared mental models on team process and
performance,” J. Appl. Psychol. , vol. 85, pp. 273–283, 2000.
[19] M. L. Shufﬂer, M. Jiménez-Rodríguez, and W. S. Kramer, “The science
of multiteam systems: A review and future research agenda,” Small Group
Res., vol. 46, pp. 659–699, 2015.
[20] J. S. Hsu, J. Y. Chang, G. Klein, and J. J. Jiang, “Exploring the impact
of team mental models on information utilization and project perfor-
mance in system development,” Int. J. Project Manage. , vol. 29, pp. 1–12,
2011.
[21] P. Lehtonen, M. Martinsuo, M. Lehtonen, and P. Dietrich, “Boundary man-
agement between temporary and permanent: Linking change programs to
their organizational context,” in Proc. 24th EGOS Eur. Group Org. Stud.
Colloq. , Jul. 2008, pp. 1–27.
[22] R. Standifer and A. Bluedorn, “Alliance management teams and en-
trainment: Sharing temporal mental models,” Hum. Relations , vol. 59,
pp. 903–927, 2006.
[23] X. J. Wu, W. W. Huang, J. Jiang, G. Klein, and S. Liu, “Boundary buffering:
Limiting interference and information leakage in design teams,” Int. J.
Oper. Prod. Manage. , vol. 40, pp. 293–313, 2020.
[24] Z. H. Aronson, R. R. Reilly, and G. S. Lynn, “The impact of leader
personality on new product development teamwork and performance:
The moderating role of uncertainty,” J. Eng. Technol. Manage. , vol. 23,
pp. 221–247, 2006.
[25] A. Scheerer, T. Hildenbrand, and T. Kude, “Coordination in large-scale
agile software development: A multiteam systems perspective,” in Proc.
IEEE 47th Hawaii Int. Conf. Syst. Sci. , 2014, pp. 4780–4788.
[26] M. A. Marks and D. Luvison, “Product launch and strategic alliance
MTSs,” in Multiteam Systems . Evanston, IL, USA: Routledge, 2012,
pp. 48–67.
[27] D. M. Kennedy, S. A. Sommer, and P. A. Nguyen, “Optimizing multi-team
system behaviors: Insights from modeling team communication,” Eur. J.
Oper. Res. , vol. 258, pp. 264–278, 2017.
[28] M. M. Luciano, J. D. Nahrgang, and C. Shropshire, “Strategic leadership
systems: Viewing top management teams and boards of directors from a
multiteam systems perspective,” Acad. Manage. Rev. , vol. 45, pp. 675–701,
2020.
[29] M. B. O’Leary, A. W. Woolley, and M. Mortensen, “Multiteam member-
ship in relation to multiteam systems,” in Multiteam Systems: An Orga-
nizational Form for Dynamic and Complex Environments , S. J. Zaccaro,
M. A. Marks, and L. A. DeChurch, Eds. New York, NY, USA: Routledge,
2012, pp. 141–172.[30] L. Dubé, “Teams in packaged software development: The software corp,”
Experience, Inf. Technol. People , vol. 11, pp. 36–61, 1998.
[31] H. Jaber, F. Marle, and M. Jankovic, “Improving collaborative deci-
sion making in new product development projects using clustering al-
gorithms,” IEEE Trans. Eng. Manage. , vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 475–483,
Nov. 2015.
[32] Y. R. Choi and P. H. Phan, “Exploration, exploitation, and growth through
new product development: The moderating effects of ﬁrm age and environ-
mental adversity,” IEEE Trans. Eng. Manage. , vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 428–437,
Aug. 2014.
[33] J. Chen, F. Damanpour, and R. R. Reilly, “Understanding antecedents
of new product development speed: A meta-analysis,” J. Oper. Manage. ,
vol. 28, pp. 17–33, 2010.
[34] W. B. Rouse and N. M. Morris, “On looking into the black box: Prospects
and limits in the search for mental models,” Psychol. Bull. , vol. 100,
pp. 349–363, 1986.
[35] H.-D. Yang, H.-R. Kang, and R. M. Mason, “An exploratory study on meta
skills in software development teams: Antecedent cooperation skills and
personality for shared mental models,” Eur. J. Inf. Syst. , vol. 17, pp. 47–61,
2008.
[36] B. D. Edwards, E. A. Day, W. Arthur, Jr, and S. T. Bell, “Relationships
among team ability composition, team mental models, and team perfor-
mance,” J. Appl. Psychol. , vol. 91, pp. 727–736, 2006.
[37] C. N. Lacerenza, R. Rico, E. Salas, and M. L. Shufﬂer, “The future of
multiteam systems: Implications for research and practice,” in Pushing
the Boundaries: Multiteam Systems in Research and Practice ,R .R .M .
L. Shufﬂer and E. Salas, Eds. Bingley, U.K.: Emerald Group Publishing
Limited, 2014, pp. 223–240.
[38] E. C. Anania et al., “Communication in the spaceﬂight multi-team system:
Training and technology recommendations to support boundary spanners,”
inProc. Hum. Factors Ergonom. Soc. Annu. Meeting , 2017, pp. 150–154.
[39] P. R. Carlile, “A pragmatic view of knowledge and boundaries: Boundary
objects in new product development,” Org. Sci. , vol. 13, pp. 442–455,
2002.
[40] S. L. Brown and K. M. Eisenhardt, “Product development: Past research,
present ﬁndings, and future directions,” Acad. Manage. Rev. , vol. 20,
pp. 343–378, 1995.
[41] D. Ancona and C.-L. Chong, “Entrainment: Pace, cycle, and rhythm
in organizational behavior,” Res. Org. Behav. , vol. 18, pp. 251–284,
1996.
[42] C. Dey and M. Ganesh, “Team boundary activity: A review and directions
for future research,” Team Perform. Manage.: Int. J. , vol. 23, pp. 273–292,
2017.
[43] D. A. Harrison, S. Mohammed, J. E. McGrath, A. T. Florey, and S. W.
Vanderstoep, “Time matters in team performance: Effects of member
familiarity, entrainment, and task discontinuity on speed and quality,”
Personnel Psychol. , vol. 56, pp. 633–669, 2003.
[44] Y. Zheng, S. Liu, W. Huang, and J. J.-Y. Jiang, “Inter-organizational coop-
eration in automotive new product development projects,” Ind. Manage.
Data Syst. , vol. 120, pp. 79–97, 2019.
[45] M. L. Tushman and D. A. Nadler, “Information processing as an inte-
grating concept in organizational design,” Acad. Manage. Rev. ,v o l .3 ,
pp. 613–624, 1978.
[46] S. R. Nidumolu, “Standardization, requirements uncertainty and software
project performance,” Inf. Manage. , vol. 31, pp. 135–150, 1996.
[47] S. Li, X. Cui, B. Huo, and X. Zhao, “Information sharing, coordination and
supply chain performance: The moderating effect of demand uncertainty,”
Ind. Manage. Data Syst. , vol. 119, pp. 1046–1071, 2019.
[48] F. Wynstra, F. Von Corswant, and M. Wetzels, “In chains? An empirical
study of antecedents of supplier product development activity in the
automotive industry,” J. Product Innov. Manage. , vol. 27, pp. 625–639,
2010.
[49] J. J. Jiang, G. Klein, J. C.-A. Tsai, and Y. Li, “Managing multiple-supplier
project teams in new software development,” Int. J. Project Manage. ,
vol. 36, pp. 925–939, 2018.
[50] J. S.-C. Hsu, N. Parolia, J. Jiang, and G. Klein, “The impact of team
mental models on is project teams’ information processing and project
performance,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Res. Workshop Inf. Technol. Project
Manage. , 2007, pp. 39–49.
[51] E. Salas, D. E. Sims, and C. S. Burke, “Is there a ‘big ﬁve’ in teamwork?,”
Small Group Res. , vol. 36, pp. 555–599, 2005.
[52] F. W. Kellermanns, S. W. Floyd, A. W. Pearson, and B. Spencer, “The
contingent effect of constructive confrontation on the relationship between
shared mental models and decision quality,” J. Org. Behav. , vol. 29,
pp. 119–137, 2008.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on May 30,2026 at 09:56:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
LEI et al. : SHARED MENTAL MODELS AND BOUNDARY MANAGEMENT ACTIVITIES IN NEW PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT 1085
[53] M. M. Montoya-Weiss, A. P. Massey, and M. Song, “Getting it together:
Temporal coordination and conﬂict management in global virtual teams,”
Acad. Manage. J. , vol. 44, pp. 1251–1262, 2001.
[54] T. Kude, S. Mithas, C. T. Schmidt, and A. Heinzl, “How pair programming
inﬂuences team performance: The role of backup behavior, shared mental
models, and task novelty,” Inf. Syst. Res. , vol. 30, pp. 1145–1163, 2019.
[55] S. Khavul, L. Pérez-Nordtvedt, and E. Wood, “Organizational entrainment
and international new ventures from emerging markets,” J. Bus. Venturing ,
vol. 25, pp. 104–119, 2010.
[56] R. S. Burt, “Structural holes and good ideas,” Amer. J. Sociol. , vol. 110,
pp. 349–399, 2004.
[57] D. G. Ancona and D. Caldwell, “Beyond boundary spanning: Managing
external dependence in product development teams,” J. High Technol.
Manage. Res. , vol. 1, pp. 119–135, 1990.
[58] Y. Shin, M. Kim, and W.-M. Hur, “Interteam cooperation and competition
and boundary activities: The cross-level mediation of team goal orienta-
tions,” Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health , vol. 16, pp. 2738–2762, 2019.
[59] T. E. Johnson and Y. Lee, “The relationship between shared mental models
and task performance in an online team-based learning environment,”
Perform. Improvement Quart. , vol. 21, pp. 97–112, 2008.
[60] M. Chakkol, A. Karatzas, M. Johnson, and J. Godsell, “Building bridges:
Boundary spanners in servitized supply chains,” Int. J. Oper. Prod. Man-
age., vol. 38, pp. 579–604, 2018.
[61] C. B. Gibson and R. Dibble, “Excess may do harm: Investigating the effect
of team external environment on external activities in teams,” Org. Sci. ,
vol. 24, pp. 697–715, 2013.
[62] Y. Hong and J. L. Hartley, “Managing the supplier–supplier interface in
product development: The moderating role of technological newness,” J.
Supply Chain Manage. , vol. 47, pp. 43–62, 2011.
[63] J. Zhang, J. Jiang, X. Wu, and R. Jiang, “Moderating effect of requirements
uncertainty on task interdependence and NPD performance,” Ind. Manage.
Data Syst. , vol. 121, pp. 456–477, 2021.
[64] P. Lu, X. Song, and Y. Song, “An empirical analysis of requirements
uncertainty, task uncertainty and software project performance,” J. Emerg.
Trends Econ. Manage. Sci. , vol. 3, 2012, Art. no. 559.
[65] M. Bensaou and N. Venkatraman, “Inter-organizational relationships and
information technology: A conceptual synthesis and a research frame-
work,” Eur. J. Inf. Syst. , vol. 5, pp. 84–91, 1996.
[66] G. Premkumar, K. Ramamurthy, and C. S. Saunders, “Information pro-
cessing view of organizations: An exploratory examination of ﬁt in the
context of interorganizational relationships,” J. Manage. Inf. Syst. , vol. 22,
pp. 257–294, 2005.
[67] Y. Lu and K. Ramamurthy, “Understanding the link between information
technology capability and organizational agility: An empirical examina-
tion,” MIS Quart. , vol. 35, pp. 931–954, 2011.
[68] S. Faraj and L. Sproull, “Coordinating expertise in software development
teams,” Manage. Sci. , vol. 46, pp. 1554–1568, 2000.
[69] K. K. Kim, N. S. Umanath, and B. H. Kim, “An assessment of electronic
information transfer in B2B supply-channel relationships,” J. Manage. Inf.
Syst., vol. 22, pp. 294–320, 2005.
[70] F. Salvador, A. Chandrasekaran, and T. Sohail, “Product conﬁguration,
ambidexterity and ﬁrm performance in the context of industrial equipment
manufacturing,” J. Oper. Manage. , vol. 32, pp. 138–153, 2014.
[71] J. A. Shaffer, D. DeGeest, and A. Li, “Tackling the problem of construct
proliferation: A guide to assessing the discriminant validity of conceptually
related constructs,” Org. Res. Methods , vol. 19, pp. 80–110, 2016.
[72] M. W. Browne, R. C. MacCallum, C.-T. Kim, B. L. Andersen, and
R. Glaser, “When ﬁt indices and residuals are incompatible,” Psychol.
Methods , vol. 7, pp. 403–421, 2002.
[73] T. A. Carte and C. J. Russell, “In pursuit of moderation: Nine common
errors and their solutions,” MIS Quart. , vol. 27, pp. 479–501, 2003.
[74] C.-W. Sheng, Y.-F. Tian, and M.-C. Chen, “Relationships among teamwork
behavior, trust, perceived team support, and team commitment,” Social
Behav. Personality: Int. J. , vol. 38, pp. 1297–1305, 2010.
[75] L. A. DeChurch and S. J. Zaccaro, “Perspectives: Teams won’t solve this
problem,” Hum. Factors , vol. 52, pp. 329–334, 2010.
[76] C. Xiang, Z. Yang, and L. Zhang, “Improving IS development teams’
performance during requirement analysis in project—The perspectives
from shared mental model and emotional intelligence,” Int. J. Project
Manage. , vol. 34, pp. 1266–1279, 2016.
[77] C. M. Santos, S. Uitdewilligen, and A. M. Passos, “Why is your team more
creative than mine? The inﬂuence of shared mental models on intra-group
conﬂict, team creativity and effectiveness,” Creativity Innov. Manage. ,
vol. 24, pp. 645–658, 2015.[78] M. A. Marks, S. J. Zaccaro, and J. E. Mathieu, “Performance implications
of leader brieﬁngs and team-interaction training for team adaptation to
novel environments,” J. Appl. Psychol. , vol. 85, pp. 971–986, 2000.
[79] B. C. Lim and K. J. Klein, “Team mental models and team performance:
A ﬁeld study of the effects of team mental model similarity and accuracy,”
J. Org. Behav. , vol. 27, pp. 403–418, 2006.
[80] P. R. Carlile, “Transferring, translating, and transforming: An integrative
framework for managing knowledge across boundaries,” Org. Sci. , vol. 15,
pp. 555–568, 2004.
Yang Lei received the Ph.D. degree in decision sci-
ences and managerial economics from The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, in 2019.
He is currently an Assistant Professor with the
Department of Information Systems and Manage-
ment Engineering, College of Business, Southern
University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen,
China. He has authored or coauthored six papers. His
research interests include supply chain management
and project management.
Dr. Lei has numerous publications in journal, in-
cluding Information and Management, Decision Support Systems, International
Journal of Operations and Production Management, etc .
Xiaosong Wu received the Ph.D. degree in manage-
ment science and engineering from the Xi’an Jiaotong
University, Xi’an, China, in 2021.
He is currently an Assistant Research Fellow with
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School,
Shenzhen, China. He has authored/coauthored in In-
ternational Journal of Operations and Production
Management, Journal of Management Science and
Engineering, Industrial Management and Data Sys-
tems, Journal of Computer Information Systems, and
Information Systems Management . His research in-
terests include complex IT/IS project management and IT-enabled or digital
transformation program management.
James Jiang received the Ph.D. degree in informa-
tion management from the University of Cincinnati,
Cincinnati, OH, USA, in 1992.
He is currently a Professor of Management with
National Taiwan University (NTU), Taipei, Taiwan.
Prior to join NTU, in 2013, he was the Research
Professor with IS, University of Central Florida,
Orlando, FL, USA and a Distinguished Professor
with Australian National University, Canberra, ACT,
Australia for more than two decades. He has au-
thored/coauthored more than 200 refereed journal
articles with more than 12 517 citations ( H-index=62). His research interests
include IS project/program/portfolio management.
Prof. Jiang has serviced as a Senior Editor of MIS Quarterly and Journal
of Association of Information Systems . He is currently the Editor-in-Chief of
Paciﬁc Asia Journal of the Association for Information Systems . He was the
inaugural recipient of the NTU Fu-Bon Endowed Professorship and the Out-
standing Scholar Chair Professorship for the Foundation for the Advancement
of Outstanding Scholarship.
Authorized licensed use limited to: University College London. Downloaded on May 30,2026 at 09:56:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 