--- PAGE 1 ---
THE COMPETENT BOUNDARY SPANNER
PAUL WILLIAMS
Inter-organizational frameworks of intervention dominate the resolution of complex
societal problems facing the UK and many other countries. Strategic alliances, joint
working arrangements, networks, partnerships and many other forms of collabor-ation across sectoral and organizational boundaries currently proliferate across the
policy landscape. However, the discourse is positioned at an institutional and
organizational level, and comparatively little attention is accorded to the pivotal
role of individual actors in the management of inter-organizational relationships.
This paper attempts to redress this balance by focusing on the skills, competencies
and behaviour of boundary spanners. A critical review of the relevant literature,
both from an institutional and relational perspective, is undertaken. This is comp-
lemented by some new empirical research that involves an engagement with groups
of particular types of boundary spanner using a combination of surveys and in-
depth interviews. Finally, a discussion makes connections between the existing
literature and the research ﬁndings and offers suggestions for future areas of
enquiry.
INTRODUCTION
This paper explores the major factors that inﬂuence the effective collabor-
ative behaviour and competence of key agents managing within inter-organizational theatres – the boundary spanners. The discussion is framedwithin the UK public policy context where the persistence of a number of
complex problems is being tackled through partnership and collaborative
interventions. A critical review of the disparate and cross-disciplinaryliterature, both institutional and relational, is examined and used to explorea range of perspectives, themes, concepts and models that help to illuminatethe behaviour patterns and competency proﬁles of practising boundaryspanners.
This is followed by a detailed account of the research ﬁndings of a study
that is aimed at identifying and understanding the competency frameworkfor boundary spanners including the bundle of skills, abilities and personalcharacteristics that contribute to effective inter-organizational behaviour.Prominent in the emerging framework are the building and sustaining ofrelationships, managing within non-hierarchical environments, managing
complexity and understanding motives, roles and responsibilities. The
paper concludes with a discussion about areas for future research.
Paul Williams is Senior Research Fellow in the National Centre for Public Policy, University of
Wales Swansea.
Public Administration Vol. 80 No. 1, 2002 (103–124)Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2002, 108 Cowley Road, Oxford OX4 1JF, UK and 350 Main Street,
Malden, MA 02148, USA.

--- PAGE 2 ---
104 PAUL WILLIAMS
THE MORPHOLOGY OF PUBLIC POLICY PROBLEMS
The public policy landscape is characterized by a host of complex and seem-
ingly intractable problems and issues –community safety, poverty, social
inclusion, health inequalities, teenage pregnancies, urban regeneration,substance misuse, climate change and homelessness –an ever growing and
assorted list of community concerns. Such issues have been referred to as
‘wicked ’because they ‘defy efforts to delineate their boundaries and to
identify their causes, and thus to expose their problematic nature ’(Rittel
and Webber 1973, p. 167); Trist (1983) simply sees them as ‘messes ’.‘Wicked
issues ’appear to possess a number of inherent properties:
•They bridge and permeate jurisdictional, organizational, functional,
professional and generational boundaries. They are often capable ofmetamorphosis and of becoming entangled in a web of other problemscreating a kind of dense and complicated policy swamp.
•They are socially constructed because the conceptualization, causes and
analysis of problem structures are a function of the unique perspective
or gaze of individual stakeholders, of which there are many in dense
policy spaces such as with health, poverty or social disadvantage.Schon (1987) and Stone (1997) refer to the act of ‘framing ’because
‘depending on our disciplinary backgrounds, organizational roles, past
histories, interests, and political/economic perspectives, we frame
problematic situations in different ways ’(Schon 1987, p. 4). In addition,
the ripple effect of interdependent problems often makes it dif ﬁcult to
disentangle root causes, and even trace many policy outcomes back tospeci ﬁc interventions despite the current penchant for evidence-
based practice.
•Wicked issues are not amenable to optimal solutions. Many are not
entirely solved or remain intractable and real progress is dependent
on systemic change not short-term ﬁxes.
•Finally, this kind of problem does not ‘yield readily to single efforts
and is beyond the capacity of any one agency or jurisdiction ’(Luke
1998, p. 19).
It is instructive to frame an understanding of ‘wicked issues ’in the langu-
age and thinking of non-linear theories such as complexity and chaostheories developed in the physical sciences. Complex social problems suchas crime or health inequality are not amenable to linear thinking whichassume a simple relationship between inputs and outcomes. On the con-trary, relationships are non-linear. Outcomes are dif ﬁcult or impossible to
predict; responses can be disjointed from causes and a change in the causal
agent does not necessarily elicit a proportional change in some variable itaffects. It may elicit no response, a dramatic response or a response at cer-tain levels of cause. The metaphors of complexity theory –strange attrac-
tors, birfurcation, edge of chaos and possibility space –may offer useful
Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2002
 14679299, 2002, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-9299.00296 by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

--- PAGE 3 ---
THE COMPETENT BOUNDARY SPANNER 105
ways of exploring and understanding complex societal problems in the
future.
ORGANIZATIONAL FORMS
Assuming that a large number of problems presenting themselves in the
public policy arena in Britain today bear a close resemblance to the charac-
teristics of a ‘wicked issue ’, it is appropriate to consider the best form of
managerial and organizational response necessary for their treatment. Iargue that a postmodern rather than a classical form of organization is morelikely to be in tune with this particular policy challenge for reasons thatare summarized in table 1. Firstly, given that the problems are cross-bound-
ary in nature, the focus of organizational action needs to move from a pre-
occupation with intra-organizational imperatives more to a commitmentto the building of inter-organizational capacity. Secondly, thinking about‘wicked issues ’requires a language that re ﬂects relationships, intercon-
nections and interdependencies –holistic thinking. This is not the prevail-
ing discourse of classical organizations that are underpinned by notions of
rationality, linear thinking, task differentiation and functionalism. Bureau-
cratic forms of organization which champion the virtues of rationality, pro-fessionalism and compartmentalism are anathema to the challenge of inter-dependencies. Forms of organization and governance that are designedaround collaboration, partnership and networking appear to be more suit-able for the task.
Inter-organizational capacity is unlikely to ﬂourish in organizational
structures that are based on hierarchical control and power. New capacitiesare needed to manage con ﬂict, inter-personal behaviour and fragmented
and contested power relations. Within the realms of inter-agency activity,where ‘organizational sovereignty loses credibility and conviction ’(Clegg
1990, p. 19), decision-making models must re ﬂect consensus formation and
trust building. Dif ﬁcult problems invite new ways of working and thinking,
and whereas ‘most people will come to this trapped or constrained by con-
TABLE 1 Modern and postmodern forms of organization
Modern Postmodern
Domain Intra-organizational Inter-organizational
Metaphor Mechanistic SystemsForm of government Administration Governance
Form of organization Bureaucratic Networking, collaboration,
partnership
Conceptualization Differentiation; tasks and Interdependencies
functions
Decision-making framework Hierarchy and rules Negotiation and consensus
Competency Skills-based professional Relational
Solutions Optimal Experimentation, innovation,
reﬂection
Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2002
 14679299, 2002, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-9299.00296 by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

--- PAGE 4 ---
106 PAUL WILLIAMS
ventional organizations, labels and assumptions, what is needed is a will-
ingness to entertain the unconventional and pursue the radical ’(Clarke and
Stewart 1997, p. 5). A presumption towards innovation, experimentation,risk taking and entrepreneurship is welcome in the battle against complexproblems, in contrast to the preoccupation with ﬁnding a single ‘right ’sol-
ution.
Finally, the skills and competency pro ﬁle of individuals who are focused
on the management of interdependencies will not be professional or knowl-edge-based, but rely more on relational and inter-personal attributesdesigned to build social capital. They will build cultures of trust, improvelevels of cognitive ability to understand complexity and be able to operate
within non-hierarchical environments with dispersed con ﬁgurations of
power relationships.
THE HEGEMONY OF ‘JOINED-UP’ GOVERNANCE
The New Labour government in Britain has embraced the analysis of
‘wicked issues ’with some alacrity and grounded many of its public policy
interventions on holistic planning, joined-up government and cross-cutting
approaches. An emerging inter-organizational hegemony is promulgatedand manifested in terms of multi-agency, multi-disciplinary and cross-boundary programmes across the policy spectrum. A ﬂood of new initiat-
ives bears witness to this approach –Health, Education and Employment
Action Zones, New Deal for Communities, City Challenge, Local Strategic
Partnerships and many more. One commentator refers to a condition of
‘initiativitis ’(Fitzpatrick 1999, p. xiii) to describe this type of policy making.
However, it seems that the prevailing policy discourse at both a theoreti-
cal and empirical level is quite often con ﬁned to a narrow discussion of the
effectiveness and sustainability of new inter-organizational structures and
mechanisms. I argue that this ﬁxation at the organizational and inter-
organizational domain levels understates and neglects the pivotal contri-bution of individual actors in the collaborative process. The research andanalysis that follows argues that the effectiveness and success of inter-organizational ventures rests equally with the people involved in theprocess and their ability to apply collaborative skills and mind-sets to the
resolution or amelioration of complex problems. I am supported in this
view by other researchers. Poxton, re ﬂecting on the experiences of primary
health and social care partnerships, concludes ‘a new policy environment
and new organizational arrangements should make co-operation and col-laboration easier than it has been in the past. But real success will dependas much on the determination and creativity of practitioners and managers
as it will on Government edict and structural change ’(Poxton 1999, p. 3).
Bardach, also, maintains that it is ‘clear that whatever else might help
explain success in the collaborative process, the efforts and creativity ofwhat I call purposive practitioners is an essential explanatory ingredient ’
(Bardach 1998, p. 6).
Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2002
 14679299, 2002, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-9299.00296 by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

--- PAGE 5 ---
THE COMPETENT BOUNDARY SPANNER 107
A mixture of ﬂamboyant and insightful descriptions are sometimes
ascribed to people who manage across boundaries including networker,broker, collaborator, cupid, civic entrepreneur, boundroid, sparkplug, colla-bronaut and boundary spanner (Thompson 1967). Some occupy designatedboundary spanning or cross-cutting posts such as health promotion man-agers, anti-poverty of ﬁcers, community safety co-ordinators and the like.
The majority of people are employed in mainstream jobs in which the par-
ticipation in collaborative exchanges with people in other agencies andorganizations is increasingly important to the realization of their own per-sonal or organizational objectives.
However, the literature is not particularly forthcoming on the nature,
characteristics and behaviour of these boundary spanners. The emphasis is
rather more on managing within organizations as well as on the develop-ment of professional expertise.
THEORIES OF INTER-ORGANIZATIONAL RELATIONS
Although this paper has a micro-level focus, a consideration of inter-
organizational theorizing at an institutional level is warranted and instruc-
tive as it offers perspectives and hints to behaviour patterns relevant to therole of individual actors in the collaborative process. There is no consoli-dated body of inter-organizational theory and a ‘striking characteristic of
research on inter-organizational relations is the astonishing variety of disci-plines, research paradigms, theoretical perspectives and sectoral focuses
within which it is researched ’(Huxham and Vangen 1998, p. 1). The litera-
ture too is characterized by ‘a cacophony of heterogeneous concepts,
theories, and research results ’(Oliver and Ebers 1998, p. 549). However,
Grandori (1997) detects the prevalence of economic and sociological macro-analytical approaches to the subject.
Oliver and Ebers (1998) attempt to identify ‘structural beacons in the
messy landscape of inter-organizational research ’through a review of the
pertinent literature. They conclude that resource dependency and networkmodels dominate the theoretical approaches, while considerations of powerand control prevail with regard to outcomes. They emphasize the predomi-nance of motivation and interaction in the processes linking antecedents
with outcomes. In the case of inter-organizational network research, they
ﬁnd that the theoretical stances are polarized between a social network per-
spective, which looks at the structural properties of networks, and a govern-ance perspective that focuses on ‘attributes of both the networked actors
and the form and content of their relationships within a particular insti-tutional context ’(Oliver and Ebers 1998, p. 569).
Grandori (1998) suggests that inter ﬁrm co-ordination modes can be
explained by the core variables of task complexity, environmental un-certainty, task-related competence, behavioural trustworthiness, task inter-dependence and resource interdependencies. Oliver (1990), on the otherhand, lists the critical contingencies of relationship forming as asymmetry,
Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2002
 14679299, 2002, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-9299.00296 by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

--- PAGE 6 ---
108 PAUL WILLIAMS
reciprocity, ef ﬁciency, stability and legitimacy. Ebers (1997) contrasts Inter-
organizational networks with other form of organizing such as markets andﬁrms. They ‘institutionize recurring, partner-speci ﬁc exchange relationships
ofﬁnite duration (often based on goal accomplishment) or of unspeci ﬁed
duration among a limited number of actors ’(Ebers 1997, p. 21); actors
within them individually retain residual control over resources but some-
times jointly decide on their use; processes of negotiation are used to co-
ordinate resource allocation decisions, and a wide range of information isshared between organizations.
The network metaphor is a highly integrative mechanism between differ-
ent levels of analysis and Ebers (1997) identi ﬁes three types of micro-level
ties that represent key core concepts:
1. resource ﬂow and activity links;
2. information ﬂows, especially to address issues of complexity and
uncertainty. The role of catalysts or informational intermediaries isconsidered to be highly in ﬂuential in shaping and facilitating network
form because they act as brokers to allow information symmetry and
‘as mutually trusted lynchpins between social groups, human catalysts
can bridge and help overcome informational asymmetries, establish acommon set of expectations, and facilitate goal adjustment ’(Ebers
1997, p. 31); foster co-operation and exchange; act as neutral arbitratorsin con ﬂict resolution; and reduce communication costs and uncer-
tainty. The role played by catalysts is also associated with innovation
and entrepreneurship because of a greater access to external part-nering, critical resources and information (Dodgson 1994; Ahuja 2000);
3. mutual expectations between actors, particularly trust.
Managing within networks occupies the focus of a number of researchers
(Kickert and Koppenjan 1997; O ’Toole et al . 1997) and is described as
‘promoting the mutual adjustment of the behaviour of actors with diverse
objectives and ambitions with regard to tackling problems within a givenframework of interorganizational relationships ’(Kickert and Koppenjan
1997, p. 44). The major activities include intervening/restructuring networkrelations, joint problem solving and negotiating integrative strategies. Game
management strategies such as brokering and facilitation are much in evi-
dence. O ’Toole et al. (1997) highlight the demands of network management
at different phases of the policy-making process. Although there may besimilarities with other stages, they suggest that the implementation phaseis characterized by managing across and through different functional net-works; working in a multi-party and multi-level environment and under-
standing the complexity of assembling all the pieces of the implementation
jigsaw. This entails a very focused and problem-solving mode of engage-ment.
Some models of inter-organizational relationships present a typology of
different structural forms (Alter and Hage 1993) and others visualize this
Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2002
 14679299, 2002, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-9299.00296 by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

--- PAGE 7 ---
THE COMPETENT BOUNDARY SPANNER 109
type of activity unidimensionally along a continuum of varying degrees of
sophistication from co-operation to collaboration, re ﬂecting the changes in
the intensity of the interaction and the magnitude of the recon ﬁguration of
power relationships (Taylor 2000; Mattesich and Monsey 1994; Hudson1998; Pratt et al. 1999).
Much of the research focus on inter-organizational relations is on
motives, contingencies and structures and less on processes. An exception
to this is theories that map joint working in terms of a sequence of de ﬁned
stages or phases. Gray (1989) proposes a 3-stage model –problem setting,
direction setting and implementation –using this approach, and Lowndes
and Skelcher (1998) refer to a four-stage life cycle of partnerships. Ring and
Van de Ven (1994) propose a cyclical model of network development that
emphasizes socio-psychological factors as much as managerial pro-ﬁciencies. It may be that a different set of boundary spanning skills and
styles are appropriate for different stages as is suggested by Snow andThomas (1993) with phase-speci ﬁc broker roles. A ﬁnal approach centres
on the identi ﬁcation of particular factors, barriers or conditions that are
inﬂuential in determining the success or failure of collaborative encoun-
ters –critical performance factors such as shared vision, communication,
teamwork and so on. Huxham and Vangen (1999) prefer to concentrate onthe key themes in collaborative practice such as trust, leadership, account-ability and power, some of which are process-orientated and others thatare structural in nature such as ambiguity, complexity and dynamics.
PROFILING BOUNDARY SPANNERS
The literature on boundary spanners is by no means extensive or consoli-
dated. However, it is possible to identify a number of themes and perspec-tives that permeate the research that is available from a number of different
disciplines and traditions.
The boundary spanner as reticulist
Friend et al. (1974) identify a cluster of reticulist or networking skills and
judgements and emphasize the importance of cultivating inter-personalrelationships, communication, political skills and an appreciation of the
interdependencies around the structure of problems and their potential sol-
utions. Webb refers to individuals ‘who are especially sensitive to and
skilled in bridging interests, professions and organizations ’(Webb 1991,
p. 231), and Degeling (1995) sees reticulists as ‘entrepreneurs of power ’who
understand coupling, interdependencies and ﬁssures in strategically located
players. Trist visualizes them as facilitating communication over ‘social
ground rather than between institutionalised ﬁgures ’(Trist 1983, p. 280),
although a knowledge of how to operate within the formal organizationalsystem is equally essential. One report refers to ‘special ’people in networks
who play a role in ‘bringing unlikely partners together, in breaking through
red tape, and seeing things in a different way ’(LGMB 1997, p. 10).
Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2002
 14679299, 2002, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-9299.00296 by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

--- PAGE 8 ---
110 PAUL WILLIAMS
Hosking and Morley (1991) summarize the functions of networking as
gaining information, achieving in ﬂuence to help implement the actor ’s
agenda and to exchange with others, co-operation and resources. Effectivenetworking enables a boundary spanner to understand the social construc-tions of other actors, and how they ‘deﬁne the issue in relation to their own
values and interests, knows what “outcomes ”and processes each would
value, knows who needs to be involved, knows who could mobilize in ﬂu-
ence, and so on ’(Hoskins and Morley 1991, p. 228). It is the basis for suc-
cessful negotiation.
Networking takes place through inter-personal relationships and this can
result in a blurring of professional and personal relationships. Some
research (LGMB 1997; Ring and Van de Ven 1994) views this process of
social bonding as a positive feature in terms of sharing values, gaining trustand so on. An opposite view (LGMB 1997) warns of the potential downsideof informality and an over-reliance on personal relationships, the tensionsof multiple accountabilities, the inherent fragility of personal relationshipsand the negative effects of the formation of cliques.
The boundary spanner as entrepreneur and innovator
Complex public policy problems tend not to be amenable to tired tra-ditional or conventional approaches. Their resolution demands new ideas,creativity, lateral thinking and an ‘unlearning ’of professional and organiza-
tional conventions and norms. The entrepreneurial and innovative
capacities of boundary spanners are emphasized by Challis (1988) who
highlights the de ﬁning characteristic of ﬂexibility, and Leadbeater and Goss
who refer to ‘civic entrepreneurs ’as‘creative, lateral thinking rule-breakers
who frequently combine a capacity for visionary thinking with an appetitefor opportunism ’(Leadbeater and Goss 1998, p. 15). Similarly, deLeon
evokes the image of public entrepreneurs as mavericks or ‘catalysts who
bring together problems and solutions that otherwise would bubble chaot-ically in the conventional currents of modern policy streams ’(deLeon 1996,
p. 508). Kingdon (1984), also, underlines the importance of ‘policy
entrepreneurs ’who are skilled at coupling problems, policies and politics,
particularly opportunistically in response to opening ‘policy windows ’.
The boundary spanner and otherness
Boundary spanners are characterized by their ability to engage with othersand deploy effective relational and interpersonal competencies. This is mot-ivated by a need to acquire an understanding of people and organizationsoutside their own circles –to acknowledge and value difference in terms
of culture, mind-set, profession, role and ‘gaze ’. Trevillion views boundary
spanners as ‘cultural brokers ’who need to understand anothers ’organiza-
tion and to ‘make a real effort to empathize with, and respect anothers ’
values and perspectives ’(Trevillion 1991, p. 50); Engel concludes that,
because much interorganizational activity takes place in teams, the people
Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2002
 14679299, 2002, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-9299.00296 by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

--- PAGE 9 ---
THE COMPETENT BOUNDARY SPANNER 111
involved need to practice empathy and that ‘communication underpins and
permeates the entire construct of capability for collaboration ’(Engel 1994,
p. 71); and Hornby alights on the notion of ‘reciprocity ’which she considers
is manifested ’in respect and concern for the individual, gives value to mut-
ual understanding and the building of mutual trust ’(Hornby 1993, p. 160).
The dynamics and dilemmas of support relationships in boundary manage-
ment is considered to be a dif ﬁcult because boundary spanners ‘must be
adept at breaking down boundaries between themselves and recipients tolisten empathetically and build trust; they also need to enforce boundariesto protect themselves from enmeshment with the recipient ’s problems ’
(Bacharach et al ., 2000, p. 706). This is a balancing act between inclusion
and separation, dependence and autonomy.
The boundary spanner and trust
Trust is often isolated as one of the most important factors to in ﬂuence the
course of interorganizational relations. Webb is forthright in his assertionthat ‘trust is pivotal to collaboration. Attitudes of mistrust and suspicion are
a primary barrier to co-operation between organizations and professional
boundaries: collaborative behaviour is hardly conceivable where trustingattitudes are absent ’(Webb 1991, p. 237), and ‘trust is thought to be a more
appropriate mechanism for controlling organizational life than hierarchicalpower ’(Sydow 1998, p. 31). It is a highly contested notion that is the subject
of a substantial body of theory from a variety of disciplines (Giddens 1991;
Lane 1998; Boon 1994; Lewicki and Bunker 1996; Cummings and Bromily
1996; Das and Teng 2001).
Various models of trust implicate the concept with faith, predictability,
goodwill and risk taking. Others suggest that it can be derived from calcu-lation, value and norms or common cognition. Bachmann (2001) refers to
trust as a mechanism for coping with uncertainty and complexity, and there
are theories that position trust at both a personal and system level. Bach-mann (2001) is also anxious to stress the relationship between trust andcontrol, both being mechanisms for co-ordinating social interactions. Simi-larly, Hardy et al. distinguish between real and simulated trust, and attempt
to disentangle the two heavily loaded notions of trust and power. They
suggest that most functional interpretations of trust ‘ignore the fact that
power can be hidden behind a fac ¸ade of “trust ”and a rhetoric of “collabor-
ation ”and can be used to promote vested interests through the manipu-
lation and capitulation of weaker parties ’(Hardy et al. 1998, p. 65). Newell
and Swan (2000) submit that different types of trust interrelate in particularways depending on the motives holding actors together in a network.
Lastly, from a practical point of view, there is an important question to be
resolved in relation to the building and sustaining of trust. Vangen andHuxham single out expectation forming and risk taking as the main deter-minants of a model that envisages a cyclic process because ‘each time part-
ners act together they take a risk and form expectations about the intended
Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2002
 14679299, 2002, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-9299.00296 by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

--- PAGE 10 ---
112 PAUL WILLIAMS
outcome and the way others will contribute to achieving it. Each time an
outcome meets expectations, trusting attitudes are reinforced. The outcomebecomes part of the history of the relationship, so increasing the chancethat partners will have positive expectations about joint actions in thefuture ’(Vangen and Huxham 1998, p. 8).
The boundary spanner and personality
The literature is peppered with innumerable references to the personalities,character, traits and disposition of boundary spanners. There are sugges-tions that they are personable, respectful, reliable, tolerant, diplomatic, car-ing and committed –to name but a few. Faitlough (1994) writes that ‘diplo-
macy, tact, dispassionate analysis, passionate sincerity, scrupulous honesty;
the boundary spanner needs an impossible string of virtues ’, and Beresford
and Trevillion (1995) consider that collaborative values to be characterizedby honesty, commitment and reliability. The proposition is, perhaps, thatgood collaborative behaviour is a function of particular personal attributes –
an assumption that is grounded in the personality school of thought which
argues that people are different because of de ﬁning characteristics, person-
alities or temperaments (Eysenck 1994).
Unfortunately, trait theories are found to be poor predictors of behaviour,
and a second school of thought associated with cognitive psychology inter-prets individual differences in terms of different cognitive styles and pro-cesses (Brunas-Wagstaff 1998). The signi ﬁcance of personality remains a
highly contested intellectual domain and the question, ‘is an effective
boundary spanner born and not bred ’, will continue to attract keen debate.
The boundary spanner as leader
The boundary spanning challenge impinges signi ﬁcantly on leadership
styles. Luke (1998) offers a critical comparison of leadership styles between
traditional and collaboratively inclined organizations and this is illustratedin table 2. The sovereign and charismatic leader, who enthuses ﬁrm and
TABLE 2 Contrasts between modern and postmodern styles of leadership (after Luke
1998)
Modern leadership Postmodern leadership
Hierarchical Non hierarchical and inter-organizational
Evokes followership Evokes collaboration and concerted actionTakes charge; seizes the reins of an Provides the necessary catalyst or spark for
organization action
Takes responsibility for moving followers in Takes responsibility for conveningcertain directions stakeholders and facilitates agreements for
collective action
Heroic; provides the right answers Facilitative; asks the right questions
Has a stake in a particular solution or Has a stake in getting to agreed-upon
strategy outcomes, but encourages divergent ways to
reach them.
Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2002
 14679299, 2002, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-9299.00296 by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

--- PAGE 11 ---
THE COMPETENT BOUNDARY SPANNER 113
directive leadership, is sharply contrasted with a more facilitative and cata-
lytic approach displayed by leaders in partnership arenas. He identi ﬁes
certain foundational skills that are essential for ‘catalytic leaders ’–these
are thinking and acting strategically, interpersonal skills for facilitating aproductive working group or network, and underlying character. Kanter(1995), also, pro ﬁles cosmopolitan leaders of the future as integrators, diplo-
mats, cross-fertilizers and deep-thinkers.
The preoccupation of the New Labour government in Britain, with
joined-up approaches to policy making, has spawned a number of reportsand studies that refer to individual skills and competencies. One govern-ment report concludes that civil servants need to be better at working across
organizational boundaries and ‘alter their mindsets from a culture of tribal
competitiveness to one of partnership ’(Cabinet Of ﬁce 2000, p. 42). This
report also advocates the promotion of ‘culture-breakers ’to act as catalysts
for cross-cutting behaviour. Another report judges that in local government‘new skills and capacities are essential, particularly strategic capacities, and
skills in listening, negotiation, leadership through in ﬂuence, partnership
working, performance management and evaluation ’(DETR, 2000, p. 7).
Capacity building is considered to be especially important, as are brokering,networking, resource packaging and building trust. Finally, Jupp (2000)addresses the neglected issue of training and development in partnershipworking. He notes that, traditionally, management training is concentratedaround managing in hierarchical situations and more recently, in managing
contracts. In contrast, the emphasis should now move to developing key
partnership skills such as brokerage, facilitation, negotiation and co-ordination and project management.
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
New empirical research has been undertaken by the author to explore the
management of interdependencies inherent in collaborative and networkedforms of governance. This research set out to identify, describe, categorizeand understand boundary spanning competencies and effective collabor-ative behaviour. The ﬁeldwork and data collection consists of two inter-
connected phases (table 3). Phase 1 is directed to an initial identi ﬁcation and
categorization of boundary spanning competencies together with a short
attitudinal investigation. The concept of ‘competency ’, which is often used
promiscuously (Sandberg 2000), in this context, is taken to mean, ‘an under-
lying characteristic of a person in that it may be a motive, trait, skill, aspectof one ’s self-image or social role, or a body of knowledge which he or she
uses ’(Boyatzis 1982, p. 21).
To start with, surveys of three types of boundary spanner operating in
different policy areas –health promotion specialists, crime and community
safety co-ordinators and environmental and local agenda 21 co-ordinators –
were undertaken using postal questionnaires. They were selected opportun-istically through personal contact between the author and three national
Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2002
 14679299, 2002, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-9299.00296 by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

--- PAGE 12 ---
114 PAUL WILLIAMS
TABLE 3 Details of ﬁeldwork
Phase 1 Phase 2
Geographical area UK Wales Wales Welsh local authority area
Sample Environmental & Crime & Health promotion Partnership managers
local Agenda 21 community safety specialistsco-ordinators co-ordinators
Type of Local authority Local authority Health authority Local authority; Health
organization and NHS Trust authority; NHS Trust; Police;
Voluntary sector; Probation
service; Youth offending
partnership
Research method Postal survey Postal survey Postal survey In-depth interviewsSampling method Opportunistic Opportunistic Opportunistic SnowballSample size 469 22 10 15Response rate (%) 50 54 100 100
networks. This enabled effective access to individual contacts and a poten-
tially enhanced response rate. The policy framework and institutional con-texts for all three samples was comparable, involving managing across tra-ditional boundaries and tackling complex problems within a variety of
multi-agency initiatives.
Phase 2 sharpened the focus of the research with a more intensive
exploration and understanding of the potential determinants of effectiveboundary spanning framed within a particular geographical area. The areaselected was a unitary local authority in South Wales within which a variety
of different agencies were collaborating across a range of policy areas. The
policy and governmental context was broadly similar to that in other localauthority areas throughout the UK where partnership working is high onthe political agenda. A sample of boundary spanners operating at a strategiclevel was chosen for interview using personal contacts in the study area toidentify the main actors managing in multi-agency partnerships addressing
key problem areas –health, social care, crime and young people. The ﬁnd-
ings from Phase 1 were used to inform the topic guide for a series of in-depth and semi-structured interviews. Topics covered included motivationsfor partnership working; the management of boundary spanning roles; per-sonal skills and competencies for collaborative working; evidencing effec-tiveness through critical incidents; barriers and problems in cross-boundary
activity; and training and development.
THE ART OF BOUNDARY SPANNING
The research ﬁndings indicate that, as far as boundary spanners are con-
cerned, there are a number of key factors and in ﬂuences implicated in effec-
Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2002
 14679299, 2002, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-9299.00296 by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

--- PAGE 13 ---
THE COMPETENT BOUNDARY SPANNER 115
tive collaborative working, and they involve the use of particular skills,
abilities, experience and personal characteristics. It is particularly evident,also, that there is considerable overlap and interdependency between thevarious factors and individual variables, and typically, they are deployedin different permutations depending on particular circumstances.
Building sustainable relationships
A necessary part of interorganizational working involves building and sus-taining effective personal relationships. Collaborative encounters involvethe management of difference. People from a variety of organizational, pro-fessional and social backgrounds assemble to pursue mutually bene ﬁcial
agendas, and this demands an investment in time to forge an effective
working relationship and a readiness to visualize reality from the perspec-tive of others. The development of interpersonal relationships is part ofa process of exploration, discovery and understanding of people and theorganizations they represent –a search for knowledge about roles, responsi-
bilities, problems, accountabilities, cultures, professional norms and stan-
dards, aspirations and underlying values. The quality of this information
is invaluable in allowing boundary spanners to identify potential areas ofcommunality and interdependency. The medium for this process of enquiryand knowledge exchange is the quality and durability of personal relation-ships. The respondents to the research draw particular attention to a num-ber of factors in this process.
Communicating and listening
The value of basic and effective oral, written and presentational communi-cation skills cannot be overestimated. The ability to express oneself, andone’s position with clarity, is considered to be essential, as is the choice and
use of language. The problem associated with the use and interpretation of
‘professional ’languages and jargon is recognized as an area in need of
sensitive management in order not to undermine, patronize, mislead orgive offence to others. The search for shared meanings is particularly acutein partnership arenas. Communication is also a two-way process andreceiving information –listening –is considered as important as infor-
mation giving. References are made to ‘active listening ’which is expressed
as a willingness or openness to be in ﬂuenced by the views of other people.
Understanding, empathizing and resolving con ﬂict
Relationship building is described as a process that occurs over time –an
interaction that seeks to illuminate the perspectives, roles, problems, pri-orities, motivations, styles and values of prospective partners. One view is
that this must involve a balance between how much to invest in the per-
sonal as opposed to the strictly work relationship. Time is clearly a signi ﬁ-
cant factor here, as is regular exposure to, and engagement with, partners.It is also felt that a state of understanding can proceed to a higher, andpotentially more rewarding level, the condition known as empathy. How-
Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2002
 14679299, 2002, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-9299.00296 by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

--- PAGE 14 ---
116 PAUL WILLIAMS
ever, it is accepted that, notwithstanding the potential bene ﬁts of this end
state, a working relationship can still be maintained at a lower level of‘understanding ’. The acid test of a robust relationship is considered to be
the ability to manage con ﬂict and criticism –the potential to disagree and
fallout, but a willingness to move on without harming the relationship.
Personality
The conversations with boundary spanners around building and sustainingrelationships inevitably invite references to de ﬁning personality traits,
characteristics and personal values. Respect, honesty, openness, tolerance,approachability, reliability, sensitivity and many others are viewed as desir-able qualities, and the ‘best’boundary spanners are considered to be those
with an easy and inviting personality, particularly those who are able to
divest themselves of their organizational and professional baggage.
Trust
Not surprisingly, trust is raised as a key variable within exchange relation-ships, acting as a kind of currency or lubricant. The study con ﬁrms the
conclusion of the literature review that the notion has no universally agreed
meaning and, moreover, is often taken for granted and internalized. How-ever, there is consensus that trust must underpin effective relationships atboth an individual and organizational level. A number of meanings areattributed to the notion, including that it entails a reciprocal risk-takinginvolving the giving and receiving of information not widely accessible in
the public domain. The risk is, that if the person entrusted with this
information misuses it, then some harm could befall the informant. It isconceptualized as a process of ‘opening-up ’or exposing oneself, and of
dependency testing. If it passes the tests of reliability, delivering on prom-ises, not being underhand and being honest, the relationship moves on to
a possibly more enduring state of ‘deep trust ’. This description of trust is
very indicative of the calculative model referred to in the literature. Othercomments suggest that individuals approach trust in one of two ways.Either by assuming that people are trustworthy from the outset and pro-ceeding accordingly or, believing that people are naturally guarded andeven devious, and testing whether this proves to be a self-ful ﬁlling proph-
esy.
Trust is considered essentially to be a condition that is constituted in the
relationship between individuals, although by implication and on the basisof the aggregated behaviour of individuals representing it, organizationscan acquire a reputation for being more or less trustworthy. This evidencesthe dif ﬁculty of disentangling personal from institutionalized forms of trust.
Managing through inﬂuencing and negotiation
Collaborative environments are characterized by power relationships thatare more contested and dispersed than is often the case in traditionalbureaucracies where power, authority and control over resources are often
Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2002
 14679299, 2002, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-9299.00296 by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

--- PAGE 15 ---
THE COMPETENT BOUNDARY SPANNER 117
exercised by individuals drawing on their position and status in the hier-
archy. There is an acute awareness amongst the boundary spanners inter-viewed that they lack direct lines of authority over other partners, and theatmosphere of interorganizational working needs to be set within decision-making models that are premised on consensus, equality and win-winsolutions. The skills needed to be effective in these arenas are felt to be
inﬂuencing, bargaining, negotiation, mediation and brokering.
Inﬂuencing is about being persuasive and diplomatic; always being con-
structive and non-judgemental; leading on some occasions but facilitatingin others; and of being acutely aware of the political and personal sensibili-ties surrounding exchanges. The potential for effective in ﬂuencing stems
from the nature and robustness of personal relationships, and the dynamics
often change depending upon whether the encounters are dyadic or ingroups, private or in public. Collaboration involves a great deal of negoti-ation –over aims, funding proposals, operational programmes, priorities,
resource allocation and so on. It is seen by a number of survey respondentsas a process that is both convoluted and very time consuming, particularly
in collectives involving a number of partners. Effective boundary spanners
can expect to enter such arenas having to compromise and make carefuljudgements about the balance between bene ﬁts and disbene ﬁts for them-
selves and other organizations. It is a far from altruistic exercise and needsto be ‘hard-nosed ’, particularly around detailed operational, contractual,
ﬁnancial and delivery considerations as they impact on individual organi-
zations.
A skill that frequently appears in the conversations with the interviewees
is the ability to successfully broker solutions or deals between a number ofdifferent parties. This requires considerable expertise in in ﬂuencing and
negotiation, but also the perceived legitimacy to act objectively and openly
for others –the honest broker role. Brokering effective deals epitomizes,
perhaps, the essence of a successful boundary spanner as it depends on theemployment of a range of competencies and skills –an acute understanding
of interdependencies between problems, solutions and organizations; aninterpersonal style that is facilitating, respectful and trusting; and a drive todevise solutions that make a difference to solving problems on the ground.
Networking
Partnership environments are characterized by networked forms of govern-ance and, certainly, networking is the predominant modus operandi of choice
of the boundary spanner. Within the particular interorganizational domainstudied, there is a well-developed network of key ‘movers and shakers ’–
primary nodes in the network –which make partnerships work. It consists
of a reservoir of people active at a strategic level, representing differentagencies and organizations who are referred to as ‘the usual suspects ’
because of their appearance on many different partnerships. This has con-siderable advantages in terms of the accumulated investment of inter-
Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2002
 14679299, 2002, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-9299.00296 by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

--- PAGE 16 ---
118 PAUL WILLIAMS
personal relationships and social capital. There are clear bene ﬁts of being
a member of an interorganizational network, including being at the leadingedge of information, having access to new ideas, gossip and happenings inother sectors, professions and organizations, and being able to seek supportfrom and in ﬂuence people in other organizations. A network offers mem-
bers the bene ﬁto f ‘being in the loop ’for information of all sorts, about
emerging resource opportunities, changing government priorities, impend-
ing changes, potential scandals, new needs –the raw material for con-
structing a joined-up agenda.
Networking occurs at and around meetings, but is most effectively
undertaken outside formal decision-making structures, especially in con-
versations. There is a general view that the ‘real’business of partnership
work is effected within the framework of these personal exchanges. It iswhere dif ﬁculties are shared, aims agreed, problems sorted out, deals struck
and promises made –all out of the public gaze. Crucially, this is where
interorganizational imperatives are translated into the organizationalrealities of individual participants, and where the progress of formal events
are mapped out in advance and choreographed.
The extent to which networking involves the blurring of professional and
personal boundaries is contested. One view is that a strictly professionalrelationship is perfectly tenable, but another argues that a more personalrelationship will increase the potential, quality and richness of theinterchange. The dangers of tight and exclusive networks are recognized,
particularly in terms of their potential to become institutionalized through
processes of group normalization and shared values leading to ‘blindness ’
in certain areas. Questions are also raised about the inherent fragility ofnetworks that are reliant on personal relationships, and the problemsencountered when key boundary spanners are removed from a network as
a result of a job shift or breakdown in relationships.
Managing complexity and interdependencies
The interviews with boundary spanners con ﬁrm that interorganizational
management is a highly complex business. In addition to dealing withoften-disparate bodies of technical knowledge and professional expertise,
actors are faced with making sense of the structure and process of collabor-
ation. This demands an appreciation of connections and interrelationshipswhich are manifested in different ways at different stages in the partnershipprocess. At the planning and formulation stage, the relevant links involvepartner search, problem diagnosis, de ﬁning roles and responsibilities, nego-
tiating goals and developing cross-cutting agendas; at the implementation
and delivery stage, they are about contracts, agreements, protocols and
budgeting; and at the evaluation stage, they involve joint accountabilitiesand the measuring of outcomes. Although the boundary spanners inter-viewed operate primarily at a strategic level, they are acutely aware of theneed to cross the boundary between strategy and implementation, to ensure
Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2002
 14679299, 2002, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-9299.00296 by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

--- PAGE 17 ---
THE COMPETENT BOUNDARY SPANNER 119
that policy intentions are translated into problem solving on the ground.
In fact, most profess a commitment to achieving real change in the face ofdifﬁcult problems and issues.
The study isolates three main contributory factors to an ability to manage
interdependencies –interorganizational experience, transdisciplinary
knowledge and cognitive capability. The value of accumulated ‘on-the-job ’
interorganizational experience is considered to be possibly the main source
of understanding. It is the constant exposure to others that enables anunderstanding of their viewpoints, constraints, cultures, working practicesand so on to be stored. Also highly regarded is a track record of employ-ment in different types of organization and sector. The belief is that experi-
ence of different cultures, ways of working, roles and responsibilities and
past networks –insider knowledge –is invaluable for both making connec-
tions and understanding the motivations, mind-sets and behaviours of col-leagues in partner agencies.
On the question of technical knowledge, there is a view that boundary
spanners need to be knowledgeable in one area of expertise to act as a kind
of passport of legitimacy for engaging with people from other organiza-
tions –harnessing the power that is associated with knowledge. Another
view is that boundary spanners need to be ‘a jack of all trades and master
of none ’. It is suggested that the best boundary spanners do not have a
conventional professional or career pro ﬁle, are less constrained by the
attendant baggage, and are not perceived as direct threats to the status
of the more professionally grounded practitioners of this art. Numerous
references are made to the desirability of having ‘analytical ability ’,‘being
able to think laterally ’,‘taking a holistic view ’,‘understanding the big pic-
ture’and of ‘strategic thinking ’. Whether these abilities are rooted in experi-
ence or a function of a particular cognitive style is a matter of debate.
The ability to be creative, innovative and entrepreneurial is important
in joint working environments, particularly where the design of effectivesolutions to complex problems, the skillful negotiation of sustainable part-nership agreements involving a number of different agencies, and the mobi-lization of resource packages is needed. Interviewees highlight the valueof opportunism as well as the ability to collaboratively fashion new sol-
utions to previously intractable problems. In addition, the successful mobil-
ization or levering-in of resources is considered to evidence well-developedentrepreneurial skills. A powerful image of Kingdon ’s (1974) ‘policy
entrepreneurs ’is invoked by a number of respondents who are adept at
coupling solutions to problems, and of often being ahead of the agendawith ‘Blue Peter ’solutions already prepared in anticipation of future
political/resource opportunities or opening ‘policy windows ’.
Managing roles, accountabilities and motivations
Boundary spanners are acutely conscious of the con ﬁguration of roles and
responsibilities between agencies within an existing or emerging inter-
Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2002
 14679299, 2002, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-9299.00296 by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

--- PAGE 18 ---
120 PAUL WILLIAMS
organizational domain, and appreciate the political and professional sensi-
bilities that encompass them. This accumulated knowledge of ‘who does
what ’is vital in the management of partnerships and provides the basis on
which potential connections and interrelationships can be identi ﬁed and
explored, both at the strategy formulation stage and for detailed oper-ational programming.
The management of multiple accountabilities is viewed as an area of ten-
sion that requires delicate judgement. Boundary spanners are particularlyconfronted with the accountability interface between their role as organiza-tional representative and that of partner in a multi-agency environment.These accountabilities may be con ﬂicting at times and the situation may be
confounded by perceived accountabilities to service users or deep-rooted
value systems such as the public service ethos. Boundary spanners inter-viewed in the survey are adamant about the ﬁrst call on their responsi-
bility –that is, to their employing organization. However, it is felt that the
way in which this is discharged needs to recognize the other sources ofaccountability. A poor partner is perceived as one who slavishly or dog-
matically ploughs a representative furrow in partnership arenas and, irritat-
ingly, has to ‘report back ’everything to the home organization. Conversely,
the more effective partners are those who are empowered, within certainnegotiated parameters, to engage constructively with other partners. Theyhave a feel for what may or may not be acceptable to their home organiza-tions and are ready to play the partnership game. Understanding the para-
meters and constraints of each partner is considered to be highly important.
The interorganizational relations ’literature offers a number of expla-
nations to the triggers for partnership working, and some of these resonatewell with the individual motivations that are expressed by people in thesurvey. I conceptualize these as hegemony, resource opportunity and man-
date. Collaboration as hegemony embraces the view that interorganiza-
tional working is the only way for dealing with complex and interrelatedproblems that cross arti ﬁcially created administrative and jurisdictional
boundaries. It is the most effective and ef ﬁcient way of using an organiza-
tion’s resources, avoids duplication and overlaps, and can produce syner-
gistic outcomes that can only be achieved through ‘whole-systems ’
approaches. This model of collaboration also includes the deep-rooted
motivation expressed by some boundary spanners of a commitment to ser-vice users or citizens as the basis for service delivery –as opposed to
approaches based on the convenience of existing bureaucratic structuresand administrative arrangements.
Collaboration as resource opportunity re ﬂects the resource exchange
model in which organizations seek to work in partnership in order to real-
ize their own internal goals through accessing resources from other organi-zations. This practice is certainly increasing outside the sphere of ‘natural
partnerships ’with the advent of more cross-cutting issues. The third source
of collaborative motivation is mandated. Central government is committed
Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2002
 14679299, 2002, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-9299.00296 by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

--- PAGE 19 ---
THE COMPETENT BOUNDARY SPANNER 121
to the concept of interorganizational working and is anxious to encourage,
persuade, empower or coerce all organizations, particularly in other tiers ofgovernance, to be similarly committed. New legislation, advice, guidance,funding regimes and initiatives are geared to partnership working. Theproblem occurs where coercion and prescription conceals the true motiv-ations of individuals and organizations. The rhetoric of collaboration may
be fuelled but insincere; convenient or fragile relationships may result.
CONCLUSION
It is hoped that the value of this paper lies in the fact that it provides a much
needed focus on the individual actor within the ﬁeld of interorganizational
relationships, while the strength of the empirical research lies in its attempt
to build a framework of competency-based variables and factors that in ﬂu-
ence effective collaborative engagement, behaviour and management. Theresearch reinforces many of the images that dominate the relational litera-ture –the boundary spanner as network manager; the importance of build-
ing effective personal relationships with a wide range of other actors; the
ability to manage in non-hierarchical decision environments through
negotiation and brokering; and performing the role of ‘policy entrepreneur ’
to connect problems to solutions, and mobilize resources and effort in thesearch for successful outcomes.
The empirical research also resonates with institutional level perspectives
and theorizing on interorganizational relationships. The network metaphor
is certainly a powerful integrating mechanism across all levels of analysis,
and the micro-level ties identi ﬁed by Ebers (1997) can be clearly seen –the
management of expectations between actors through the medium of trust,and the ability of catalysts to cope with highly complex and ambiguousinformation. Individual motivations of boundary spanners, whether man-
dated or voluntary, have clear parallels with domain level perspectives,
and there is an appreciation at the micro-level of the different phases inthe collaborative process.
It is recognized that the research presented in this paper is by no means
deﬁnitive and important questions remain unresolved. There needs to be
more speci ﬁc evidence to link the use of a particular set of competencies
or collaborative behaviour to outcomes. The interorganizational literature
is particularly poor in this area. It is comparatively strong on antecedents,motives and structures, but weak on processes and effectiveness. Method-ologies that link competency to impact, performance and effectiveness needto be explored and developed, particularly in relation to comparisons withother forms of organizing. Although the boundary spanners involved in
the research cover different policy areas, organizations and types of part-
nership, the research does not explore possible differences and contrasts.The role and behaviour of boundary spanners within different contextualand institutional situations needs further examination. Again, many part-nerships typically proceed through various stages of development, and are
Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2002
 14679299, 2002, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-9299.00296 by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

--- PAGE 20 ---
122 PAUL WILLIAMS
manifested at both a strategic and operational level. The skill demands of
each of these phases, and the relationship between strategic and operationalboundary spanners, represents an interesting avenue for further explo-ration. A deeper understanding of the dynamics of boundary spanners ’
interventions would also be an invaluable contribution. These and manyother questions offer potentially rewarding pathways for future research.
Finally, there are practical bene ﬁts from this type of research. In the cur-
rent British policy climate, which extols the virtues of partnership working,a clear recognition and understanding of effective boundary spanningcapacities is essential to inform the training, development and educationof current and potential practitioners. There is a current dearth of opport-
unities on collaborative working and this needs to be addressed as a matter
of some urgency.
There is little doubt that ‘the fashioning of collaborative relationships of
substance is a job for talented practitioners ’(Hudson 1993, p. 375) and much
greater attention needs to be focused on their contribution within inter-organizational relationships than has been the case in the past. It is hoped
that this paper will stimulate further research in this important aspect of
public policy in the future.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The author is very grateful to the anonymous reviewers for their very help-
ful and constructive comments and suggestions to an earlier draft of thispaper.
REFERENCES
Ahuja, G. 2000. ‘Collaboration networks, structural holes, and innovation: a longitudinal study ’, Administrat-
ive Science Quarterly , Vol. 45, 425 –55.
Alter, C. and J. Hage. 1993. Organizations working together . Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Bacharach, S.B., P. Bamberger and V. McKinney. 2000. ‘Boundary management tactics and logics in action:
the case of peer-support providers ’,Administrative Science Quarterly , Vol. 45, No. 4, 704 –736
Bachmann, R. 2001. ‘Trust, power and control in trans-organizational relations ’,Organization Studies , Vol. 22
No. 2, 337 –365.
Bardach, E. 1998. Getting agencies to work together . Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Beresford, P. and S. Trevillion. 1995. Developing skills for community care . Aldershot: Arena.
Boon, S. 1994. ‘Dispelling Doubt and Uncertainty: Trust in Romantic Relationships ’, in S. Duck (ed),
Dynamics of relationships . London: Sage.
Boyatzis, R. 1982. The competent manager . London: Wiley.
Brunas-Wagstaff, J. 1998. Personality: a cognitive approach . London: Routledge.
Cabinet Of ﬁce. 2000. Wiring it up . London: Cabinet Of ﬁce.
Challis, L., S. Fuller, M. Henwood et al. 1988. Joint approaches to social policy . Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Clarke, M. and J. Stewart. 1997. Handling the wicked issues –a challenge for government . Birmingham: Univer-
sity of Birmingham.
Clegg, S.R. 1990. Modern organizations . London: Sage.
Cummings, L.L. and P. Bromily. 1996. ‘The organizational trust inventory (OTI) ’in R.M. Kramer and T.R.
Tyler (eds), Trust in organizations . London: Sage.
Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2002
 14679299, 2002, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-9299.00296 by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

--- PAGE 21 ---
THE COMPETENT BOUNDARY SPANNER 123
Das, T.K. and B-S. Teng. 2001. ‘Trust, control, and risk in strategic alliances: an integrated framework ’,
Organization Studies , Vol. 22 No. 2, 251 –83.
Degeling, P. 1995. ‘The signi ﬁcance of ‘sectors ’in calls for urban public health intersectoralism: an Australian
perspective ’,Policy and Politics , Vol. 23 No. 4, 289 –301.
deLeon, L. 1996. ‘Ethics and entrepreneurship ’,Policy Studies Journal , Vol. 24 No. 3, 495 –510.
DETR. 1999. Cross-cutting issues affecting local government . London: DETR.
Dodgson, M. 1994. ‘Technological collaboration and innovation ’, in M. Dodgson and R. Rothwell (eds), The
handbook of industrial innovation . Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Ebers, M. 1997. ‘Explaining inter-organizational network formation ’, in M. Ebers (ed.), The formation of inter-
organizational networks . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Engel, C. 1994. ‘A functional anatomy of teamwork ’, in A. Leathard (ed.), Going interprofessional . London:
Routledge.
Eysenck, H.J. 1994. ‘Trait theories of personality ’, in S.E. Hampson and A.M. Colman (eds), Individual differ-
ences and personality . London: Longman.
Fairtlough, G. 1994. Creative compartments . London: Adamantine Press.
Fitzpatrick, D. 1999. ‘Drowning in a sea of initiatives ’,New society , 26 April, pp. xiii –xiv.
Friend, J.K., J.M. Power and C.J.L. Yewlett. 1974. Public Planning: the inter-corporate dimension . London: Tavis-
tock.
Giddens, A. 1991. Modernity and self-identity . Oxford: Polity Press.
Grandori, A. 1997. ‘An organizational assessment of inter ﬁrm coordination models ’.Organization Studies ,
Vol. 18, No. 6, 897 –925.
—— . 1998. ‘Editorial ’,Organization Studies , Vol. 19 No. 4, v –xiii.
Gray, B. 1989. Collaborating . San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Hardy, C., N. Phillips and T. Lawrence. 1998. ‘Distinguishing trust and power in interorganizational
relations: forms and facades of trust ’, in C. Lane and R. Bachmann (eds), Trust in and between organizations .
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hornby, S. 1993. Collaborative care . Oxford: Blackwell.
Hosking, D-M. and I.E. Morley. 1991. A social psychology of organizing . London: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Hudson, B. 1993. ‘Collaboration in social welfare: a framework for analysis ’, in M. Hill (ed), The policy
process: a reader . London: Harvester.
—— . 1998. Primary health care and social care: working across organizational and professional boundaries . Leeds:
Nufﬁeld Institute for Health.
Huxham, C. and S. Vangen. 1998. ‘What makes practitioners tick?: understanding collaboration practice and prac-
tising collaboration understanding ’, Workshop on Interorganizational Collaboration and Con ﬂict McGill
University Montreal.
Huxham, C. and S. Vangen. 1999. ‘Building trust in inter-organizational collaboration ’,Organization Studies .
Jupp, B. 2000. Working together . London: Demos.
Kanter, R.M. 1997. ‘World-class leaders ’, in F. Hesselbein, M. Goldsmith and R. Beckhard (eds), The Leader
of the future . San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Kickert, W.J.M. and J.F.M. Koppenjan. 1997. ‘Public management and network management: an overview ’,
inManaging complex networks . London: Sage.
Kingdon, J.W. 1984. Agendas, alternatives, and public policies . Boston: Little, Brown and Company.
Lane, C. 1998. ‘Introduction: theories and issues in the study of trust ’, in C. Lane and R. Bachmann (eds),
Trust in and between organizations . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Leadbeater, C. and S. Goss. 1998. Civic entrepreneurship . London: Demos.
Lewicki, R.J. and B.B. Bunker. 1996. ‘Developing and maintaining trust in work relationships ’in R.M.
Kramer and T.R. Tyler (eds), Trust in organizations . London: Sage.
LGMB. 1997. Networks and networking . London: LGMB.
Lowndes, V. and C. Skelcher. 1998. ‘The dynamics of multi-organizational partnerships: an analysis of
changing modes of governance ’,Public Administration , Vol. 76, 313 –33.
Luke, J.S. 1998. Catalytic leadership . San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Mackintosh, M. 1993. ’Partnership: issues of policy and negotiation ’,Local Economy , Vol. 7 No. 3, 210 –44.
Mattessich, P.W. and B.R. Monsey. 1994. Collaboration: what makes it work . St. Paul, Minnesota: Amherst H.
Wilder Foundation.
Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2002
 14679299, 2002, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-9299.00296 by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

--- PAGE 22 ---
124 PAUL WILLIAMS
Newell, S. and J. Swan. 2000. ‘Trust and inter-organizational networking ’,Human Relations , Vol. 53 No. 10,
1287 –328.
Oliver, C. 1990. ‘Determinants of interorganizational relationships: integration and future directions ’,Acad-
emy of Management Review , Vol. 15 No. 2, 241 –65.
Oliver, A.L. and M. Ebers. 1998. ‘Networking network studies: an analysis of conceptual con ﬁgurations in
the study of inter-organizational relationships ’,Organization Studies , Vol. 19 No. 4, 549 –83.
O’Toole Jnr., L.J., K.I. Hanf and P.L. Hupe. 1997. ‘Managing implementation processes in networks ’,i n
Managing complex networks . London: Sage.
Poxton, R. 1999. Working across the boundaries . London: King ’s Fund.
Pratt, J., P. Gordon and D. Plampling. 1999. Working whole systems . London: King ’s Fund.
Ring, P.S. and A.H. Van de Ven. 1994. ‘Developmental processess of cooperative interorganizational
relationships ’, Academy of Management Review , Vol. 19, 90 –118.
Rittel, H. and M. Webber. 1973. ‘Dilemmas in a general theory of planning ’,Policy Sciences , 4, 155 –69.
Sandberg, J. 2000. ‘Understanding human competence at work: An interpretative approach ’,Academy of
Management Journal , Vol. 43 No. 1, 9 –25.
Schon, D.A. 1991. The re ﬂective practitioner . Aldershot: Ashgate.
Snow, C.C. and J.B. Thomas. 1993. ‘Building networks: broker roles and behaviours ’, in P. Lorange, B.
Chakravarthy, J. Roos and A.H. Van de Ven (eds), Implementing strategic processes: change, learning and
co-operation . Oxford: Blackwell.
Stone, D. 1997. Policy paradox: the art of political decision making . New York: Norton and Co.
Sydow, J. 1998. ‘Understanding the constitution of interorganizational trust ’, in C. Lane and R. Bachmann
(eds), Trust in and between organizations . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Taylor, M. 2000. Top down meets bottom up: neighbourhood management . York: Joseph Rowntree Foundation.
Thompson, J.D. 1967. Organizations in action . New York: McGraw-Hill.
Trevillion, S. 1991. Caring in the community . London: Longman.
Trist, E. 1983. ‘Referent organizations and the development of inter-organizational domains ’,Human
Relations , Vol. 36 No. 3, 269 –84.
Vangen, S. and C. Huxham. 1998. The role of trust in the achievement of collaborative advantage, presented
at the 14th EGOS Colloquium, Maastricht.
Webb, A. 1991. ‘Co-ordination: a problem in public sector management ’,Policy and Politics , Vol. 19 No. 4,
229–41.
Date received 17 May 2001. Date accepted 4 September 2001.
Blackwell Publishers Ltd. 2002
 14679299, 2002, 1, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-9299.00296 by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

