erandNalebuff(1995)andBrandenburgerandStuart(1996),wereason that there is a positive association between thedesign of the business model and the performance ofthe focal ﬁrm—if, for a given level of competition, thefocalﬁrm’sbusinessmodeldesigncreatesvalue, andit
doesnot decrease itsbargainingpowerrelativetoother
businessmodelstakeholders.
Environmentalconditionsseemimportantasmodera-
tors of the hypothesized relationship between businessmodeldesignandtheperformanceofanentrepreneurialﬁrm (McArthur and Nystrom 1991). Muniﬁcence, dy-namism, and complexity are all important dimensionsZottandAmit: Business Model Design and the Performance of Entrepreneurial Firms
184 OrganizationScience18(2),pp.181–199,©2007INFORMS
of the environment (Dess and Beard 1984). We fo-
cus on muniﬁcence, which captures the availability ofresources,andwhich—accordingtoRandolphandDess(1984) and McArthur and Nystrom (1991)—inﬂuencesthe survival and growth of existing companies as wellastheabilityofnewﬁrmstoenterthemarket.Theuseof muniﬁcence as a focal dimension of environmentaluncertaintyderivesfromaresource-dependenceviewoforganizations, which treats environments as arenas inwhich all compete for resources (Pfeffer and Salancik1978, Aldrich 1979). This perspective seems particu-larlyrelevantforentrepreneurialﬁrms,whichdependonexternalresources,andonthereceptivityofcapitalandproductmarketstoinnovativeactivity.
Building on the work of Aldrich (1979), Dess and
Beard (1984), and Tushman and Anderson (1986), wedeﬁne muniﬁcence as the extent to which the envi-ronment supports growth. In this paper, muniﬁcencerefers to the scarcity or abundance of critical resourcesrequired to create and implement business model de-signs. The performance prospects of ventures withnovelty- and/or efﬁciency-centered business model de-signs may vary with the availability and costs of re-sourcesthatentrepreneurscanaccess.
Novelty-CenteredBusinessModel
DesignandPerformance
The essence of novelty-centered business model design
is the conceptualization and adoption of new ways ofconductingeconomicexchanges,whichcanbeachieved,forexample,byconnectingpreviouslyunconnectedpar-ties, by linking transaction participants in new ways,or by designing new transaction mechanisms. Businessmodel innovation may complement innovation in prod-ucts and services, methods of production, distributionormarketing,andmarkets(Schumpeter1934).Anovelbusinessmodeleithercreatesanewmarket(likeeBay)orinnovatestransactionsinexistingmarkets(likePrice-line.com). Dell, for example, implemented a customer-driven build-to-order business model that replaced thetraditional build-to-stock model of selling computersthroughretailstores(BrynjolfssonandHitt2004).
Not only can the business model exploit an oppor-
tunity for wealth creation, but its design may in itselfbe part of the opportunity development process. Theentrepreneur-as-designer can cocreate opportunities, forexample,bydrawingonnewinformationandcommuni-cationtechnologiestobridgefactorandproductmarketsinnewways.
Business model innovation may give rise to entre-
preneurial rents (Rumelt 1987). These monopoly-typerents may accrue to business model stakeholdersbetween the introduction of an innovation and its dif-fusion. Although we expect novelty-centered businessmodel design to have a positive primary effect on theperformance of entrepreneurial ﬁrms, entrepreneurialrents may accrue to allstakeholders in the business
model. To predict the overall effect of novelty-centeredbusiness model design on the performance of the focalentrepreneurialﬁrm,wemustalsoconsideritseffectontheﬁrm’sabilitytoappropriatethevaluethatitsbusinessmodel generates. This ability depends on factors like(i) the switching costs of other business model stake-holders, (ii) the focal ﬁrm’s ability to control informa-tion,(iii)theabilityofotherstakeholderstotakeuniﬁedactionvis-à-visthefocalﬁrm,and(iv)thereplacementcostsofotherstakeholders(seeCoff1999,p.122).Forexample,thehighertheswitchingcostsofotherbusinessmodelstakeholders,thegreaterthefocalﬁrm’sbargain-ing power vis-à-vis these stakeholders, and the greateritsabilitytoappropriaterent.
We suggest that, on average, an increase in business
modelnoveltywillnotdecreasethefocalentrepreneurialﬁrm’s ex post bargaining power relative to other busi-nessmodelstakeholders.Thefocalﬁrmistheinnovator,and its business model is the locus of innovation. Thehigherthedegreeofbusinessmodelnovelty,thehigherthe switching costs for the focal ﬁrm’s customers, sup-pliers, and partners, as there may not be readily avail-able alternatives to doing business with the focal ﬁrm.The other determinants of the focal ﬁrm’s bargainingpower,identiﬁedbyCoff(1999),areunlikelytobesys-tematically affected in one direction or the other. Thefocal ﬁrm’s bargaining power vis-à-vis these parties isunlikelytobediminishedthroughnovelty-centeredbusi-ness model design. Therefore, considering the positiveeffect of novelty-centered business model design, bothon total value created and on the ability of the focalﬁrmtocapturethatvalue,weexpectapositiveeffectofnovelty-centered business model design on the perfor-manceofanentrepreneurialﬁrm.
Hypothesis 1. The more novelty centered an entre-
preneurial ﬁrm’s business model design, the higher theﬁrm’s performance.
Novelty-centered business model design will matter
more to performance in periods of high resourceavailability, when entrepreneurs’ dynamic governancecosts (e.g., persuasion costs) are lower (Langlois 1992,Langlois and Robertson 1995), than in periods of re-sourcescarcity.Theycanpersuade,negotiate,andcoor-dinate with resource holders more easily, and teachthemaboutthemeritsoftheirinnovativebusinessmodeldesigns.Theyhaveeasieraccesstotheresourcesneededto support and implement their business model inno-vations, such as investments in complementary assets.Entrepreneurial ﬁrms with novelty-centered businessmodeldesignsarepoisedtotakeadvantageofthegreaterwillingness of customers to spend, and they will notsuffer a decrease in their aggregate bargaining powervis-à-visotherbusinessmodelstakeholders.Thus,novelbusinessmodeldesignismoredistinctlyassociatedwithZottandAmit: Business Model Design and the Performance of Entrepreneurial Firms
OrganizationScience18(2),pp.181–199,©2007INFORMS 185
higher ﬁrm performance when resources are abundant
thanwhentheyarescarce.
Hypothesis 2. In environments characterized by high
resource muniﬁcence, the positive association betweennovelty-centered design and the performance of theentrepreneurial ﬁrm will be stronger than in environ-ments with low resource muniﬁcence.
Efﬁciency-CenteredBusinessModel
DesignandPerformance
Analternativewayforentrepreneurstocreatewealthis
to imitate rather than innovate—to do things similar toestablished organizations, but in a more efﬁcient way(Aldrich1999,Zott2003).Toexaminetheperformanceimplicationsofefﬁciency-centeredbusinessmodels,webuild on the transaction cost perspective (Milgrom andRoberts 1992; Williamson 1975, 1983), which refersto the design of economic transactions. According toWilliamson(1983),exchangeattributes,includinginfor-mationasymmetryandcomplexity,determinethattrans-actions will be organized into markets or hierarchies inwaysthatminimizetransactioncostsandmaximizeper-formance. Researchers generally assume that economicactorswhosetransactionsareunalignedwithappropriategovernance structures are “more likely to display poorﬁnancial performance /periodori/periodori/periodorithan those whose transactions
are properly aligned” (Silverman 2001, p. 484). Poppoand Zenger (1998) have explicitly modeled the perfor-mance implications of the transaction cost perspective,andMilgromandRoberts(1992)haveelaboratedontheeffect that transaction costs, in the form of coordina-tion, and motivation costs have on ﬁrm performance.These studies suggest that there is an important directrelationshipbetweenthedesignoftransactionsandﬁrmperformance.
Efﬁciency-centereddesignreferstothemeasuresthat
ﬁrmsmaytaketoachievetransactionefﬁciencythroughtheir business models. The construct focuses on busi-ness model design and is not intended to capture allmeans by which a ﬁrm can strive for efﬁciency (e.g.,throughareductionofproductioncosts).Theessenceofan efﬁciency-centered business model is the reductionoftransactioncosts.Thisreductioncanderivefromtheattenuation of uncertainty, complexity, or informationasymmetry(Williamson1975),aswellasfromreducedcoordination costs and transaction risk (Clemons andRow1992,Langlois1992,MilgromandRoberts1992).Theorder-trackingfeatureinAmazon’sbusinessmodel,for example, is aimed at enhancing transaction trans-parency and therefore constitutes an efﬁciency-centereddesign element. It reduces the cost of providing infor-mationtothelogisticscompany,andinducesmorecus-tomers to check on their packages (Brynjolfsson andHitt 2004). Other efﬁciency-centered design elementsare intended to increase the reliability and simplicityof transactions, reduce the asymmetry of information
among transaction participants, speed up transactions,enable demand aggregation, reduce inventory, providefor transaction scalability, or reduce the direct and in-direct costs of transactions. Consider Baxter ASAP,which lets hospitals order supplies electronically directfrom wholesalers. By reallocating its saved resources(the costs of data entry), the company was able tooffer additional value-adding services to its customers(BrynjolfssonandHitt2004).Consequently,weexpectapositiveprimaryeffectonﬁrmperformanceofadoptinganefﬁciency-centeredbusinessmodeldesign.
As with the novelty-centered business model design,
to predict the overall effect of an efﬁciency-centereddesignonﬁrmperformance,wemustconsideritseffectontheﬁrm’sabilitytoappropriatethevaluethatitgen-erates. Efﬁciency-centered business model design aimsatreducingtransactioncosts,forexample,throughsim-pliﬁed transactions, reduced transaction complexity, ordeep linkages among business model stakeholders thatoften do not require transaction-speciﬁc investments(web services, for example). These characteristics ofefﬁciency-centered business model design are likely toaffect the switching costs for allbusiness model stake-
holders in the same direction so that, in the aggregate,thebalanceofpoweramongthesepartieswillnotshift.Importantly,thefocalﬁrm’sbargainingpowerisunlikelytodecrease.
Another central aspect of efﬁciency-centered design
is that it enables better information ﬂow among stake-holders and reduces information asymmetries amongthe parties, limiting the control over information thatany stakeholder can have. In general, this aspect doesnot negatively affect the focal ﬁrm’s bargaining power.Moreover,thethirddeterminantofthefocalﬁrm’sbar-gaining power identiﬁed by Coff (1999, see above)—the ability of other business model stakeholders to takeuniﬁed action against the focal ﬁrm—is unlikely to besystematically affected in one direction or the other bydesignefﬁciency.Last,itshouldbenotedthatreducingdirecttransactioncosts(e.g.,search,transportation,andcoordination costs) increases the pool of potential cus-tomers,aswellaspartnersandsuppliers,andimpliesareductioninthecosttothefocalﬁrmofreplacingsuchstakeholders,increasingtheﬁrm’sbargainingpower.
Theseargumentssuggestthat,onbalance,amorepro-
nouncedefﬁciency-centeredbusinessmodeldesigndoesnotdecreasethefocalﬁrm’sbargainingpowerrelativetoother business model stakeholders. We therefore expecta positive main effect of efﬁciency-centered businessmodel design on the performance of an entrepreneurialﬁrm.
Hypothesis 3. The more efﬁciency centered an entre-
preneurial ﬁrm’s business model design, the higher theﬁrm’s performance.ZottandAmit: Business Model Design and the Performance of Entrepreneurial Firms
186 OrganizationScience18(2),pp.181–199,©2007INFORMS
When resources are scarce, efﬁciency-centered busi-
nessmodeldesignassumesgreaterimportanceasadif-ferentiatingfactorthaninperiodsofresourcemuniﬁcence.In tough economic environments, consumers and busi-nesses spend and invest less, and cost savings be-come more important as a driver of value creation.Entrepreneurialﬁrmsaremorevolatilethanestablishedorganizations (Stinchcombe 1965), so are sensitive tosuch changes. Conversely, during times of high envi-ronmentalmuniﬁcence,totalvaluecanbeenhanced,forexample,bytappingadditionalrevenuestreams.Inotherwords, in environments characterized by low resourcemuniﬁcence,theadvantagesderivedfromreducedtrans-actioncostsareaccentuated,whileourargumentsaboutthe bargaining power of ﬁrms with efﬁcient businessmodelscontinuetohold.Thus,efﬁcientbusinessmodeldesign will be more distinctly associated with higherperformance of an entrepreneurial ﬁrm when resourcesarescarcethanwhentheyareabundant.
Hypothesis 4. In environments characterized by low
resource muniﬁcence, the positive association betweenefﬁciency-centered design and the performance of theentrepreneurial ﬁrm will be stronger than in environ-ments with high resource muniﬁcence.
Interaction Between Novelty- and
Efﬁciency-CenteredBusinessModelDesignandPerformance
Do these arguments imply that entrepreneurs should
embrace both efﬁciency-centered and novelty-centeredbusiness model designs? The need to balance designelementshasbeenrecognizedbyresearcherswhohigh-lightthebeneﬁtstoentrepreneursofreconcilingdistinctaspectsofdesign,suchasthefamiliarandtheunfamiliar(Hargadorn and Douglas 2001), conformity and differ-entiation (Deephouse 1999), and reliability and distinc-tiveness (Lounsbury and Glynn 2001). Achieving thisbalancecanhelpentrepreneursbuildmuch-neededlegit-imacy (Zott and Huy 2006), a prerequisite for venturegrowth and performance (Zimmerman and Zeitz 2002).This suggests that novelty and efﬁciency can be com-plementary,andthattheirinteractioncouldhaveapos-itiveeffectonperformance.First,increasingthedegreeof novelty of a business model may enhance the returnonefﬁciency-centereddesign.Novelty-centeredbusinessmodeldesignmakesabusinessmodelmoredistinctive,andthismayresultinincreasedswitchingcostsforotherbusinessmodelstakeholdersbecauseoffewercompara-blealternatives.Byemphasizingbusinessmodelnovelty,the focal ﬁrm may be better positioned to appropriatesomeofthevalueitcreatesthroughincreasedefﬁciency.Second, increasing the emphasis on efﬁciency-centereddesignmayenhancethereturnondesignnovelty.Novelbusiness models that are also designed for efﬁciencymayappealtoawiderrangeofcustomers(i.e.,notonlyto those who are intrigued by its novel elements, butalsotothosewhoappreciatelowertransactionandcoor-
dination costs). Thus, by simultaneously emphasizingefﬁciencyandnoveltyasdesignthemes,theentrepreneurmay be able to create even more value than througheither novelty-centered or efﬁciency-centered businessmodeldesignalone.
Hypothesis 5. The more novelty centered and efﬁ-
ciency centered the business model design, the higherthe performance of the entrepreneurial ﬁrm.
However, another line of reasoning suggests that at-
temptsbyentrepreneurstodesigntheirbusinessmodelsforbothhigherefﬁciency