ORIGINAL EMPIRICAL RESEARCH
Walking a tightrope: the joint impact of customer and within-firm
boundary spanning activities on perceived customer satisfaction
and team performance
Stefan Sleep & Sundar Bharadwaj & Son K. Lam
Received: 16 October 2013 /Accepted: 28 May 2014 /Published online: 17 June 2014
# Academy of Marketing Science 2014
Abstract To successfully satisfy large customers and meet
financial objectives, dedicated sales teams need to manage
two boundaries: a boundary within the selling firm and one
with the customer organization. However, little is known
about the process of managing these multiple boundaries. This
study integrates job demands-resource theory with research on
key account management and sales teams to examine (1) the
main effect of customer boundary spanning on perceived
customer satisfaction and team performance and (2) the mod-
erating role of within-firm coordination activities at three
levels: top management, cross-functional, and within-team.
An empirical test of the model with data from 167 sales teams
finds that the interaction between customer boundary span-
ning and within-firm coordination activities has opposite ef-
fects on perceived customer satisfaction and team perfor-
mance outcomes. The results are robust to endogeneity and
heteroskedasticity concerns.
Keywords Boundary spanning . Dedicated sales teams .
Customer satisfaction . Team performance
We (the dedicated sales team) are riding a bicycle be-
tween two galloping elephants, [the large customer] on
one side and [our company] on the other. If one of those
suckers stumbles, if one of them swerves unexpectedly,
we are not going to just get squished. We are going to be
peeled off the side of an elephant. (A sales team
member)
As customers consolidate and continue to rationalize the
number of vendors they use, selling organizations have had to
adapt by creating new organizational forms that concentrate
selling resources to fewer but more critical customers due to
two key factors. First, customer consolidation has led to such
customers accounting for a larger percentage of suppliers’
total sales. For example, Walmart Inc. and Target account
for 30 and 7 % of P&G’s U.S. sales respectively (Lafley and
Charan 2008), thus increasing their importance significantly.
Second, such dedication of selling resources is required as
selling increasingly involves a joint effort between the cus-
tomer and the firm’s sales team to develop collaborative
solutions that enhance the profits of both firms (Day 2000;
Tuli et al. 2007; Ulaga and Reinartz 2011). One approach by
which sales organizations have dedicated resources to cus-
tomers is the deployment of dedicated multi-functional sales
teams (Alldredge et al. 1999). From sales teams that used to
mirror the buying centers of customer organizations (Hutt
et al. 1985; Moon and Armstrong 1994; Smith and Barclay
1990), selling teams have evolved to deliver on the seller’s
commitment to cooperative relationship selling by maintain-
ing large sales teams that mirror the selling firm at the buyer’s
headquarters.
To achieve the cooperative relationship between buyer and
seller, boundary spanning––behavior intended to establish
relationships with and generate knowledge from external ac-
tors that can assist a team in meeting objectives ––has become
increasingly important (Marrone et al. 2007). Dedicated multi-
S. Sleep
Department of Marketing, Terry College of Business, University of
Georgia, 131 Brooks Hall, Athens, GA 30602-6258, USA
e-mail: stsleep@uga.edu
S. Bharadwaj
Department of Marketing, Terry College of Business, University of
Georgia, 105 Brooks Hall, Athens, GA 30602-6258, USA
e-mail: sundar@uga.edu
S. K. Lam (*)
Department of Marketing, Terry College of Business, University of
Georgia, 133 Brooks Hall, Athens, GA 30602-6258, USA
e-mail: sonlam@uga.edu
J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2015) 43:472–489
DOI 10.1007/s11747-014-0395-4

functional sales teams are unique in that they must interact
with two organizations simultaneously: externally with the
customer (customer boundary spanning), and internally within
the firm (Bradford et al. 2010). When managing these dual
relationships, sales teams may encounter demands of value
creation (e.g., customer satisfaction) and value appropriation
(e.g., performance) (De Ruyter et al. 2009). Our review of
prior research on sales teams and boundary spanning activi-
ties, summarized in Fig. 1, reveals the following gaps.
First, the literature has largely focused on the firm, custom-
er, or within-team view of boundary spanning, but to this
point, it has not simultaneously examined internal and external
interactions as interdependent entities. Second, managers face
potentially competing outcomes from the customer and the
firm. The customer expects its needs to be quickly and cor-
rectly met; however, delivering on customer needs may run
counter to the firm’s financial objectives. As a result, sales
managers must consider not only the customer goals but also
those of the internal organization, which together place sig-
nificant and at times conflicting demands on the sales team
(Siders et al. 2001). However, there is little research that
examines this issue. Finally, the existing literature does not
distinguish among the various types of within-firm interac-
tions. Dedicated sales teams have different relationships with
top management, other functions, and internal team members
that can either increase demands on the team or provide access
to resources required for the desired outcome. By examining
each of these interactions separately, we can determine their
specific influence on the team’s goals.
Against this backdrop, our study contributes to the literature
by addressing the following questions: (1) How do external
customer boundary spanning activities affect perceived cus-
tomer satisfaction with the team and team performance? (2)
How do firm coordination and within-team activities moderate
these relationships? and (3) Based on the relative emphasis on
internal versus external outcome (e.g., team overall perfor-
mance or perceived customer satisfaction), when should spe-
cific internal or external boundary spanning activities be em-
phasized? Because sales teams that serve a single major client
are likely to engage intensively in both within-firm and cus-
tomer boundary spanning, we examine these research ques-
tions in the dedicated sales team context using team-level
outcomes. Given this focus, we conceptualize boundary span-
ning as a team-level phenomenon in accordance with previous
research applications (Joshi et al. 2009; Marrone et al. 2007).
We use data collected from 167 United States-based dedi-
cated sales teams of a large multinational firm. Each dedicated
sales team serves only a single client and is multi-functional.
Our study supports the existing literature that, other things
being equal, customer boundary spanning is beneficial to
Foci on TM and Cross-functional BSAs
Foci on Customer BSAs
Foci on Within Team Activities
Research
gap
Team Selling
e.g., Workman et al. 2003 
Boundary Spanning
e.g., Bettencourt and Brown 
2003, de Ruyter et al. 2009; 
Stock 2006, Heide and Wathne
2006
Boundary Spanning
e.g., Ancona 1990, de Jong et
al. 2004, Marrone et al. 2007
Boundary Spanning
e.g., Lysonski 1985,  
Keller 2001
Boundary Spanning
e.g., Ancona and Caldwell 1990, 
Bharadwaj et al. 2007, Holger et al. 2010, 
Homburg and Jensen 2007, Krasnikov and 
Jayachandran 2008
Job Demands
e.g., Bakker and Demerouti
2007, Bakker et al. 2010,
Miao and Evans 2013
Team Selling
e.g. Cespedes 1995,
Morgan 2012
Boundary Spanning
e.g. Ancona and 
Caldwell 1992, 
Edmondson 2003 
Team Selling
e.g., Narayandas and Rangan
2004, Tuli et al. 2007, Weitz
and Bradford 1999
Team Selling
e.g. Homburg et al. 2002,
Bradford et al. 2012
Boundary Spanning
e.g., Edmonson 1999, 
Marks et al. 2001
External
Joint
Internal
Job Demands
e.g., Hambrick et al.
2005
Job Demands
e.g., Zablah et al. 2012b 
Job Demands
e.g., Zablah et al. 2012a
Fig. 1 Literature summary and research gaps. BSA, boundary spanning activity; TM, top management
J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2015) 43:472–489
473

customer satisfaction but not necessarily to team performance.
More importantly, by incorporating interaction effects, we
find that top management coordination weakens the relation-
ship between customer boundary spanning and customer sat-
isfaction but strengthens the relationship when team perfor-
mance is the outcome metric. In contrast, cross-functional
coordination enhances customer boundary spanning’s influ-
ence when customer satisfaction is the outcome and attenuates
it when team performance is the outcome. Finally, we find that
within-team management has a positive effect on the relation-
ship between customer boundary spanning and team perfor-
mance and no influence on customer satisfaction. These re-
sults indicate a potential tradeoff, such that in delivering
internal and external goals, the joint effect of customer bound-
ary spanning and various within-firm coordination activities
can be synergistic or antagonistic.
The findings extend the existing understanding of sales
teams in several ways. First, we progress from a simple main
effects based theory to a contingency based framework. By
integrating the sales team, boundary spanning, and job
demands-resources (JD-R) literature, we provide a more real-
istic and comprehensive understanding of sales team’s activ-
ities and performance. Second, we capture and delineate the
moderating effects of several within-firm boundary spanning
activities that prior research has largely ignored. By exploring
the interaction of within-firm and customer boundary span-
ning activities simultaneously, we demonstrate that within-
firm activities, such as top management coordination, cross-
functional coordination, and within-team management, are
distinct and have both positive and negative interactions with
customer boundary spanning. These interactions run contrary
to the traditionally favorable viewpoint about boundary span-
ning outcomes and bring forward the dysfunctional impact as
well. Finally, we pinpoint the nature of the interaction based
on the focal outcome metric: perceived customer satisfaction
with the team or team performance. Sales teams face the
demands of not only incorporating customer and firm interac-
tions into the decision-making process but also balancing
customer satisfaction with team performance (e.g., de Ruyter
et al. 2009). Our study reveals that top management coordi-
nation and cross-functional coordination can be both antago-
nistic and synergistic depending on the desired outcome. This
reveals a tension within the sales team since the moderators
have asymmetric effects on each outcome. As a result, our
study provides a nuanced view and informs managers of how
to determine the correct mix of internal and external activities
depending on the sales team’s outcome metric.
We organize this paper as follows. First, we briefly review
the background literature on team selling, boundary spanning,
and job demands-resources (JD-R) theory. Next, we propose
hypotheses relating to the main effect of customer boundary
spanning and moderating effects of within-firm coordination
on customer satisfaction and team performance. We then
describe the data and the analytical strategy and test the
contingency model. Finally, we summarize the results and
discuss the contributions to theory and managers.
Background literature
Our study draws from the team selling, boundary spanning,
and JD-R literature. In this section and in Fig. 1, we briefly
review each of these literature streams and provide a summary
of how their integration informs our theoretical development.
Team selling
Complex business-to-business sales relationships typically
require large sales teams consisting of employees from a
variety of internal functions. The size of the customer and its
importance can lead to sales teams that are bigger and involve
more organizational units and layers of management (Moon
and Armstrong 1994). These teams, referred to as dedicated
sales teams, contain employees devoted to a single customer
because of the importance of the customer in terms of firm
revenue, percentage of sales, or customer lifetime value
(Bradford et al. 2012). Such a dedicated relationship between
buyer and seller is, not surprisingly, collaborative rather than
competitive (Weitz and Bradford 1999).
Previous research has explored the factors that make a sales
team effective (e.g., Ahearne et al. 2010; Homburg et al. 2002;
Workman et al. 2003) and the key components of developing
a successful buyer–seller relationship (e.g., Johnson et al.
2004; Narayandas and Rangan 2004; Weitz and Bradford
1999). In the case of dedicated accounts, effective teams have
been shown to have a higher level of proactivity toward the
customer, exhibit extensive information sharing, involve firm
top management, and have a cooperative team environment
(Workman et al. 2003). In addition, dedicated sales teams
engage in boundary spanning in order to foster interactions
outside the sales team. Integrating these various components
of effective sales teams leads to external benefits, such as
improved market performance and profitability, or internal
benefits, such as improved coordination, enhanced rate of
learning, and improved implementation (Bradford et al.
2012; Johnson 1999; Workman et al. 2003). Importantly, as
summarized in Fig. 1, the extant research has focused on
interactions with a single boundary (either the customer or
within the firm) while ignoring the simultaneous interaction
with both boundaries that a dedicated sales team typically
encounters.
Boundary spanning
The constituency-based theory of the firm contends that a firm
has distinct internal and external coalitions (Anderson 1982).
474
J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2015) 43:472–489

Similarly, at a lower level of analysis, selling teams have to
simultaneously manage both internal and external relation-
ships. In its external role, the sales organization takes a posi-
tion that will assure customer satisfaction while being cogni-
zant of the goals and objectives of the functions within the
firm. In its internal role, the sales organization must effectively
communicate and negotiate with top management and other
functions across the firm in order to achieve these strategic
objectives (Anderson 1982).
As shown in Fig. 1, existing studies either examine external
relationships between the customer and customer-related
teams or service employees (e.g., De Jong et al. 2004; de
Ruyter et al. 2009; Stock 2006) or internal relationships with
other functions (e.g., Bharadwaj et al. 2007; Holger et al.
2010; Rouziès et al. 2005). The management literature focuses
on exploring boundary spanning relationships and the impact
within the team (e.g., Ancona 1990; Ancona and Caldwell
1992; Marrone et al. 2007). There is little research that simul-
taneously examines internal, external, and within-team bound-
ary spanning activities.
By ignoring the tradeoffs and potential conflicts inherent in
managing several interactions concurrently, previous research
does not provide a comprehensive and nuanced understanding
of sales team boundary spanning activities. Specifically, custom-
er requests might be too costly for the firm to satisfy (Lee et al.
2012) and the need to manage multiple internal and external
relationships may place significant demands on the team.
While the constituency-based theory of the firm and the
boundary spanning literature both identify distinct internal
and external coalitions within the firm, they do not specifically
address the demands or resources that influence the team as it
interacts with both coalitions. We draw from the JD-R theory
to shed light on this issue.
Job demands and resources
Job demands are the physical, psychological, or organization-
al aspects of the job that require sustained effort or skill and
are associated with certain psychological costs (Bakker and
Demerouti 2007). Examples of job demands include high
work pressure and demanding interactions with clients. In
the sales scenario, customers have the power to place intense
performance demands on sales teams, which can cause an
increase in job demands (Porter 1980). Simultaneously, the
team also needs to meet firm performance objectives because
the customer contributes to the overall success of the firm
(Cespedes 1995; Homburg et al. 2002; Morgan 2012). This
can result in pressure from customers to meet their needs and
firm pressure to meet profitability and sales goals which can
lead to stress that negatively affects organizational outcomes
(Bakker et al. 2010; Hambrick et al. 2005).
In addition to job demands, sales teams also require job
resources, which are aspects of the job that allow employees to
meet work goals or to reduce or cope with job demands
(Bakker and Demerouti 2007). Previous research shows that
in customer-oriented scenarios, job resources interact with job
demands to reduce the negative impact of job demands on
performance (Miao and Evans 2013; Zablah et al. 2012a). In
fact, when facing demanding job requirements, such as within
the dedicated team, the beneficial impact of resources is often
enhanced (Bakker and Demerouti 2007). Sales teams encoun-
ter a combination of job demands and resources as they
address customer and firm objectives.
Integrating team selling, boundary management, and JD-R
research
We integrate the three research streams to capture internal and
external factors that jointly influence dedicated sales team
outcomes. Developing and maintaining buyer–seller relation-
ships requires participation from both the buying and selling
firms, resulting in an increased emphasis on the team to
support interactions between the selling firm and the customer
(McFarland et al. 2006; Weitz and Bradford 1999).
Our integration of the three research streams leads to a
novel insight that underlies our rationale for the interaction
effects of various boundary spanning activities. We argue that
the multiple sales team–customer, top management, cross-
functional, and within-team interactions not only jointly facil-
itate the value creation (e.g., customer satisfaction) and value
appropriation (e.g., team performance) processes but also
create job demands or job resources based on the desired
outcome. Specifically, boundary spanning serves to either
facilitate team processes or meet desired outcomes. As a
result, the performance challenge of multiple outcomes places
high job demands on the sales team. Internal interactions can
then either increase demands, if they run contrary to a desired
outcome, or provide resources that support internal team
processes to reduce the overall demands placed on the team
through improved insights.
Conceptual model
We present the conceptual model in Fig. 2. We focus on team-
level variables and performance measures because business
measures are rarely explored in the boundary spanning litera-
ture (de Jong et al. 2004) and they are not always compatible
(Cespedes 1995; Morgan 2012; Slater and Olson 2000).
We capture outcomes in terms of both an external customer
related metric, i.e., perceived customer satisfaction with the
team, and an internal firm metric, i.e., team performance.
Perceived customer satisfaction with the team refers to the
evaluation of meeting customer expectations as determined by
the sales team. Prior research on teams suggests that a key
outcome of work teams is that the output of the team exceeds
J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2015) 43:472–489
475

expectations of people who review it, which captures the
importance of customer satisfaction (Hackman 1987). We
define team performance as how the team meets its profitabil-
ity, profit growth, sales, and sales growth objectives. While
customer and firm objectives can support each other, sales
teams often experience tension when simultaneously meeting
both goals.
Our conceptual model includes the main effect of customer
boundary spanning on perceived customer satisfaction and
team performance and the moderating effects of within-firm
top management coordination, within-firm cross-functional
coordination, and within-team management. The customer
boundary spanning construct consists of interactions between
the sales team and the customer to meet sales team objectives.
Sample activities include creating a common vision, setting
mutual goals, and working with the customer to achieve
business results.
Next we capture the coordination activities occurring with-
in the firm. Although the dedicated sales team is a multifunc-
tional team, it is not entirely self-sufficient. It relies on both
top management and various functions within the firm for
direction, resources, and to complete sales tasks (Ancona
and Caldwell 1992). Top management coordination occurs
at the management level within the firm and captures coordi-
nation with senior management, sales team executives, other
functional executives, and other dedicated sales team man-
agers for input on both team and firm objectives. Task coor-
dination also plays an important role in team success because
it determines the ability of the sales team to accomplish its
goals by coordinating with other internal organizations
(Ancona and Caldwell 1992). We capture these activities
through the variable cross-functional coordination. This con-
struct involves the level of coordination and interaction with
other departments. Previous research has paid little attention
to cross-functional interactions between sales and other func-
tional groups (Homburg et al. 2002). A final component of
boundary spanning activities is within-team management,
which reflects the internal interactions of the team in terms
of vision, resources, and results. Within-team management is
an important moderator because groups often perceive pro-
cesses as divided into internal and external components (Choi
2002).
Research hypotheses
Main effects of customer boundary spanning on customer
satisfaction and performance
In the case of dedicated teams, linking a full-time sales team to
a single customer provides access to both formal and informal
relationships between the two parties. The resources invested
in establishing the relationship create a long-term commitment
which provides a distinct and well-established means of coor-
dination between the buyer and seller (Bradford et al. 2010;
Ganesan 1994; Palmatier et al. 2006). Strong ties created by
such relationships also engender access to private information
and solidarity during customer boundary spanning activities
Fig. 2 Conceptual framework
476
J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2015) 43:472–489

(Tuli et al. 2010). This private information enables the team to
deliver more accurately to the customer needs than competi-
tors who do not have access to such boundary spanning.
Delivering to customer needs enhances customer satisfaction
and provides the team with better performance results. More-
over, prior research has demonstrated that customers in a
cooperative relationship report the highest level of satisfaction
with suppliers, and that customer relationships positively in-
fluence performance outcomes (Cannon and Perreault 1999;
Morgan and Hunt 1994; Palmatier et al. 2006). As a result, we
propose the following:
H1:
Customer boundary spanning activities positively influ-
ence (a) perceived customer satisfaction and (b) team
performance.
Interaction effects of top management coordination
and customer boundary spanning
Customer satisfaction as an outcome In the dual role of
managing firm- and customer-level boundaries, the team has
demands placed on it from both the customer and top man-
agement because of the importance of the relationship. Top
management rewards are often aligned with company perfor-
mance through stock options and performance bonuses, which
results in a performance orientation (Hambrick et al. 2005).
On the other hand, customer-facing teams may perceive sat-
isfying customer needs as more consistent with their job
function (Jones et al. 2003) and a key component of successful
boundary spanning (Zablah et al. 2012a). For example, inter-
nal firm performance metrics often focus on short term criteria
while the sales team’s objective is to develop long term
customer relationships through customer satisfaction
(Anderson 1982). As teams integrate customer and top man-
agement inputs to satisfy customers, positive outcomes with
the client may conflict with outcome metrics relevant to the
firm, and vice versa, resulting in increased job demands for the
sales team (Katz and Kahn 1978; Marrone et al. 2007).
As a result, we propose that interaction with top manage-
ment hinders the direct relationship between customer bound-
ary spanning and customer satisfaction by increasing job
demands. When both types of boundary spanning are incor-
porated, coordination with top management, whose focus is
on firm metrics of performance, can attenuate the impact of
customer boundary spanning on customer satisfaction. There-
fore, we propose the following:
H2a:
Higher levels of firm top management coordination
weaken the relationship between customer boundary
spanning and customer satisfaction.
Team performance as an outcome In contrast, when address-
ing team performance objectives, coordination with top
management provides access to resources, i.e., management
serves as a job resource rather than a job demand for the sales
team. Job resources may come from the organizational level of
the firm (Bakker and Demerouti 2007), and top managers will
reflect their performance orientation when coordinating with
the sales team. Since both parties are working toward shared
performance goals such as sales, growth, and profitability,
managers outside the sales team will be more likely to provide
resources to support those objectives.
Top management coordination can also enable perfor-
mance goals by buffering the job demands placed on the team
by the customer. If top management coordination clearly
articulates the alignment of team and firm objectives, the team
will feel less pressure to meet customer demands at the ex-
pense of firm performance goals and will dedicate resources to
internal activities (Choi 2002). In other words, the sales team
can evaluate customer requests in terms of their performance
impact instead of strictly focusing on satisfying the customer
at all costs, which can lead to escalating customer demands,
wasted resources, and a less profitable relationship (Homburg
et al. 2011; Lee et al. 2012; Siders et al. 2001). By reducing the
tension between meeting customer and firm-level objectives,
coordination with top management can make the sales team
more confident in their response to the customer. Overall, top
management coordination provides resources to simulta-
neously meet firm and customer objectives or buffer customer
demands on the sales team by supporting firm-oriented goals.
Thus, we propose:
H2b:
Higher levels of firm top management coordination
strengthen the relationship between customer bound-
ary spanning and team performance.
Interaction effects of cross-functional coordination
and customer boundary spanning
In order to meet long-term customer-oriented objectives, the
sales function should develop relationships with other func-
tions within the firm to acquire resources (Anderson 1982).
The functionally diverse structure of the dedicated sales team
provides multiple lenses into customer needs, a variety of
resources within the team to meet those needs, and closer ties
with other functions within the firm (Bunderson and Sutcliffe
2002; Weitz and Bradford 1999). However, many scenarios
exist in which the resources of the firm are necessary to
supplement the knowledge within the team. As access to
customer information increases, the team’s multiple functional
connections improve access to information outside the team.
The sales team can then quickly access functional resources to
respond to customer requests that cannot be met within the
team (Edmondson 1999). The combination of high levels of
cross-functional activities within the firm and high levels of
customer boundary spanning activities increases access to
J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2015) 43:472–489
477

information resources, which then reduce job demands, there-
by increasing the ability of teams to meet performance objec-
tives by making their jobs easier.
H3:
Higher levels of firm cross-functional coordination
strengthen the relationship between (a) customer
boundary spanning and customer satisfaction and (b)
customer boundary spanning and team performance.
Interaction effects of within-team management and customer
boundary spanning
The final component of boundary spanning is how teams
fulfill external demands while preserving internal dynamics,
or within-team management (Choi 2002; Marrone et al. 2007).
As mentioned earlier, within-team management refers to the
ability of the team manager to incorporate resources, goals,
and skills in the team. We believe that the level of within-team
management can function as either a demand or a resource
based on the preferred outcome.
Customer satisfaction as an outcome To satisfy the customer,
it is important for the sales team to have an organizational
structure and culture that provides the best support for the
customer’s needs (Bradford et al. 2012; Homburg et al. 2011).
However, a team has limited resources that must be allocated
between within-team and external activities (Choi 2002), and
if it focuses too heavily on internal operations, it can fail to use
external information or perceive changes in its environment
(Boyd et al. 1993; Janis 1982). At high levels of within-team
management, the focus is on addressing internal team dynam-
ics, depleting the manager’s resources available to gather
customer information. Because the customer is the singular
focus of the dedicated team, this reduction in customer-
oriented job resources increases strain on the sales team and
can lead to a negative impact on customer satisfaction (Bakker
and Demerouti 2007). On the other hand, low levels of within-
team management allow the team to focus team resources on
gathering and disseminating customer information instead of
internal team processes. Thus, we propose that higher levels of
within-team management increases demands on the team,
hindering its ability to meet customer needs:
H4a:
Higher levels of within-team management weaken the
relationship between customer boundary spanning and
customer satisfaction.
Team performance as an outcome For the team performance
outcome, the sales team integrates both firm and customer
information to meet team performance objectives. Because of
the close relationship between the team and the customer, the
commitment to the customer may drain away the resources
managers have available to guarantee the team an organiza-
tional perspective (Siders et al. 2001). This results in an
additional need to manage the team through information and
resources from the firm to balance the customer and the firm.
As a result, higher levels of within-team management provide
additional resources to the team around shared firm and team
performance objectives. Similar to top management coordina-
tion, the team then takes performance objectives into account
when addressing customer demands. Customer demands are
evaluated but not met at all costs buffering the team from
potential performance demands, especially at high levels of
customer boundary spanning. Therefore, we propose the
following:
H4b:
Higher levels of within-team management strengthen
the relationship between customer boundary spanning
and team performance.
Method
Data
The dataset was provided to us by a third-party firm that
requested confidentiality. The firm collected the data by send-
ing a survey to 201 United States-based dedicated sales teams
of a large multinational firm. The data were made available to
us after being aggregated to the team level. Of the 201 surveys
sent, 170 surveys with complete information from every team
member were received, for a response rate of 85 %. We
dropped three additional teams on the basis of outlier analysis
of their extremeness and influence using the calculated Cooks’
D and DfBeta statistics (Belsley et al. 1980, p. 13). The end
result was a total of 167 usable surveys. The final sample was
representative of the teams used by the firm in terms of size,
ranging from 4 to 12 members, and longevity. Previous re-
search has shown that the perceptions of individual team
members are meaningful for team level analysis (Chen et al.
2002; de Ruyter et al. 2009; Mathieu et al. 2000).
Addressing common method bias Because all data except for
the team performance measure involve user responses from a
single survey, we address the potential for common method
bias (CMB) by following Podsakoff et al.’s (2012)
recommendations. In terms of procedural methods, we
employed two recommended steps. For the team
performance dependent variable, the predictor and criterion
came from different sources to control for CMB. For the
perceived customer satisfaction dependent variable, the
question on perceived customer satisfaction was separated
from the main effect and moderator items within the
questionnaire. Finally, Podsakoff et al. (2012, p. 565) note
that method bias can only deflate and not inflate quadratic and
478
J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2015) 43:472–489

interaction effects. Since the primary focus of this research is
on interaction effects, method bias would not account for any
statistically significant interaction effects observed (Evans
1985; Siemsen et al. 2010).
Measures
Independent and moderating variables The measures were
assessed using a seven-point Likert scale ranging from 1
(“strongly disagree”) to 7 (“strongly agree”). The customer
boundary spanning scale and within-team management scales
were similar to the scales utilized by Marrone et al. (2007).
Specifically, customer boundary spanning (α=.92) and
within-team management (α=.87) were measured with a
six-item scale for each construct, within-firm cross-
functional coordination (α=.77) with a five-item scale, and
within-firm top management coordination (α=.78) with a
four-item scale. The top management and cross-functional
scales are new scales created to capture the variety of sales
team interactions. We created a composite score for each
construct by averaging all the items. To facilitate interpretation
of the interactions, we mean-centered all the variables in the
interactions (Aiken and West 1991).
Dependent variables The dependent variable, perceived cus-
tomer satisfaction with the team, was measured with a single
item that captured how satisfied the customer is with the sales
team as reported by the sales team. Although objective mea-
sures are preferable, a perceptual measure can be used when an
accurate objective measure is not available or the alternative is
to remove the variable from the research design (Dess and
Robinson 1984). The single-item scale was similar to the
measure used in Bolton and Lemon (1999). Sales team
performance was measured using a summated index of the
sales team’s performance reflected by sales, sales growth, profit
growth, and profitability. The supervising managers of the
dedicated sales teams recoded the team’s performance on the
four performance items into three levels of performance: low,
medium, and high. The four items were summated into a single
score. The distribution of performance ratings for the 167 sales
teams is 32.3 % low, 32.3 % medium, and 35.3 % high.
Control variables We also included several control variables
in the model. The boundary spanning activity of scouting
served as a control to capture additional non-customer bound-
ary spanning activities. Scouting was measured with a five-
item scale (α=.76) adapted from Ancona and Caldwell
(1990). We included team satisfaction as a control when using
customer satisfaction as a dependent variable because it can be
an antecedent of customer satisfaction (e.g., Heskett et al.
1994). Team satisfaction consists of a single measure that
captured the satisfaction level of the team. Perceived customer
satisfaction served as a control for the team performance
model to reflect the external impact of the variable. Finally,
we controlled for competitive advantages in price and service
across the various sales teams. These controls prevent team-
specific competitive advantages from influencing the various
boundary spanning activities. All the scales and factor load-
ings are provided in the Appendix.
Analytical strategy
We analyzed the data using seemingly unrelated regression
(SUR) (Zellner 1962) for several reasons. First, it allowed us
to model both outcomes simultaneously. Sales teams face a
constant influx of information and must make decisions about
how to use the information to simultaneously meet both team
and customer goals. The SUR provides a means to use two
equations to capture the impact of these multiple information
sources and outcomes. Second, SUR allows us to control for
the correlations in the error terms across the two equations.
Previous research has shown a relationship between customer
satisfaction and performance; however, our proposed model
should show that boundary spanning activities have asymmet-
ric impacts on each outcome. The significant correlation be-
tween the two outcomes supports the relationship between the
two outcomes. Thus, we selected SUR as the correlation
between errors in the two equations can be exploited to
enhance estimator efficiency (Cameron and Trivedi 2010).
Handling endogeneity An important consideration in the
analysis is the potential endogeneity bias that might ensue
because either (1) the decisions of the dedicated sales teams to
boundary span with the customer are motivated by certain
customer characteristics and performance expectations or (2)
sales teams with significant levels of customer boundary
spanning have self-selected themselves to respond to the
survey. In both scenarios, the relationship between customer
boundary spanning and the two outcomes of interest might be
an artifact of the exclusion of firms with lower levels of
customer boundary spanning. To correct for this bias, we
follow the procedure Garen (1984) outlines. First, we
regressed customer boundary spanning on potential anteced-
ents, such as information availability and resource availability,
and obtained the predicted error:
CBS ¼ Δ  þυ;
ð1Þ
where CBS is customer boundary spanning, x is a matrix of
antecedents, Δ is a matrix of coefficients, and υ is the standard
error term. Second, we ran the main regression model and
included two additional terms: the estimated error term from
Eq. 1 and a product of the error term and customer boundary
spanning as the bias may depend on the levels of customer
boundary spanning (Garen 1984; Grewal et al. 2010). Specif-
ically, we estimated the following two equations
J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2015) 43:472–489
479

simultaneously:
CSAT ¼ β0 þ β1  CBS þ β2  TOP þ β3  CROSS þ β4  WITHIN
β5  TSAT þ β6  SCOUT þ β7  PRICE þ β8  SERV
þβ9  CBS  TOP þ β10  CBS  CROSS þ β11  CBS  WITHIN
þαυ^þ αυ^CBSCBS þ ε:
ð2Þ
PERF ¼ β0 þ β1  CBS þ β2  TOP þ β3  CROSS þ β4  WITHIN
þβ5  CSAT þ β6  SCOUT þ β7  PRICE þ β8  SERV
þβ9  CBS  TOP þ β10  CBS  CROSS þ β11  CBS  WITHIN
þαυ^þ αυ^CBSCBS þ ε:
ð3Þ
where CSAT is perceived customer satisfaction, PERF is team
performance, CBS is customer boundary spanning, TOP is top
management coordination, CROSS is cross-functional coor-
dination, WITHIN is within-team management, TSAT is team
satisfaction, SCOUT is scouting, PRICE is competitive ad-
vantage in price, SERV is competitive advantage in service,
and αυ and αυCBS are self-selection correction coefficients,
with υ CBS representing the product of the estimated error
term from Eq. 1 and customer boundary spanning.
Hypothesis testing
Measurement model To address potential validity concerns
associated with using data collected by the firm, we conducted
exploratory (EFA) and confirmatory factor analysis (CFA)
(Gerbing and Anderson 1988). We included the latent vari-
ables of customer boundary spanning, the three within-firm
coordination moderators, and the scouting control in our anal-
ysis. The EFA did not result in any significant cross-loading
and produced singular loadings on each of the latent variables.
Measure reliability and validity were then assessed using
CFA. All of the constructs exhibited composite reliabilities
above the recommended threshold of .70 (Bagozzi and Yi
1988). Furthermore, the Cronbach’s alpha of each measure
was over .75. For each of the latent constructs, the factor
loadings were in the range from .50 to .86, with a majority
loading greater than .70 (see Appendix). All loadings were
statistically significant (p<.001), demonstrating convergent
validity (Bagozzi et al. 1991).Finally, the CFA analysis exhib-
ited adequate model fit (χ2=458.90, d.f. = 265, χ2/d.f.=1.73,
p<.001; root mean square error of approximation =.066,
CFI=.901). While the χ2 was significant, the model shows
good fit when evaluating the ratio of the χ2 to the degrees of
freedom (Jöreskog 1969) as it falls below the commonly used
criteria for good fit which range anywhere from less than 5 to
less than 2 (Wheaton et al. 1977). The CFI results are slightly
below the recommendations of Hu and Bentler (1998), but
Bagozzi and Yi (2012) suggest that these criteria may be too
stringent and there is some ambiguity around acceptable
cutoffs.
Next, we calculated the average variance extracted (AVE)
for each of the latent constructs. All the constructs were at or
above the .50 threshold, except for within-firm cross-functional
coordination. The AVE of cross-functional coordination was
.42; however, we retained it in the model because it captures the
theoretical aspect of cross-functional coordination. We also
used AVE to test discriminant validity by checking whether
the AVEs for the latent variables were greater than their con-
tribution to other constructs. The AVE of each construct was
compared with squared correlation of all other constructs and
met the above criteria, indicating discriminant validity (Fornell
and Larcker 1981). Table 1 provides a summary of the descrip-
tive statistics and the correlation matrix.
We summarize the results in Table 2. Given the inclusion of
interaction variables, we examined the variance inflation fac-
tors (VIFs) to check for multicollinearity. The mean VIF was
1.61, and the maximum VIF was 2.34, well below the thresh-
old, indicating that multicollinearity was not an issue in this
study (Draper et al. 1966).1 As Table 2 shows, the model
explains a system R-square of 34 %. The incremental variance
explained by the inclusion of the interaction variables is
statistically significant (ΔR2=.04, F=9.27; p<.05).
Main effects-only model Customer boundary spanning has a
positive and significant effect on customer satisfaction
(β=.31, p<.01) supporting H1a. Team performance does not
have a significant effect, but is in the positive direction
(β=.10, ns). This result does not support H1b.
Top management coordination moderating effect The inter-
action between customer boundary spanning and top manage-
ment coordination is negative when customer satisfaction is
the outcome (β=−.12, p<.01). This result provides support for
H2a. At low levels of customer boundary spanning, high
levels of firm top management coordination lead to higher
levels of customer satisfaction. However, at high levels of
customer boundary spanning, low top management coordina-
tion leads to more satisfied customers (see Fig. 3, Panel A).
The results also show that the interaction between customer
boundary spanning and top management coordination is pos-
itive and significant for team performance (β=.10, p<.01),
1 As an additional test, we ran an item-by-item correlation of the within-
team management and customer boundary spanning variables and re-
moved item 3 from the within-team variable because of its high correla-
tion with item 3 of customer boundary spanning. We then reran the
seemingly unrelated regression model with the new within-team manage-
ment variable and interaction term. The results were consistent with the
previous model.
480
J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2015) 43:472–489

supporting H2b. At high levels of customer boundary span-
ning, high top management coordination has a positive impact
on performance. At low levels of customer boundary spanning,
high levels of top management coordination have the opposite
effect and lower performance (see Fig. 3, Panel B).
Cross-functional coordination moderating effect The results
show a significant, positive moderating effect of cross-
functional activities on customer boundary spanning for the
customer satisfaction outcome (β=.14, p<.01). Thus, the
result provides support for H3a. High level of cross-
functional coordination and customer boundary spanning pro-
vide the highest level of customer satisfaction, while high
cross-functional coordination and low customer boundary
spanning result in the lowest level of satisfaction (see Fig. 4,
Panel A).
We next tested the interaction effect of firm cross-
functional activities and customer boundary spanning on team
performance. We predicted a positive interaction between firm
cross-functional activities and customer boundary spanning
activities; however, the results indicate a significant, negative
moderating effect of cross-functional coordination on custom-
er boundary spanning (β=−.14, p<.01). Thus, H3b is not
supported. At low levels of customer boundary spanning,
access to other functions increases performance, while at high
levels of customer boundary spanning, low levels of cross-
functional coordination lead to higher performance (see Fig. 4,
Panel B).
Within-team management moderating effect The final inter-
action is between within-team management and customer
boundary spanning. Though in the hypothesized direction,
the results do not provide support for H4a, which proposes a
negative moderating effect of within-team management on the
relationship between customer boundary spanning and satis-
faction (β=−.10, ns). For the interaction effect of within-team
management and customer boundary spanning on team per-
formance, the results provide support for H4b, which proposes
a positive moderating effect (β=.13, p<.01). At high levels of
customer boundary spanning, high within-team management
has a positive impact on performance. However, at low levels
of customer boundary spanning, high levels of within-team
management inhibit team performance (see Fig. 5).
Controls As predicted by the service profit chain, team satis-
faction has a positive significant effect on customer satisfac-
tion (β=.28, p<.01), and customer satisfaction has a positive
significant effect on performance (β=.29, p<.01). For the
other controls, only competitive advantage in service has a
significant positive effect on customer satisfaction (β=.35,
p<.01). All the other controls are not significant.
Robustness checks
We tested for violations of standard regression assumptions
regarding model misspecification using Ramsey’s (1969) RE-
SET test and normality using the Jarque–Bera test. None of
these violations appear to be either generalized or problematic
in our data. We reestimated the regression models with
White’s (1980) heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors.
The results remained stable, and the Breusch–Pagan test indi-
cated that heteroskedasticity was not an issue. We also used
alternative combinations of antecedents that were available in
the survey to estimate the self-selection variables; the final
regression results remained consistent.
Because team performance is an index measured on
three levels, we tested the dependent variable as both a
continuous and a categorical variable. The results
showed no significant difference in the estimation based
on the treatment of the performance variable, and the
reported results are with team performance as a contin-
uous variable.
Table 1 Descriptive statistics, reliability, and correlations
Variables
M
SD
AVE
CR
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
1. Team performance
2.03
0.82
−a
−a
−a
2. Perceived customer satisfaction
5.67
0.99
−a
−a
.35**
−a
3. Customer boundary spanning
4.97
1.16
.65
0.92
.30**
.42**
.92
4. Top management coordination
4.07
1.11
.49
0.79
.10
.15*
.24**
.78
5. Cross-functional coordination
3.54
0.93
.42
0.78
.09
.12
.25**
.32**
.77
6. Within-team management
5.45
0.80
.55
0.87
.18
.21**
.65**
.25**
.30**
.87
7. Scouting
3.47
0.99
.49
0.77
.11
.18*
.30**
.27**
.35**
.33**
.76
8. Team satisfaction
5.38
0.94
−a
−a
.28**
.38**
.27**
.15*
.21**
.27**
.14
−a
9. Competitive advantage in price
3.30
1.33
−a
−a
.07
.01
.02
.16*
.24**
–.05
.16*
.10
−a
10. Competitive advantage in service
5.10
1.26
−a
−a
.12
.42**
.26**
.18*
.23**
.11
.26**
.10
.11
_a
*p<.05. **p<.01. a Single-item measure
N=167. Cronbach’s alpha is on the diagonal, CR, composite reliability
J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2015) 43:472–489
481

Discussion
Recognizing the growing utilization of dedicated sales teams
to manage large customer accounts, we attempt to advance
extant research by focusing on the challenge these teams face
in managing both customer and firm boundaries to deliver
performance. We found support for our contention that coor-
dinating information across multiple internal and external
boundaries can create both job demands and job resources
that work to both hinder and help the value creation and value
appropriation processes.
Summary of findings and theoretical implications
Our study is the first to distinguish between customer and firm
sales activities and the dual tension of managing both custom-
er satisfaction and team performance. Therefore, our study
makes important contributions to the team selling literature by
integrating the sales team, boundary spanning, and JD-R
literature to provide a more realistic and comprehensive un-
derstanding of sales teams’ activities and performance. Our
study also contributes to the boundary spanning literature by
distinguishing between customer boundary spanning and
Table 2 Results
Hypothesis/
expected effect
Main effects model estimation
with endogeneity/self-selection
correction
Full model estimation with
endogeneity/self-selection
correction
Perceived
customer
satisfaction
Team
performance
Perceived
customer
satisfaction
Team
performance
Intercept
5.77** (.07)
2.02** (.07) 5.81** (.07)
1.97** (.07)
Main effects
Customer boundary spanning
H1a (+); H1b (+) .31** (.09)
.10 (.09)
.28** (.08)
.13* (.08)
Top management
.04 (.06)
–.02 (.06)
.02 (.06)
–.02 (.06)
Cross-functional
–.07 (.07)
–.02 (.07)
–.04 (.06)
–.05 (.06)
Within-team management
–.12 (.09)
.00 (.08)
–.12 (.09)
.02 (.08)
Interactions
Customer boundary spanning × top management
H2a (−); H2b (+)
–.12** (.05)
.10** (.05)
Customer boundary spanning × cross-functional
H3a (+); H3b (+)
.14** (.06)
–.14** (.06)
Customer boundary spanning × within-team management H4a (−); H4b (+)
–.10 (.06)
.13** (.05)
Controls
Team satisfaction
.26**(.06)
.28**(.06)
Perceived customer satisfaction
.28** (.07)
.29** (.07)
Scouting
.01 (.07)
–.02 (.07)
.01 (.07)
–.02 (.06)
Price
–.06 (.07)
.08 (.07)
–.07 (.06)
.08 (.06)
Service
.34** (.07)
–.10 (.07)
.35** (.07)
–.11 (.07)
Self-selection variables
^υ
–.10 (.21)
.46** (.20)
–.11 (.21)
.45** (.19)
^υ × CBS
–.31* (.15)
.13 (.15)
–.24 (.16)
.06 (.16)
Ordinary least squares F (p-value)
9.71 (.0001)
3.48 (.0004) 8.46 (.0001)
3.54 (.0001)
Ordinary least squares R2 (R2
adj)
.38 (.34)
.18 (.13)
.42(.37)
.23(.17)
SUR system weighted R2
.30
.34
(1) A positive coefficient of ^υ indicates that we have controlled for an upward bias of customer satisfaction/team performance due to the potential
endogeniety of customer boundary spanning. A positive coefficient of ^υ x CBS indicates that we have controlled for an upward bias of customer
satisfaction/team performance due to the range of high customer boundary spanning levels
(2) The incremental variance explained (ΔR2 =0.04) by the full model (control variables + main effects + interactions) over the constrained model
(control variables + main effects) is statistically significant (F=9.27, p<0.05)
**p<.01. *p<.05
a We report the regression coefficient with standard errors in parentheses. Consistent with extant paradigms, for the hypothesized effects, we report one-
tailed tests for statistical significance. We estimate both models using ordinary least squares and find that all results remain unchanged except for the
interaction CBS and WITH in the customer satisfaction model turns significant. For the self-selection variables, we consider customer boundary
spanning (CBS) a potential source of self-selection/endogeniety bias
482
J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2015) 43:472–489

within-firm coordination activities and the dual tension of
managing both. That is, we reveal both functional and dys-
functional interactions between customer and within-firm co-
ordination, contrary to the overwhelmingly positive view
found in the literature based on the examination of a single
boundary (e.g., Ancona and Caldwell 1990, 1992; Miao and
Evans 2013). Finally, our research expands the sales literature
by incorporating two potentially competing team outcomes. In
general sales teams will need to manage the tension between
the two performance outcomes and will need to determine the
impact of various types of within-firm coordination.
Previous research has examined boundary spanning from
one organization to another either inside or outside the firm or
as an activity that affects within-team management (Marrone
2010). We extend and contribute to the literature by simulta-
neously examining three different sources of sales team activ-
ity: those from sales team to firm, those from sales team to
customer, and those within the sales team. As a sales manager
noted, “There are three essential circles here, there’s the cus-
tomer, the company, and there’s the team.” The results suggest
that customer boundary spanning and within-firm coordina-
tion are distinct forms that interact to affect customer satisfac-
tion and performance in asymmetric ways. Harking back to
the three research questions we raised previously, we uncov-
ered empirical evidence that has important implications for
both theory and practice.
Performance implications of customer boundary
spanning We examined how external customer boundary
spanning activities affect customer satisfaction and team per-
formance. This research shows that, other things equal, cus-
tomer boundary spanning has a positive effect on customer
satisfaction, in support of previous studies that espouse the
cooperative versus competitive nature of customer relation-
ships (Tuli et al. 2007; Tuli et al. 2010). However, customer
boundary spanning has a directional, but not significant, im-
pact on team performance. That is, other things equal, cus-
tomer boundary spanning does not necessarily lead to team
performance. Nevertheless, we feel that the results of the
main-effects model support the cooperative nature of custom-
er relationships.
Interaction of within-firm coordination and customer bound-
ary spanning The results suggest that the relationships be-
tween customer boundary spanning and customer satisfaction
and sales team performance are subject to several contingen-
cies. We find support for the contingent expectations that
externally focused customer boundary spanning plays two
different roles to internally focused top management coordina-
tion: a substitute in delivering customer satisfaction and a
complement in delivering team performance. In addition, cus-
tomer boundary spanning is effective when the level of cross-
functional coordination is high when delivering customer sat-
isfaction. In contrast, when the metric is internal—namely,
team performance—cross-functional coordination exerts a neg-
ative moderating effect on customer boundary spanning. This
finding suggests that for superior team performance, customer
boundary spanning is effective when it is high and the level of
cross-functional coordination is low. Finally, we find that
within-team management is complementary in delivering team
performance. These results contribute to the boundary span-
ning and team selling literature by moving from a main effects
framework to a contingency framework and showing the po-
tential negative interactive effect of within-firm coordination
activities on customer satisfaction or team performance.
Outcome of boundary spanning activities: internal versus
external outcomes By using perceived customer satisfaction
and team performance, our study employs two team-level
variables to measure the outcome of boundary spanning ac-
tivity. This is especially relevant, considering that these two
outcomes often result in tension within the sales team. In the
face of competing needs, this research provides evidence that
the different outcomes can affect whether within-firm coordi-
nation or customer boundary spanning activities are more
important in meeting team objectives. In other words, it is
not as simple as improving customer satisfaction to meet
performance objectives; there is a point at which the cost
PANEL A
Perceived Customer Satisfaction Outcome
PANEL B
Team Performance Outcome
Fig. 3 Customer boundary spanning x top management coordination. CBS, customer boundary spanning; TOP, top management coordination
J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2015) 43:472–489
483

and resources associated with meeting customer satisfaction
objectives must be considered (Homburg et al.
2011).
However, the performance paradox that stems from
potentially conflicting demands of varied internal and external
constituencies can also positively influence team perfor-
mance. The ability to manage seemingly paradoxical perfor-
mance outcomes can lead to increased learning, creativity, and
flexibility within the team. By effectively managing the ten-
sion between the two demands, sales teams can reach an
equilibrium that allows for short term excellence and long-
term success (Smith and Lewis 2011).
Managerial implications
Our findings have several important implications for man-
agers. As sales teams grow and become more structurally
complex, managers increasingly need to communicate with
multiple parties. Dedicated sales teams are created to enhance
cooperation between buyer and seller and to satisfy their needs
quickly through the represented functions available within the
team. The internal sources of information, though valuable
when customer boundary spanning is low, do not provide an
acceptable substitute for buyer–seller cooperation. However,
when integrating information from the customer and the sell-
ing firm while managing a multifunctional team, managers
must determine how to manage multiple sources of informa-
tion. We summarize the interaction effects of within-firm
boundary spanning activities on both outcomes to inform
managers of the complementary and substitution effects of
internal and external information and resources.
Joint impact of customer and within-firm activities on custom-
er satisfaction When customer satisfaction is the manager’s
primary focus, developing a clear understanding of customers
and their needs through customer boundary spanning provides
the best means to improve customer satisfaction across all
interaction effects. By working closely with the customer, de-
veloping a common understanding between the two parties, and
sharing information across organizations, the dedicated team is
b e t t e r a b l e t o m e e t c u s t o m e r s a t i s f a c t i o n
objectives.
Interestingly, managers’ ability to incorporate in-
formation from either top management or other functions with
customer boundary spanning activities has differing effects on
customer satisfaction. The best source of information for
PANEL A
Perceived Customer Satisfaction Outcome
PANEL B
Team Performance Outcome
Fig. 4 Customer boundary spanning x cross-functional coordination. CBS, customer boundary spanning; CROSS, cross-functional coordination
Team Performance Outcome
Fig. 5 Customer boundary
spanning × within-team
management team performance
outcome. CBS, customer
boundary spanning; WITHIN,
within-team management
484
J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2015) 43:472–489

satisfying customers comes from top managers within the firm
when there is limited access and input from the customer. Other
managers within the firm have experience with a variety of
customers, and their input provides best practices that can
improve overall customer satisfaction. However, as the level
of customer boundary spanning increases, managers should
focus more on the customer. The generalized input received
from top management, based on experience with other cus-
tomers, may not be consistent with the unique requirements of
a specific customer. Integrating both can attenuate the positive
impact of customer boundary spanning and result in a less
optimal outcome than using the more customized source of
information.
However, managers should increase coordination with oth-
er functions within the firm in combination with customer
boundary spanning to improve customer satisfaction. The
findings indicate that at high levels of customer boundary
spanning the multifunctional aspects of the dedicated sales
team enable managers to quickly reach out to the parent
organization for input on customer requests that cannot be
addressed within the team resulting in more satisfied cus-
tomers. However, at low levels of customer boundary span-
ning, managers should have a limited need to reach out to
other functions. Because there is little customer driven input,
solutions should be available within the team. As a result, low
levels of both lead to more satisfied customers.
Joint impact of customer and within-firm activities on team
performance For team performance, the combination of high
levels of customer boundary spanning and within-firm activ-
ities have a minimal or negative effect, the opposite of what
managers experience when focusing on customer satisfaction.
Managers that excessively focus on the customer may over-
commit resources to the relationship which, while satisfying
the customer, reduces overall profitability (Homburg et al.
2011). This is especially critical in the case of dedicated sales
teams. Because they are created to service large customers,
they have a tendency to go native, and these actions can have a
direct impact on overall firm profitability. By incorporating
firm objectives into its day-to-day interactions with the cus-
tomer, the team is less likely to spend excess resources in
meeting customer needs. The asymmetric interaction results
for customer satisfaction and team performance indicate that
managers need to be aware of multiple outcomes and how
they combine firm and customer information.
The highest level of performance occurs when managers
combine top management and customer inputs. Top-level
information from within the firm provides managers clear
insight into the organizational goals of the firm, and the
combination of customer and firm boundary spanning enables
the sales team to incorporate customer and profitability objec-
tives to meet team performance objectives. We also find that at
low levels of customer boundary spanning, high levels of top-
level coordination can reduce the effectiveness of team per-
formance because teams become increasingly focused on firm
objectives, leading to an inability to integrate customer needs
with internal firm objectives. We find similar results with the
within-firm management interaction. The results suggest that
high levels of within-team management enable managers to
clearly integrate firm goals and objectives into the team.
Because the team has a high level of understanding of both
team and customer objectives, it performs better.
However, contrary to expectations, increased levels of cross-
functional coordination can decrease team performance when
combined with customer boundary spanning. When there is
limited customer information, input from other functions pro-
vides managers with better access to overall organizational
needs. However, at high levels of customer boundary spanning,
cross-functional coordination has a negative effect. Because
dedicated teams have a variety of functions, they are largely
self-sufficient, and when customer boundary spanning infor-
mation is available, managers should be able to readily respond
to customers. Higher levels of cross-functional coordination
indicate that the sales team does not have the necessary internal
resources and cannot perform at the same levels as other teams.
Limitations
This research has several limitations. First, the study is cross-
sectional. Because our analytical method controls for
endogeneity, it help us address one of the key limitations of
cross-sectional data. Moreover, cross-sectional studies are
commonly found in the marketing literature. Notwithstanding,
a longitudinal study that uses data collected from each sales
team to determine how the relationship develops over time
would provide additional insights into the dynamic impact of
boundary spanning on satisfaction and performance. Next, we
were limited by using dedicated sales teams from a single firm
which may limit generalizability. When examining team sell-
ing it is often difficult to collect primary data (Jones et al.
2005). A study that captures various dedicated sales teams
from the seller’s perspective or even dyadic data would pro-
vide additional insights. However, given the large number of
selling teams and the controls around price and service, the
single firm we examined provides a reasonable view into
boundary spanning activities.
The dataset itself also has several limitations. First, the data
were aggregated at the team level, so we do not have the
responses of individual team members. As a result, we do not
have control variables to capture differences across teams in
terms of size, tenure and diversity. Our focus was on team-level
interactions, so the aggregated responses adequately meet the
study’s needs. Another limitation is that we only have single
item measures of the dependent variables. The requirements of
the participating firm limited the ability to use multi-item
scales. However, previous research has effectively incorporated
J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2015) 43:472–489
485

single item measures of customer satisfaction (e.g., Bolton and
Lemon 1999). A final limitation is that we only have data from
the sales team and not the customer. As a result, we cannot
control for customer characteristics and have only a perceptual
measure of customer satisfaction. Ideally, we would like to
have input from the customer. However, previous research
indicates that in general contact employees are good sources
of information on customer attitudes (Bitner et al. 1994) and a
perceptual measure can be used when an accurate objective
measure is not available (Dess and Robinson 1984).
Future research
This study provides an introduction to the study of meeting the
needs of multiple external organizations and the sales team at
the same time. We identified select moderators to reflect the
impact of organizational practices and attitudes on boundary
spanning activities; however, other moderating factors may
interact with the tradeoffs made between external clients and
the internal organization. Research should also examine dyadic
moderators that are equally important to both parties, such as
shared values, goals, or strategies. Another interesting area for
exploration would be to examine the boundary spanning activ-
ities across a variety of firms. The business relationship and its
character may play an important role on both internal and
external relationships and the desired outcome. For example,
a retailer such as P&G may have a very different relationship
with Walmart than a construction firm does with its clients.
In addition to dedicated sales teams, this research may be
applicable to other teams that span multiple boundaries within
the firm. Previous research focuses on marketing relationships
with other functions at a singular level, but not on how
simultaneously maintaining multiple relationships affects
team and firm outcomes. For example, the relationship be-
tween marketing and finance or technology may influence
relationships with customers or outside vendors. Or within
the firm, the relationship with finance and IT may interact to
impact marketing and sales measures. The tension caused by
managing activities with potentially conflicting objectives
occurs across the entire organization.
A final opportunity exists in examining different types of
relationships or relationship stages in which to evaluate
boundary spanning activities. This study does not distinguish
between the states of maturity of the relationship. Further
research could explore whether the same relationships hold
in situations in which the buyer–seller relationship is relatively
new or when there exists asymmetry in power or dependency
differs. An example of a discrepancy in power would be a
situation in which there is a large buyer and small supplier, or
vice versa. Overall, this research provides a first step in
examining the process of managing multiple boundaries at
the same time; many potential opportunities exist to further
expand this research stream.
Appendix
Table 3 Scale items
Perceived customer satisfaction a
Team performance
Likert scale ranging from 1 (“not satisfied”) to 7 (“very satisfied”)b Ranking: low, medium, highb
Outside supervising managers assessment of the sales team
Consider all of your customer’s experiences with your team in
general. Overall, how satisfied would you say the customer is
with your sales team?
capturing the sales team’s potential in terms of sales, sales growth, profit
growth and profitability
Customer boundary spanningc
Cross-functional coordination
Likert scale ranging from 1 (“strongly disagree”) to 7 (“strongly
agree”)
My manager…
Likert scale ranging from 1 (“strongly disagree”) to 7 (“strongly agree”)
Extent of coordination and interface between the following groups and your
manager
1…Creates a vision for the work and shares it with his/her
customers (.86)
2…Enrolls all resources at the customer who are available to build
their business results (.80)
3…Sets stretch goals and shares mutual responsibility for results
(.77)
4…Builds skills and knowledge (mastery) of the customer (.81)
5…Jointly works with the customer to eliminate issues and
barriers in achieving business results (.82)
6…Identifies, values, and leverages skills and assets of customers
(.78)
1 Finance (.77)
2 Product supply (.65)
3 Research and development (.56)
4 Management systems (.69)
5 Human resources (.55)
486
J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2015) 43:472–489

References
Ahearne, M., MacKenzie, S. B., Podsakoff, P. M., Mathieu, J., & Lam, S.
K. (2010). The role of consensus in sales team performance. Journal
of Marketing Research, 47, 458–69.
Aiken, L., & West, S. G. (1991). Multiple regression: testing and
interpreting interactions. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.
Alldredge, K. G., Griffin, T. R., & Kotcher, L. K. (1999). May the sales
force be with you. The McKinsey Quarterly, 3, 110–21.
Ancona, D. G. (1990). Outward bound: strategies for team survival in an
organization. Academy of Management Journal, 33, 334–65.
Ancona, D. G., & Caldwell, D. F. (1990). Beyond boundary
spanning: managing external dependence in product develop-
ment teams. The Journal of High Technology Management
Research, 1, 119–135.
Ancona, D. G., & Caldwell, D. F. (1992). Bridging the boundary: external
activity and performance in organizational teams. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 37, 634–65.
Anderson, P. F. (1982). Marketing, strategic planning and the theory of
the firm. The Journal of Marketing, 46, 15–26.
Bagozzi, R. P., & Yi, Y. (1988). On the evaluation of structural equation
models. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 16, 74–94.
Bagozzi, R. P., & Yi, Y. (2012). Specification, evaluation, and interpre-
tation of structural equation model. Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, 40, 8–34.
Bagozzi, R. P., Yi, Y., & Phillips, L. W. (1991). Assessing construct
validity in organizational research. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 36, 421–458.
Bakker, A. B., & Demerouti, E. (2007). The job demands-resource model:
State of the art. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 22, 309–328.
Bakker, A. B., van Veldhoven, M., & Xanthopoulou, D. (2010). Beyond
the demand-control model: thriving on high job demands and re-
sources. Journal of Personnel Psychology, 9, 3–16.
Belsley, D. A., Kuh, E., & Welsch, R. E. (1980). Regression diagnostics.
New York: Wiley.
Bettencourt, L. A., & Brown, S. W. (2003). Role stressors and customer-
oriented boundary-spanning behaviors in service organizations.
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 31, 394–408.
Bharadwaj, S. G., Bharadwaj, A., & Bendoly, E. (2007). The perfor-
mance effects of complementarities between information systems,
marketing, manufacturing, and supply chain processes. Information
Systems Research, 18(4), 437–53.
Bitner, M. J., Booms, B. H., & Mohr, L. A. (1994). Critical service
encounters: the employee’s viewpoint. Journal of Marketing, 58,
95–106.
Bolton, R. N., & Lemon, K. N. (1999). A dynamic model of customers’
usage of services: usage as an antecedent and consequence of
satisfaction. Journal of Marketing Research, 36, 171–186.
Boyd, B. K., Dess, G. G., & Rasheed, A. M. A. (1993). Divergence
between archival and perceptual measures of the environment:
causes and consequences. Academy of Management Review, 18,
204–226.
Bradford, K. D., Challagalla, G. N., Hunter, G. K., & Moncrief,
W. C. (2012). Strategic account management: conceptualizing, in-
tegrating, and extending the domain from fluid to dedicated ac-
counts. Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management, 32, 41–
56.
Bradford, K. D., Brown, S., Ganesan, S., Hunter, G. K., Onyemah, V.,
Palmatier, R., Rouziès, D., Spiro, R., Sujan, H., & Weitz, B. (2010).
The embedded sales force: connecting buying and selling organiza-
tions. Marketing Letters, 21, 239–53.
Bunderson, J. S., & Sutcliffe, K. M. (2002). Comparing alternative
conceptualizations of functional diversity in management teams:
process and performance effects. Academy of Management
Journal, 45, 875–93.
Cameron, A. C., & Trivedi, P. K. (2010). Microeconometrics using stata.
College Station: Stata Press.
Cannon, J. P., & Perreault, W. D., Jr. (1999). Buyer-seller relationships in
business markets. Journal of Marketing Research, 36, 439–460.
Cespedes, F. V. (1995). Concurrent marketing: integrating product, sales
and service. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Chen, G., Bliese, P. D., Payne, S. C., Zaccaro, S. J., Webber, S. S., &
Mathieu, J. E. (2002). Simultaneous examination of the antecedents
and consequences of efficacy beliefs at multiple levels of analysis.
Human Performance, 15, 381–409.
Choi, J. N. (2002). External activities and team effectiveness: review and
theoretical development. Small Group Research, 33, 181–208.
Table 3 (continued)
Top management coordination
Likert scale ranging from 1 (“strongly disagree”) to 7 (“strongly
agree”)
Extent of coordination and interface between the following groups
and your Manager
1 Other sales team managers (.50)
2 Directors/VPs for your sales team (.68)
3 Sales top management (.82)
4 Company executives (VP and above non-sales management)
(.76)
Within-team managementc
Likert scale ranging from 1 (“strongly disagree”) to 7 (“strongly agree”)
My manager…
1…Creates a vision for the work and shares it with his/her team members (.61)
2…Enrolls all resources in the sales team to build the team’s business results (.72)
3…Sets stretch goals and shares mutual responsibility for results (.79)
4…Builds skills and knowledge (mastery) of his/her team members (.72)
5…Jointly works with sales team members to eliminate issues and barriers in
achieving business results (.75)
6…Identifies, values, and leverages skills and assets of sales team members (.79)
Team satisfaction
Likert scale ranging from 1 (“strongly disagree”) to 7 (“strongly
agree”)
All in all, we are satisfied with our work.a
Scouting d
Likert scale ranging from 1 (“strongly disagree”) to 7 (“strongly agree”)
Indicate the degree to which these information types are available to your team
Advance information on new technologies that may affect the team (.56)
Information on competitor’s relative overall performance results (.60)
Information on benchmarking inside your sales team (.73)
Information on benchmarking outside your sales team (.80)
Price, service
What is your level of competitive advantage in the market on these
factors?
Likert scale ranging from 1 (“very low”) to 7 (“very high”)
Pricea, servicea
Standardized factor loadings are in parentheses. All factor loadings are significant at p<.001. a Adapted from Bolton and Lemon (1999). b Single-item
measure. c Adapted from Marrone et al. (2007). d Adapted from Ancona and Caldwell (1990)
J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2015) 43:472–489
487

Day, G. S. (2000). Managing market relationships. Journal of the
Academy of Marketing Science, 28, 24–30.
De Jong, A., De Ruyter, K., & Lemmink, J. (2004). Antecedents and
consequences of the service climate in boundary spanning self-
managing service teams. Journal of Marketing, 68, 18–35.
De Ruyter, K., De Jong, A., & Wetzels, M. (2009). Antecedents and
consequences of environmental stewardship in boundary-spanning
B2B teams. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 37, 470–
487.
Dess, G. G., & Robinson, R. B. (1984). Measuring organizational per-
formance in the absence of objective measures: the case of the
privately‐held firm and conglomerate business unit. Strategic
Management Journal, 5, 265–273.
Draper, N. R., Smith, H., & Pownell, E. (1966). Applied regression
analysis (Vol. 3). New York: Wiley.
Edmondson, A. (1999). Psychological safety and learning behavior in
work teams. Administrative Science Quarterly, 44, 350–83.
Edmondson, A. (2003). Speaking up in the operating room: how team
leaders promote learning in interdisciplinary action teams. Journal
of Management Studies, 40, 1419–52.
Evans, M. G. (1985). A Monte Carlo study of the effects of correlated
method variance in moderated multiple regression analysis.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 36,
305–323.
Fornell, C., & Larcker, D. F. (1981). Evaluating structural equation
models with unobservable variables and measurement error.
Journal of Marketing Research, 18, 39–50.
Ganesan, S. (1994). Determinants of long-term orientation in buyer-seller
relationships. Journal of Marketing, 58, 1–19.
Garen, J. (1984). The returns to schooling: a selectivity bias ap-
proach with a continuous choice variable. Econometrica, 52,
1199–1218.
Gerbing, D. W., & Anderson, J. C. (1988). An updated paradigm for scale
development incorporating unidimensionality and its assessment.
Journal of Marketing Research, 25, 186–92.
Grewal, R., Chakravarty, A., & Saini, A. (2010). Governance mecha-
nisms in business-to-business electronic markets. Journal of
Marketing, 74, 45–62.
Hackman, J. R. (1987). The design of work teams. In J. Lorsch (Ed.),
Handbook of organizational behavior (pp. 315–42). Englewood
Cliffs: Prentice Hall.
Hambrick, D. C., Finkelstein, S., & Mooney, A. C. (2005). Executive job
demands: new insights for explaining strategic decisions and lead-
ership behaviors. Academy of Management Review, 30, 472–91.
Heide, J. B., & Wathne, K. H. (2006). Friends, businesspeople, and
relationship roles: a conceptual framework and a research agenda.
Journal of Marketing, 70, 90–103.
Heskett, J. L., Jones, T. O., Loveman, G. W., Sasser Jr., W.E. &
Schlesinger Jr., L. (1994). Putting the service-profit chain to work.
Harvard Business Review, March-April, 164–74.
Holger, E., Hoyer, W. D., & Rübsaamen, C. (2010). Sales, marketing, and
research-and-development cooperation across new product devel-
opment stages. Journal of Marketing, 74, 80–92.
Homburg, C., Workman, J. P., Jr., & Jensen, O. (2002). A configurational
perspective on key account management. Journal of Marketing, 66,
38–60.
Homburg, C., & Jensen, O. (2007). The thought worlds of marketing and
sales: which differences make a difference? Journal of Marketing,
71, 124–142.
Homburg, C., Müller, M., & Klarmann, M. (2011). When should the
customer really be king? On the optimum level of salesperson
customer orientation in sales encounters. Journal of Marketing, 75,
55–74.
Hu, L., & Bentler, P. M. (1998). Fit indexes in covariance structure
modeling sensitivity to underparameterized model misspecification.
Psychological Methods, 3, 424–453.
Hutt, M. D., Johnston, W. J., & Ronchetto, J. R., Jr. (1985). Selling
centers and buying centers: formulating strategic exchange patterns.
Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management, 5, 32–40.
Janis, I. L. (1982). Groupthink: psychological studies of policy decisions
and fiascoes. Boston: Wadsworth.
Johnson, J. L. (1999). Strategic integration in industrial distribution
channels: managing the interfirm relationship as strategic asset.
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 27, 4–18.
Johnson, J. L., Sohi, R. S., & Grewal, R. (2004). The role of relational
knowledge stores in interfirm partnering. Journal of Marketing, 68,
21–36.
Jones, E., Busch, P., & Dacin, P. (2003). Firm market orientation and
salesperson customer orientation: Interpersonal and intrapersonal
influences on customer service and retention in business-to-
business buyer-seller relationships. Journal of Business Research,
56, 323–40.
Jones, E., Dixon, A. L., Chonko, L. B., & Cannon, J. P. (2005). Key
accounts and team selling: a review, framework, and research agen-
da. Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management, 25, 182–198.
Jöreskog, K. G. (1969). A general approach to confirmatory maximum
likelihood factor analysis. Psychometrika, 34, 183–202.
Joshi, A., Pandey, N., & Han, G. (2009). Bracketing team boundary
spanning. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 30, 731–59.
Katz, D., & Kahn, R. L. (1978). The social psychology of organizations.
New York: Wiley.
Keller, R. T. (2001). Cross-functional project groups in research and new
product development: diversity, communication, job stress, and
outcomes. Academy of Management Journal, 44, 547–55.
Krasnikov, A., & Jayachandran, S. (2008). The relative impact of mar-
keting, research-and-development, and operations capabilities on
firm performance. Journal of Marketing, 72, 1–11.
Lafley, A. G., & Charan, R. (2008). The game-changer: how
every leader can drive everyday innovation. London: Profile
Books.
Lee, J.-Y., Sridhar, S., Henderson, C. M., & Palmatier, R. W. (2012).
Effect of customer-centric structure on firm performance. Marketing
Science Institute Working Paper Series, No. 12–111.
Lysonski, S. (1985). A boundary theory investigation of the product
manager’s role. Journal of Marketing, 49, 26–40.
Marks, M. A., Mathieu, J. E., & Zaccaro, S. J. (2001). A temporally based
framework and taxonomy of team processes. Academy of
Management Review, 26, 356–76.
Marrone, J. A. (2010). Team boundary spanning: a multilevel review of
past research and proposals for the future. Journal of Management,
36, 911–40.
Marrone, J. A., Tesluk, P. E., & Carson, J. B. (2007). Multilevel
investigation of antecedents and consequences of team member
boundary spanning behavior. Academy of Management Journal,
50, 1423–39.
Mathieu, J. E., Heffner, T. S., Goodwin, G. F., Salas, E., Cannon-Bowers,
J. A., et al. (2000). The influence of shared mental models on team
process and effectiveness. The Journal of Applied Psychology, 85,
273–283.
McFarland, R. G., Challagalla, G. N., & Shervani, T. A. (2006).
Influence tactics for effective adaptive selling. Journal of
Marketing, 70, 103–117.
Miao, C. C., & Evans, K. (2013). The interactive effects of sales control
systems on salesperson performance: a job demands-resources per-
spective. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 41, 73–90.
Moon, M. A., & Armstrong, G. M. (1994). Selling teams: a conceptual
framework and research agenda. Journal of Personal Selling &
Sales Management, 14, 17–30.
Morgan, N. A. (2012). Marketing and business performance. Journal of
the Academy of Marketing Science, 40, 102–119.
Morgan, R. M., & Hunt, S. D. (1994). The commitment-trust theory of
relationship marketing. Journal of Marketing, 58, 20–38.
488
J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2015) 43:472–489

Narayandas, D., & Rangan, V. K. (2004). Building and sustaining buyer–
seller relationships in mature industrial markets. Journal of
Marketing, 68, 63–77.
Palmatier, R. W., Dant, R. P., Grewal, D., & Evans, K. R. (2006). Factors
influencing the effectiveness of relationship marketing: a meta-
analysis. Journal of Marketing, 70, 136–53.
Podsakoff, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., & Podsakoff, N. P. (2012).
Sources of method bias in social science research and recom-
mendations on how to control it. Annual Review of Psychology,
63, 539–569.
Porter, M. (1980). Competitive strategy: techniques for analyzing indus-
tries and competitors. New York: The Free Press.
Ramsey, J. B. (1969). Tests for specification errors in classical linear least-
squares regression analysis. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society,
31, 350–71.
Rouziès, D., Anderson, E., Kohli, A. K., Michaels, R. E., Weitz, B. A., &
Zoltners, A. A. (2005). Sales and marketing integration: a proposed
framework. Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management, 25,
113–122.
Siders, M. A., George, G., & Dharwadkar, R. (2001). The relationship of
internal and external commitment foci to objective job performance.
Academy of Management Journal, 44, 570–79.
Siemsen, E., Roth, A., & Oliveira, P. (2010). Common method bias in
regression models with linear, quadratic, and interaction effects.
Organizational Research Methods, 13, 456–476.
Slater, S. F., & Olson, E. M. (2000). Strategy type and performance: the
influence of sales force management. Strategic Management
Journal, 21, 813–29.
Smith, J. B. & Barclay, D. W., (1990). Theoretical perspectives on selling
center research in Proceedings of the 1990 AMA Winter Educators’
Conference, David Lichtenthal, Robert E. Spekman et al., eds.
Chicago: American Marketing Association, 5–11.
Smith, W. K., & Lewis, M. W. (2011). Toward a theory of paradox: a
dynamic equilibrium model of organizing. Academy of Management
Review, 36, 381–403.
Stock, R. M. (2006). Interorganizational teams as boundary spanners
between supplier and customer companies. Journal of the
Academy of Marketing Science, 34, 588–599.
Tuli, K. R., Kohli, A. K., & Bharadwaj, S. G. (2007). Rethinking
customer solutions: from product bundles to relational processes.
Journal of Marketing, 70, 1–17.
Tuli, K. R., Bharadwaj, S. G., & Kohli, A. K. (2010). Ties that bind: the
impact of multiple types of ties with a customer on sales growth and
sales volatility. Journal of Marketing Research, 47, 36–50.
Ulaga, W., & Reinartz, W. J. (2011). Hybrid offerings: how manufactur-
ing firms combine goods and services successfully. Journal of
Marketing, 75, 5–23.
Weitz, B. A., & Bradford, K. D. (1999). Personal selling and sales
management: a relationship marketing perspective. Journal of the
Academy of Marketing Science, 27, 241–54.
Wheaton, B. B., Muthen, B., Alwin, D. F., & Summers, G. F. (1977).
Assessing reliability and stability in panel models. In D. R. Heise
(Ed.), Sociological methodology. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
White, H. (1980). A heteroskedasticity-consistent covariance matrix es-
timator and a direct test for heteroskedasticity. Econometrica, 48,
817–38.
Workman, J. P., Jr., Homburg, C., & Jensen, O. (2003).
Intraorganizational determinants of key account management effec-
tiveness. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 31, 3–21.
Zablah, A. R., Franke, G. R., Brown, T. J., & Bartholomew, D. E.
(2012a). How and when does customer orientation influence front-
line employee job outcomes? A meta-analytic evaluation. Journal of
Marketing, 76, 21–40.
Zablah, A. R., Chonko, L. B., Bettencourt, L. A., Aleen, G., & Hass, A.
(2012b). A job demands-resources perspective on new product
selling: a framework for future research. Journal of Personal
Selling & Sales Management, 23, 73–87.
Zellner, A. (1962). An efficient method of estimating seemingly unrelated
regressions and tests for aggregation bias. Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 57, 348–68.
J. of the Acad. Mark. Sci. (2015) 43:472–489
489
