doi: 10.1111/padm.12117
ONLY GOODFENCESKEEPGOODNEIGHBOURS!
THEINSTITUTIONALIZATIONOFMINISTRY–AGENCYRELATIONSHIPSATTHESCIENCE–POLICYNEXUSIN GERMANFOODSAFETYPOLICY
REBECCA-LEA KORINEK AND SYLVIA VEIT
This article makes a further contribution to opening the ‘black box’ of micropractices in
ministry–agency relationships. We argue that the mechanisms that come into play in the courseof institutionalizing agencification reforms– such as renegotiating mutual roles and rules inministry–agency interactions– are only poorly covered in the existing literature. To adequatelyaddress the negotiated and contingent nature of de facto agency autonomy and political control,we develop an interpretive approach based on the concept of ‘boundary work’. The empiricalfocus is on ministry–agency interactions at the science–policy nexus in the contested policy fieldof food safety. By studying actors’ stories about the institutionalization processes following thefundamentalreorganization of theGerman foodsafety administrationin thewakeof the BSEcrisisfrom a longitudinal perspective, we show how actors manage boundary conflicts via increasinglydifferentiatedbackstage coordination.
INTRODUCTION
For almost two decades, a growing body of literature within public administration
has focused on agencification reforms – that is, the delegation of regulatory and other
state competencies to various forms of formally semi-autonomous bodies (e.g. Pollittetal.2001; Gilardi 2005; Christensen and Lægreid 2006; Van Thiel etal.2012). While this
research has provided important insights, for example with regard to the lack of a clear
relationship between formaland de facto autonomy of agencies, it is still struggling to
capture the mechanisms that come into play in the course of the institutionalization of
the agencification reforms in practice (Yesilkagit 2004). To adequately address microlevel
institutionalization dynamics, such as the renegotiation of mutual roles and rules in
ministry–agency relationships, we concur with other recent contributions to the field
in arguing that much is to be gained from adopting an interpretive approach to the
agencification phenomenon (Moynihan 2006; Flinders 2009; Smullen 2010; Hay 2011;Elston 2014).
This article sets out to address this microlevel practice gap by interpreting the institu-
tionalizationofagencificationwithinaspecificsetting,namelythescience–policynexusin
Germanfoodsafetypolicy,whichwasfundamentallyreorganizedinthewakeoftheBSE
crisis in the early 2000s. To explore the question how the intra- and inter-organizational
roleunderstandingsandpracticesinministry–agencyrelationshipschangedafterreorga-
nization, we develop a heuristic allowing us to conceptualize de facto agency autonomy
as the result of ‘boundary work’ (Gieryn 1983). Methodically, we draw on narrative data
fromsemi-structured,personalexpertinterviewsconductedwithvariousmembersoftheorganizations involved.
Rebecca-Lea Korinek is at the Cultural Sources of Newness Unit, at the Berlin Social Science Center Berlin (WZB), Ger-
many.SylviaVeitis intheFacultyof Economicsand Management,UniversityofKassel,Kassel,Germany.
PublicAdministrationVol.93,No.1, 2015 (103–120)© 2014 John Wiley& Sons Ltd.
104 REBECCA-LEAKORINEKANDSYLVIAVEIT
WHY WE NEED AN INTERPRETIVE APPROACH TO AGENCY AUTONOMY
In the 1990s scholars began to observe a growing number of semi-autonomous agen-
cies spreading across countries and sectors, resulting in the metaphorical diagnosis of
‘agency-fever’ (Pollitt etal.2001). In addition to mapping, assessing, and explaining the
rise and renewal of agency landscapes, agencification research has focused on concep-
tualizing and empirically assessing ‘agency autonomy’. A major analytical distinctionis made between formal autonomy (‘the level of decision-making competencies’) and
de facto autonomy (‘the exemption of constraints on the actual use of decision-making
competencies’) (Verhoest etal.2004, p. 104). According to this conception, autonomy is
inherentlya quantitative phenomenon.Thishasconsiderableimplicationsforhowagency
autonomy is approached empirically, namely in terms of the varying degreesof formal or
de facto autonomy.
Most of the scholars focusing on de facto autonomy attempt to measure the autonomy
of executive agencies on the basis of large- Nsurvey research (Verhoest etal.2012). One
remarkablefindingstatesthatinanumberofcountriesthereisstillaconsiderabledegree
ofpoliticalcontrolovertheoperationalworkofagencies.Ahigherdegreeofformalauton-
omyhencedoesnotalwaysimplyahigherdegreeofdefactoautonomy(e.g.Yesilkagitand
VanThiel2008;Maggetti2012).Atthesametime,however,thepatternsofautonomyand
control in the actual ministry–agency interactions are contingent on different contextual
factors (Verhoest etal.2012). These survey results lend some support to critiques ques-
tioning one of the dominant New Public Management myths: namely, the possibility and
universal rationality of a clear separation between politics/policy (having the primacy)
and bureaucracy.
StudyingDutchagencies,YesilkagitandVanThiel(2008)concludethattherelationships
between autonomy and control are highly complex and that the question remains howmechanisms ofcontrol workinpractice, given thehighdegree ofinfluence thattheagen-
cies ascribed to governmental actors, according to their survey. Discussing the method
used,theyfinallyarguethatthequestionofthepracticaloperationofautonomyandcon-
trol, that is, the way in which agencies respond to external expectations, requires ‘a more
dynamic approach’ than survey research permits (Yesilkagit and Van Thiel 2008, p. 152).
Ronessetal.(2008,p.168)arguethatsuchfindings,whichdrawarathermessypictureof
howthepatternsofautonomyandcontrolfunctioninpractice,areentirelyplausiblecon-sideringthedeeply negotiated andcontingent natureofagencyautonomy.Finally,Verhoest
etal.(2010), though supporting basic claims made by ‘task-specific path-dependence the-
ory’(Pollitt etal.2004),suggestthatthereshouldbeastrongerfocusinfutureresearchon
‘the mechanisms and logics in the minds of the key actors involved’ (Verhoest etal.2010,
p. 269).
Thisbriefliteratureoverviewshowsthatwhilepreviousresearchhasproducedimpor-
tant insights, several questions remain unanswered: How do actors use and understandthe concept of agency autonomy and political control? What mechanisms come into play
inthe course oftheinstitutionalization oftheagency model, forexample interms of‘role
purification’(ChristensenandLægreid2006),followingtheestablishmentofnewagencies
(Yesilkagit 2004)? If the agency model is contested, how does this contestation take place,
andhowmightthemodelreassertitselfinthefaceofcontestations?Howdothedifferentinstitutional logics of politics, bureaucracy, and other social spheres shape organizational
sensemaking processes with regard to the agency model?
Public AdministrationVol. 93, No.1, 2015 (103–120)
© 2014JohnWiley &SonsLtd.
INSTITUTIONALIZATIONOFMINISTRY–AGENCYRELATIONSHIPS 105
Answering questions such as these, we argue, requires us to supplement the existing
researchbyadoptinganinterpretivemicroperspectiveonagencification.Inthefollowing,
weshallthusdevelopaheuristicenablingustoaddressthemicrolevelofsensemakingin
institutionalization processes.
STUDYING AGENCIFICATION THROUGH INTERPRETIVE LENSES
In line with a phenomenological view of institutions (Meyer 2008), we address the
microlevel of institutionalization as a process– rather than as a property– by drawing on
theconceptualizationofinstitutionalizationinwhich‘sensemaking’and‘boundarywork’
are key discursive mechanisms.
Tolbert and Zucker (1996, p. 181) refer to institutionalization as a ‘set of sequential
processes – habitualization, objectification and sedimentation’. In a preinstitutionaliza-
tion phase (habitualization), there is little sense for the necessity and the general utility
of a new structural arrangement (p. 181). Habitualization is followed by processes ofobjectification in which some form of social consensus concerning the value of new
structures inproblem-solving iscreatedwithinorbetweenorganizations. Thisconsensus
emergeswhenthenewarrangementisjustifiedasasolutiontothepre-identifiedproblem
using logical or empirical argumentation (p. 183). Hence, objectification involves the
developmentofgeneral,sharedsocialmeaningsattachedtonewstructuralarrangements
(Zucker 1977). Finally, when there is historical continuity in practising the new struc-
tural arrangements, they are gradually completely institutionalized (sedimentation). The
practices are then transmitted to new members of the organization who lack knowledge
of their origins and are apt to treat them as ‘social givens’ (Tolbert and Zucker 1996,
p. 181).
WhereasTolbertandZucker(1996)areparticularlyconcernedwiththeemergingstruc-
turesandpracticesonthemesoleveloforganizationalfields,Weick(1995,p.36)focuseson
microlevelsensemakingasthe‘feedstockofinstitutionalization’.AccordingtoWeick,the
wayactorsinterpretnewstructuralarrangementsisinfluencedbytheirinitialidentitycon-
structions(pp.18–24).Whatactorsthinktheyare(identityconstruction)asorganizational
actors affects how they interpret new roles and rules (Weick etal.2005, p. 409). More-
over, from a sensemaking perspective, identity constructions are shaped by how actors
are viewed by others: ‘Who we are lies importantly in the hands of others, which means
our categories for sensemaking lie in their hands’ (p. 409). Using Weick’s understanding
of sensemaking processes we can analyse how actors make sense of reform models on
the basis of initial identities that inform the meaning they attribute to newly established
organizational structures.
With Weick, we can also focus on how actors’ initial identities come to be destabilized
and more receptive to new meanings. He allows us to see how this occurs within pro-
cesses that involve changes in how actors are viewed by others. These changes typically
occur when new rules and roles are habitualized, objectified, and sedimented following
organizationalreformsthatdisruptestablishedorganizationalnormsandworldviews(p.
416).Moreover,Weickteachesusthat‘sensemakingisaboutorganizingthroughcommu-
nication’(p.413).Yet,hissensemakingapproachprovidesuswithnoguidanceastohow
thedifferentcommunicativemicropracticesinvolvedinthewayactorsmakesenseofnew
roles and rules can be analytically distinguished.
Wearguethattheconceptof‘boundarywork’(Gieryn1983),originatinginsciencestud-
ies, helps us to understand how actors struggling to make sense of their changing roles
Public AdministrationVol.93, No.1, 2015 (103–120)
© 2014JohnWiley &SonsLtd.
106 REBECCA-LEAKORINEKANDSYLVIAVEIT
in institutional reforms deal with contradictory institutional logics. According to Gieryn
(1983),scientificactorsareconstantlyworkingondrawingandredrawingtheboundaries
between science and other knowledge forms in order to maintain the epistemic authority
ofscientificactorsinjudgingtruth.Boundaryworkis,however,notonlyadiscursivestrat-
egy for maintaining scientific autonomy. It is also a discursive device used to expandthe
scientific field of influence into areas dominated by actors from different social spheres,
such as politics or bureaucracy (or vice versa), and to coordinate the different and in part
contradictory expectations (Hoppe 2005). It is thus a useful heuristic for reconstructing
thediscursivestrategiesusedbyactorsatthescience–policynexusin(re)negotiatingtheir
roles and rules governing their interactions. However, it would be misleading to assumethatboundaryworkisa purelyrational-intentionalpracticeasthetermof‘boundarywork
strategies’mightimply.Rather,reflexiveactorsdrawoninstitutionalframesandlogicsto
both emergently and deliberately account for why a boundary is (or is not) legitimately
drawn, maintained or overstepped.
BOUNDARY WORK ANALYSIS: OPERATIONALIZATION AND METHOD
We distinguish between three types of boundary work strategies at the science–policy
interface (table 1). Demarcation is a discursive device to uphold autonomy that entails
disclaiming external expectations as normatively illegitimate, thereby advocating indif-
ference to all but one’s own criteria of relevance and legitimacy (Jung 2014). Applying
this to ministry–agency interactions at the science–policy nexus means that the demar-
cation device is used by ministries to protect political decision-making processes from
attemptsbyscientificadvisoryagenciestoimposetheirscientificlogicontheseprocesses.
Conversely,demarcationcanalsobeusedbyscientificadvisoryagenciestowardoffmin-
istries wishing to have a say in the agency’s internal processes of knowledge production
and communication (Korinek and Veit 2013).
Expansion involves the expectation that actors from other social spheres will adapt to
one’s own norms and standards, while again framing external demands as illegitimate
(Jung 2014). Applied to our object of study, expansion is about ministerial attempts to
TABLE1 Discursivedevicesofboundarywork(owncompilation,basedonKorinekandVeit2013)
Boundary work device Operationalization
1. Demarcation Ministry/agencydisclaimothers’expectationsasnormativelyillegitimateand
advocatethe demarcationofexternaldemands
⇒maintaining autonomyofpoliticaldecision-making/scientific knowledge
production
2. Expansion Ministry/agency claimsthatthe otherpartyhas to adapttotheir owncriteria
ofrationality,whilewardingoffexternaldemands atthe sametime
⇒scientizationofpolitics/politicizationofscience
3. Strategicadaptation Ministry/agency claimsthatits ownadaptationto the other’sdemands is
bothnormativelylegitimateand strategicallynecessary
⇒reflexivizationofpolitico-administrativedecision-making/scientific
knowledge production
Public AdministrationVol. 93, No.1, 2015 (103–120)
© 2014JohnWiley &SonsLtd.
INSTITUTIONALIZATIONOFMINISTRY–AGENCYRELATIONSHIPS 107
TABLE2 Institutionalizationandboundarydiscourses(owncompilation)
Institutionalization phase Boundary discourse
Habitualization ⇒expansion anddemarcationdiscourses dominateover
strategicadaptationdiscourses Uncertaintyandconflictaboutnewroles
andrules
Objectification ⇒strategicadaptationdiscourses dominateoverdemarcation
andexpansion discourses Workingconsensusonthedefinitionof
newrolesandrules
Sedimentation ⇒strategicadaptationdiscourses marginalizeexpansion and
demarcationdiscourses Takenforgrantednessofnewrolesand
rules
politicize the agency’s work in the field of scientific knowledge production and attempts
by agencies to scientize politico-administrative decision-making (Korinek and Veit 2013).
However,actorsalsoclaimattimesthatadaptationtoexternaldemandsisbothnorma-
tivelylegitimateandstrategicallynecessaryintermsoftheirownidentity-boundmotives.Strategic adaptation is thus a third device of boundary work (Jung 2014). Ministries con-
cedeagencyautonomyandadapttoscientificexpertlogiconlywhenandwherescientificautonomyisdeemedausefulmeansforachievingpoliticalgoalssuchaspubliclydemon-strating policy credibility. Independent or semi-autonomous scientific advisory agencies,in turn, adapt to political needs only where and when they regard the primacy of poli-tics as a legitimate and necessary means for realizing their own strategies. Thus, strategicadaptationisaboutnegotiatingwhen,where,andwhyscientificadvisoryagenciesshouldadapt to politico-administrative expectations and vice versa, with actors thereby becom-ingmorereflexiveintheirownidentityandexpectationsinrelationtootheridentitiesand
expectations. Table 1 summarizes this operationalization.
Turningtotheempiricalmaterial,itisreasonabletoassumethatinanyorganizational-
institutionalsettingallthreediscursivedevicesofboundaryworkarepresent(Jung2014).Yet, we claim that we can observe a hierarchical pattern of these boundary work dis-courses at particular time periods along Tolbert and Zucker’s (1996) institutionalizationroute. Combining the three devices of boundary work with these three phases of institu-tionalization leads us to expect the following patterns (table 2):
1. In the phase of habitualization, conflict about new roles and rules, expansion and
demarcation discourses will be dominant due to a lack of understanding of the use-fulness of the new reform model.
2. Astimepasses,theprimenarrativesmakingsenseofthenewstructuralarrangement,
however, might change. The concepts of autonomy/control might shift from beingpredominantlyframedasanillegitimateanddysfunctionalexpansionofauthoritybybothpartiestobeingportrayedasnormativelylegitimateandnecessaryforachieving
organizational goals. The story then is primarily about explaining why strategically
adapting to external rationalities is both appropriate and necessary and about why,accordingly, actors should concede autonomy in certain respects or accept politicalcontrolinotherrespects.Inthiscase,whenstrategicadaptationdiscoursesdominateoverexpansionanddemarcationdiscourses,wecanspeakofanobjectificationofthenew arrangement.
Public AdministrationVol.93, No.1, 2015 (103–120)
© 2014JohnWiley &SonsLtd.
108 REBECCA-LEAKORINEKANDSYLVIAVEIT
3. While expansion discourses will still be visible and partly challenge the dominance
of demarcation and strategic adaptation discourses in the objectification phase, theybecome generally marginalized if and when the new reform model is sedimented.
Thus, in the phase of sedimentation, when the negotiated roles and rules become
taken for granted, strategic adaptation is the widely unquestioned dominant dis-course.
Methodology
Following what Ospina and Dodge (2005) called ‘the narrative turn in public administra-
tion’, we analyse these ‘boundary discourses’ as they manifest themselves in the stories
that members from different levels within ministries and agencies tell. The aim of this
narrative analysis is to understand how particular collective stories legitimizing or dele-gitimizing agency autonomy become dominant in the process of institutionalization and
how they act as a means of resocialization that prescribes or reinforces particular actions.
By analysing the way a storyteller includes or excludes, emphasizes or de-emphasizes,particular experiences or actions, we can reconstruct how the teller interprets the events
and actions that have occurred and how she evaluates how things used to be, how they
are, and how they should be (Czarniawska 1998; Feldman etal.2004).
Data collection
We drew our narrative data from different fieldwork sources. These included interviews
andofficialdocumentssuchasguidelinesandconferencedocumentation,aswellasfieldnotestakenduringparticipantobservationoftwopubliceventsorganizedbytheBfR(tri-
angulation).Weconducted23semi-structuredexpertinterviewsfromJune2011toAugust
2012, which lasted from 45 to 120 minutes. They were all fully and precisely transcribedwith advanced rules including cross talk and long pauses. We assumed that the storiestold and received would vary according to the various organizational loci and therefore
selectedintervieweesinpositionsrangingfromagencypresidents,headsofdivisionsand
subdivisions to section leaders and heads of research groups and laboratories. The inter-views probed how the organization members had experienced the changes connected to
the agencification reform in practice and addressed broader sets of different themes cov-
ering more general issues such as ‘policy change’, or ‘evidence-based policymaking’ and‘risk communication’, as well as the nitty-gritty details of intra- and inter-organizational
coordination.
Data analysis
In accordance with the interpretive focus of the study, we applied a reconstructive
sequence-oriented microanalysis, proceeding in two steps.
First,weanalysedthestoriesinthe microcontext ofthesequencesinwhichtheyoccurred.
Here,wefocusedasmuchaspossibleonthenarrativedatathemselves – thatis,theform,
content, and structure of the story told. Within this, we devoted particular attention to
the storytellers’ use of personal, temporal, and spatial deixis (Krzy ̇zanowski 2010, p.
88). Tracing personal deixis (e.g. we, us, our, they, them, their) allowed us to observe
the interviewee’s allegiance and non-allegiance to certain groups described in the story,
and her construction of her own agency in the actions recounted in the story. Analysingspatialdeixis(e.g.there,here,atthetop,atthebottom)enabledustoseetheinterviewee’s
self-positioning as regards hierarchical subordination or superiority. Examining different
temporal deixis (e.g. then, now, in the beginning) allowed us to explore the scope of
Public AdministrationVol. 93, No.1, 2015 (103–120)
© 2014JohnWiley &SonsLtd.
INSTITUTIONALIZATIONOFMINISTRY–AGENCYRELATIONSHIPS 109
different phases of the stories that were told (What was then? Why? And what is now?
What has changed? Why?).
Onthebasisofthismicroanalysis,wewentthroughalloftheidentifiedstoriesinorder
todetectastoryline – thatis,thebasicpointthatwethoughttheintervieweewasmaking
about the practical operation of ministry–agency interactions and the changes associated
withtheagencyreform(Feldman etal.2004,p.154).Inadditiontothisinductiveapproach,
wealsoperformedamoredeductiveanalysisbydrawingontheabove-describedanalyti-
calheuristicofboundaryworkwhichwasrefinedoverthecourseofanalysingthestories.
In the second step of analysis, we located our preliminary interpretations of the stories
within a multilayered context. In doing this, we drew on our knowledge of (a) the local
mesocontext oftheorganizationalsocialandpoliticalspacesstudied,aswellasourknowl-
edgeof(b)the macrocontext ofpolicyandadministrativetraditions(BevirandRhodes2003,
p. 71).
With all identified stories and storylines from the transcript at hand, we used a col-
laborative process to identify two main storylines. One storyline was about the conflicts
caused by what we interpreted as practices of expansion becoming especially visible in
theearlyyearsofthereform.Anotherstorylinewasabouthowtheorganizationsinvolved
arrived at a consensus regarding the overall success of the new agency model, which we
interpreted as a story of strategic adaptation occurring during the phase of objectifica-
tionaccordingtoouranalyticalheuristic.Beforewepresentourfindings,thenextsection
firstbrieflysketchesouttheinstitutionalanddiscursivecontextoftheGermanfoodsafetyadministration.
GERMAN FOOD SAFETY ADMINISTRATION IN CONTEXT
In Germany, scientific policy advice is most commonly organized in the form of ‘gov-
ernmental research agencies’ (GRAs) that are usually ‘multiple purpose organizations’
performingvariousadministrativeandregulatorytasksinadditiontoconductingresearch
and giving scientific policy advice (Bach and Döhler 2012, p. 6). As a consequence of the
German‘departmentalprinciple’andthedoctrineofministerialresponsibility,GRAs(and
indeed almost all German federal agencies) are traditionally subject to full ministerial
(legalandfunctional) oversight. Due to their hybrid accountabilities to the political and
the scientific sphere, GRAs are traditionally perceived as being both scientifically valid
and politically relevant and legitimate expert bodies.
In the wake of the German BSE crisis, however, the federal GRAs responsible for food
safety were blamed for having failed to assess, manage, and communicate scientific
evidence neutrally and openly (von Wedel 2001). As a result, the organization of the
science–policynexusinfoodsafetypolicy,neverapoliticallysalientbutratheratechnical
issue,becameafront-stagepoliticaltheme.Coherentandobjectiveandtherewithcredible
risk assessment and communication came to be defined as something that required more
scientific autonomy than traditionally assigned to GRAs (Jung and Korinek 2014).
Accordingly, the scientific advisory system in food safety policy was fundamen-
tally reorganized in 2001–02 (Janning 2011, pp. 158–65). The Federal Institute for
Health Protection of Consumer and Veterinary Medicine (BgVV) was dissolved,
and two new single-purpose organizations were created in its place: one scien-
tific risk assessment and risk communication agency, the Federal Institute for Risk
Assessment (BfR); and one risk management agency, the Federal Office of Consumer
Protection (BVL).
1
Public AdministrationVol.93, No.1, 2015 (103–120)
© 2014JohnWiley &SonsLtd.
110 REBECCA-LEAKORINEKANDSYLVIAVEIT
The BfR is responsible for producing scientific opinions on the risks to human health
from food, chemicals, and other consumer products either on request or on its own
initiative. The recipients of these recommendations are the various federal ministries,
mainlytheFederalMinistryforConsumerProtection,FoodandAgriculture(BMELV)and
the risk management agency BVL, which conducts authorization procedures. Since the
establishment of the BfR in 2002, the number of risk assessments produced per year has
increased from 2,200 to 3,080 in 2012 (BfR 2012, p. 8), indicating regular interactions with
ministries. The BfR conducts its own research and runs national reference laboratories
in a number of fields. One of the main characteristics of the BfR is its formal autonomy
in terms of risk research and public communication. The BfR was initially composed of
former staff members from its predecessor agency, the BgVV. Today it has 756 employees
(BfR2012, p.8).
The BVL is responsible for authorization and risk management, fulfilling various
coordinationandservicetasksbothforEU-levelbodiesandforthefederalstates( Länder).
On the national level, the BVL is responsible for crisis management and for manag-
ing authorization procedures, for example for plant protection substances, veterinary
medical products, and genetically modified organisms. In contrast to the BfR, the BVL
is subject to BMELV’s legal and functional oversight. On authorization procedures,
there is very close cooperation between the BVL and the BfR; the majority of BfR risk
assessments are part of the authorization procedures conducted by the BVL. Like the
BfR, the BVL is a successor organization of the BgVV. Today, it employs around 522 staff
members.
Summingup,thespecialcharacterandhistoryofthefederalfoodsafetyadministration
makes it a particularly suitable setting to study, from a longitudinal perspective, one of
the key questions in agencification research: How do the intra- and inter-organizational
role understandings and practices in ministry–agency interactions change when a mul-
tipurpose organization previously under full ministerial supervision formally becomes a
semi-autonomous, single-purpose organization?
BOUNDARY DISCOURSES IN MINISTRY–AGENCY INTERACTIONS
In the following, we will reconstruct the changing boundary work discourses within
two different phases of the institutionalization processes (habitualization, objecti-
fication). Looking back at more than one decade of operational practice, there is
a clear awareness among all the interviewees that the implementation of the sep-
aration model was (and sometimes still is) not without problems, conflicts, and
dilemmas that required particular management practices in order to be solved. The
next section deals with how such boundary conflicts were played out in the phase of
habitualization.
Habitualization: What does itmean to be an ‘independent risk assessor’?
When we asked about ‘critical moments’ in the implementation phase of the reform
model, we were told a story in which conflicts over new roles and rules disturbed the
inter-organizational workflow in the early days of the new organizational arrangement.
What was highly controversial was the question of how the concept of an independent
risk assessment and communication should relate to the scope of political definitional
power in risk management. The reform in 2002 made providing legal evaluations and
policyrecommendations theexclusivetaskoftheBVL.However,thewaytheBfRstarted
Public AdministrationVol. 93, No.1, 2015 (103–120)
© 2014JohnWiley &SonsLtd.
INSTITUTIONALIZATIONOFMINISTRY–AGENCY RELATIONSHIPS 111
to engage with the new reform model was informed by its traditional self-understanding
as a ‘multipurpose’ organization whose remit included both assessing risks scientifi-
cally and evaluating policy and legal implications. As such, the members of the BfR’spredecessor organization were explicitly required to consider political and legal con-
straints in their work. However, after the reform, the ministry and the BVL perceived
the inclusion of concrete policy recommendations and legal evaluations in the BfR’srisk assessment reports as an ‘inappropriate overstepping of its domain of author-
ity’ (#7). They expected the BfR to provide a range of more general policy options
and not just formulate single and detailed policy recommendations including legal
evaluations.
In addition to sticking to its ‘old’ identity as a multipurpose organization, the BfR
increasingly internalized the newly assigned ‘public education function’ as part of its
identity. The agency now perceived itself as a ‘scientific corrective’ (#1,5) to the political
sphere, ‘established with the aim of balancing the [political] unwillingness to commu-nicate’ (#1). From the risk managers’ perspective, this self-description was not without
its problems because it ignored their demands for independent risk communication. As
one official complained: ‘the difficulty wasthen, if someone is an independent scientist ,h e
will tend to say things immediately andclearly, just like his profession and also his mandate
dictates, and in addition, possibly also will give a recommendation for action. And then
there is the expectation behind this: I have done all this scientific work, …and, actually,
I have given them recommendations 1, 2, 3 of what to do’ (#2). A colleague remembered
the initial problems of independent risk communication in a similar way: ‘Because youare obliged to educate the public, and then you tend to immediately put many things
online. And that is not always a good thing’ (#4).
As these quotations demonstrate, providing anything more than purely scientific risk
assessmentshereisframedassteppingoutsidetheagency’sdomainofauthority.Inaddi-
tion,astheitalicizedwordshighlight,understandingthe‘publiceducation’mandateasa
purely scientifictask – thatis,ataskthatshould becarried outexclusively onthebasisof
scientificnormsandstandards(e.g.publishorperish;linguisticprecision) – isdeemedan
illegitimate and dysfunctional expansion of the new agency’s authority.
The ministry regularly felt ‘put on the spot when a blockbuster runs through the news
tickerat5p.m.onFriday’(#2).ThisquoteusesemotivelanguagetorefertotheBfR’sinitial
practice of publishing scientific risk assessment results, typically prompting immediatemedia interest, without informing the ministry in advance. The ministry was denied a
time buffer in order to become acquainted with the case or to at least allow the ministry
toprepareapressreleasefortheminister.Asaconsequence,itoften‘feltdriven’(#2,3)bythe BfR in the early years after the reform.
In the face of these dilemmas, the key challenges perceived were learning to give the
ministry time buffers to prepare public statements, and giving the ministry and the BVL
roomformanoeuvreinriskmanagement.Constitutiveofgrantingpolitico-administrative
room for manoeuvre was developing a language reflecting the ministry’s and the BVL’sautonomy in risk management, thereby modifying the agency’s autonomy in risk com-
munication in response to politico-administrative demands.
2For the ministry, the BfR’s
autonomy in public risk communication required using ‘language, that doesn’t containany risk management instructions and is comprehensible’ – that is, language that avoids
‘stumblingblocksinthecommunication’,suchastheuseof‘should’insteadof‘must’and
is not ‘replete with references’ (#3).
Public AdministrationVol.93, No.1, 2015 (103–120)
© 2014JohnWiley &SonsLtd.
112 REBECCA-LEAKORINEKANDSYLVIAVEIT
Habitualization: What does itmean tobearisk manager?
The interpretive conflicts did not solely focus on the independent risk assessor role but
alsoontheroleoftheministryandtheBVLasriskmanagers.Initially,ministrystaffstucktotheirtraditionalself-understandingasthe‘hierarchicalsuperiors’oftheBfRstaff,andtothenormofcommandandcontrolthatthisidentityimplies.ThefactthattheBfRwasnowformallyindependentinriskcommunicationparticularlychallengedtheministry’sestab-lished self-understanding. Several interviewees saw the ministry’s continued attempt to
‘prevent certain things from being published, or to postpone their publication’ (#5) as an
expression of its adherence to its former identity. In keeping with its traditional identity,it also continued to regard the BfR as its ‘extended workbench’ (#5) with the implicationthatministryofficials‘likedtocreatetheirownfeel-goodareawithintheBfR’(#5).Justashad been the norm beforehand, some junior-level officers expected the BfR’s scientists to
give advice or to carry out work orders ‘at the snap of the fingers’ (#5).
However,totheBfRtheministry’sbehaviourwasaninappropriateintrusioninto‘inter-
nal issues and procedures’ (#1), which its new mandate defined as autonomous fromministerial interventions. It felt negatively affected by the ministry’s uncoordinated hier-archicalinterventionsandbilateralrequestingpractices,whichcausedworkoverloadsinthe agency. Moreover, the BfR felt impeded in its mission to speak with one voice, which
wasseenasapreconditionforbecomingacceptedasa‘referenceauthority’(#1,5,3)infood
safety policy – that is, being deemed as an authoritative voice vis-à-vis both critics fromsocial interest groups and media as well as other experts in the field.
However, convincing the ministry that the only appropriate option was to adjust its
role and adopt a more horizontal interactional pattern vis-à-vis the BfR was no easy task.
Ministerial officials ‘were not amused, when they called us [the BfR] and then were not
servedonthespot’(#5).Theministry’sinitialdifficultiesinlettinggooftheirformerroleasthe‘hierarchicalsuperior’wasfurtherdescribedbyanotherBfRstaffmember:‘Ofcourse,accordingtotheministry’sunderstanding,somethinglikeourorganizationdoesn’texist,becauseforthemit’ssimplyunimaginablethatthereisanorganization,andalthoughit’sfinancedbytheministry,itisstillabletodowhateveritwants’(#6) .Thus,theBfRrealized
thatmaintainingitsformalautonomyinriskassessmentandcommunicationwouldpose
a challenge.
Oneofitsfirststepsalongthisroadwasmakingclearthattheministryneededtoadjust
to the idea that the BfR was autonomous in defining its internal and external workingpracticesandthatthiswasnecessaryinordertorestoreconsumertrust.Inthiscontext,the
ability of the agency’s president to cope with conflicts was seen as a crucial element: ‘as
a former professor …who had just entered the organization and therefore had no BgVV
orBGAexperience,heknewthathehadthemandate,weareallowedandareexpectedtoindependently assess and communicate risks’ (#5).
To sum up, we have illustrated in the examples above how the boundary between the
forms of autonomy and control that were considered legitimate and necessary and the
formsofautonomy/controlthatweredeemedillegitimateanddysfunctionalweredrawn
in different ways. Informed by their identities, actors attributed differing meanings tothe concept of scientific autonomy and deployed these ambiguous and contested under-standings in renegotiating roles and rules in ministry–agency interactions. According toour heuristic we can interpret these observations as ‘discourses of expansion’. Auton-
omy is, on the one hand, thought of as a means of monopolizing risk communication
and policy advice: by referring to the concept of scientific autonomy, the political expec-tations attributed to the practical operation of risk communication are disclaimed here
Public AdministrationVol. 93, No.1, 2015 (103–120)
© 2014JohnWiley &SonsLtd.
INSTITUTIONALIZATIONOFMINISTRY–AGENCY RELATIONSHIPS 113
as normatively illegitimate. Agency autonomy, in turn, is justified by the public educa-
tion function attributed to scientific experts. On the other hand, the dominant claim isthat understanding autonomous risk communication as an exclusively scientific task cre-ates dysfunction. What follows is an exploration of how these conflicting interpretationsresultinginexpansiondiscoursescametobereconciledbyusingdifferentboundaryman-
agement practices.
Objectification: Boundary management as conflict management
Coming to shared understandings of new roles and rules was a challenging process: ‘We
underwent a learning,athinking process, which we,here,a n dalso the staff , still had to
developin the course of time …if you introduce new rules, it normally takes four, five,
six yearsuntil theyreachthebottom down there ’ (#3).This ‘learning’ and ‘thinking process’
was fundamentally about redefining the new organization model as a strategic ‘successstory’withinacrisis-plaguedandcontestedpolicyfield.Astheaboveitalicizedwordssug-gest,fororganizationmemberstheprocessofacceptingthisstoryhasbeenaverylengthyone requiring considerable effort to establish top-down management. Let us first have acloserlookathowthenewgovernancemodelisnarratedasastrategicsuccessstory,beforeexploringthedifferentboundarymanagementpracticesusedtoenforcethisharmonizingsuccess story.
Managing boundary conflicts through strategic success stories
A constitutive element of the success story, which we read as ‘meta’ practice of conflict
managementusedfortheresocializationoforganizationmembers,isportrayingtherela-tionship between the ministry and the BfR as a strategic relationship serving the institu-tional self-interest of both. As a ministerial staff member put it: ’And if you ask me whathas changed? Simply the acceptance of the BfR as an independent scientific institution inthe public, in the multiplier groups has increased. And that’s the success, to place a newinstitutiononthemarketinarelativelyshorttimeframeandgetittothepointwherewhatthis institution says is considered equally credible by the media and the consumers. Andwith this in mind, one can also argue that this has resulted in increased consumer “trustin science” (#8).
Hence, the success story commences by pointing out the BfR’s increased public accep-
tance. It then proceeds by explaining why public acceptance, here the attribution of cred-ibility, is such an important indicator for assessing the success of the agency. An inde-pendent agency is politically useful because it functions as an epistemic authority in a
contested field – that is, in a ‘market’ where various experts are competing for credibility.
Autonomy here is, in short, justified by the epistemic authority attributed to an indepen-dent agency.
We also find a very similar and extensive discussion of the benefits of an independent
single-purposeagencyprovidingexclusivelyscientificadviceintheBfR’snarratives:‘Onehasrecognizedinthepolicyfieldthathereyouhave,let’ssay,toplacethereferencefunc-tionofscienceintheforeground,although,atthebottom,thisisasubstitute,Iwouldsay,for political decisions or the delegation of political decision making’ (#1) .Once again, the
lossofpoliticalprimacyinriskcommunicationisjustifiedbyrecoursetothenewagency’sepistemic authority. It is important to note that what is described as a ‘learning process’hereis‘toplacethereferencefunctionofscienceintheforeground’,althoughdefacto(‘atthe bottom’) this means the ‘replacement’ of political authority. Thus, in this passage it
Public AdministrationVol.93, No.1, 2015 (103–120)
© 2014JohnWiley &SonsLtd.
114 REBECCA-LEAKORINEKANDSYLVIAVEIT
becomesclearthatthestrategicadaptationnarrativeisindeedusedasadiscursivedevice
of boundary management.
Theepistemic‘referencefunction’isfurtherportrayedasallthemoreimportantwhere
‘the distinction between good and bad science, …is indeed a crucial one’. In such an
environment, the BfR is portrayed as ‘the sole agency in Germany whose core task is giv-
ing good advice to them [the government] and that’s indeed the case. We are the soleagency giving exclusively good advice because we don’t stamp and don’t authorize andthat makes it special, because the question is, how to deal with second-best advice? And
how to bring your people to a standard that ensures that the public regards the BfR as a
reference’ (#1) .
These sequences frame agency autonomy as a strategic necessity. Through its indepen-
dence, the knowledge the BfR produces is apt to be considered ‘good science’, which canbe demarcated from ‘bad science’. Thus, the benefit of agency autonomy in risk commu-
nication here is the generation and reassertion of epistemic authority in a politically and
epistemically contested policy field.
However, as should be clear from our previous analysis, this success story, which
relies on the mutual strategic benefit of the separation model, had to compete with
counter narratives. To manage these acceptance problems, the leadership in both
organizations used various coordination practices as means of resocializing orga-nization members and enabling a working consensus over new roles and rulesto emerge.
Managing boundary conflicts through bureaucratic coordination
Wecallthefirstsetofboundarymanagementpracticesusedtoenforcethestrategicadap-
tationnarrative‘bureaucraticcoordination’ – thatis,thetargetedandenhanceduseofclas-sicalintra-andinter-organizationalcoordinationpracticesofGermanministerialbureau-cracy.Onepracticewastograduallyunderminewhatwasperceivedasascientificmono-polization of risk communication by defining the BfR’s role not only with reference to its
researchactivitiesandscientificexpertise,butalsoonthebasisofitsresponsibilitiesasan
agency, that is,as a part of the politico-administrative system.
First and unsurprisingly, this meant fulfilling the ministerial expectation of ‘being
in constant touch’ (#2), and hence keeping the ministry informed about politically
and administratively important issues in the work of the agency. In particular in
the early days of the BfR, its president and vice-president were invited to weekly,sometimes even daily, telephone conversations or meetings with the ministry. Sec-ond, a ‘no surprises rule’ (#2,5,6) was agreed upon in order to give the ministry thechance to prepare press releases and coordinate a media or stakeholder communi-
cation strategy. According to this rule, the BfR’s risk assessment reports are to be
submitted to the ministry at least 24 hours prior to publication. The BfR acknowl-edged the general importance of such time buffers for political actors because theyhave learned to regard them as a prerequisite for the politico-administrative capac-
ity to act. Today, this rule is seen as a ‘self-evident professional practice in good
relationships’ (#8).
Conversely, a central means of avoiding the ministry’s interventions in what came to
be defined as the BfR’s ‘internal working procedures’ (#1,5,6) was an additional classicalbureaucratic coordination device, namely procedural formalization, centralization, and
hierarchization. An informal rule was agreed according to which all ministerial requests
have to be made by formal decree. This procedural formalization was accompanied by a
Public AdministrationVol. 93, No.1, 2015 (103–120)
© 2014JohnWiley &SonsLtd.
INSTITUTIONALIZATIONOFMINISTRY–AGENCY RELATIONSHIPS 115
centralization of the intra-organizational workflow within both the ministry and the BfR.
Within the BMELV, the section that was charged with supervising the department’s sub-ordinated agencies was assigned the distinct task of monitoring the implementation ofreorganization. One of the section’s prime tasks at that time was fostering change in theministry’s tradition of secrecy to bring about a ‘culture of openness and transparency’where‘consumerinformationisnowthecentralpillar’(#3).Aculturalchangeofthismag-nitude did not proceed without triggering conflicts within the ministry.
Duringtheinternaldiscussionsconcerningtheministry’snewrole,‘insomesituations,
somepeoplelostpatience’(#8).Overtime,theministry’sleadershipmanagedtointernally
achievea‘changeofconsciousness’:theministryinternallysucceededincentralizingcom-municationwiththeBfRinordertoavoidministerialinterventionsandbilateralrequests,which gradually came to be seen as running counter to the mutual goal of having anagency ‘speaking with one voice’ (#1,2,5). This centralization implies that the line organi-zation’s requests to the BfR always have to pass the desks of the respective section leaderand of the head of division.
The BfR also introduced new internal hierarchies and underwent a process of central-
ization in order to enable the agency to speak to the political sphere and the public withone voice. As a result, each ministerial decree is now first processed in the clearing unitwithin the division for risk communication. The clearing unit then makes a suggestion tothe president regarding which particular division or expert group should have responsi-bility for processing the request. After the division or group in charge has responded totherequestand,ifnecessary,coordinatedwithotherdivisions,therequestispassedtothedivision forriskcommunication, andthenbackagain tothepresidentbeforeitleaves thehouse.
Managing boundary conflicts through translation and standardization
Another boundary management practice involves adjusting the language of the sci-
entific risk assessors to conform to politico-administrative and legal demands and
rationalities (e.g. consistency with legal wording used in a court of law) by means of alegal-bureaucratic language regime. Here, the different rationalities of politics, law, andscience, often entailing contradictory normative and cognitive expectations concerningthe role of an independent scientific advisory agency, are translated into a language thatis perceived as politically and legally robust. Moreover, the agency’s leadership saw theneed to agree on standardized risk assessment terminology, making use of, for instance,thetermof‘verifying’insteadof‘tofindameasurementvalue’(#5)obligatoryforitsstaffmembers.
In order to create intra-organizational capacities for these translation and standard-
ization activities, the BfR’s president established a new division for risk communicationconsistingofsocialscientists,psychologists,lawyers,andmediaexperts.Thisdivisionini-tiatedthecreationofa‘GuidanceDocumentforHealthAssessments’containingconcreteformulations and definitions of risks, and thereby also serving as an internal coordina-tion device: ‘Because [the decision] whether the risk is now “high” or “medium high”, or“likely”, or “foreseeable” simply cannot be dependent on how person X or Y from divi-sion A or B pulls it out of his hat’ (#5). These guidelines, which are revised every secondyear, standardize the use of terminology in a number of respects: terminology for riskcharacterization, recommended management options, codifying scientific uncertainties,the concordant use of legal terms, and referring to legal provisions (BfR 2010, pp. 6–24).
Public AdministrationVol.93, No.1, 2015 (103–120)
© 2014JohnWiley &SonsLtd.
116 REBECCA-LEAKORINEKANDSYLVIAVEIT
For example, the phrase ‘health risks cannot be excluded’ should be avoided as it has no
merit in a court oflaw (p.24).
Theguidelinesalsoregulatetheoverallstructureandcontentofthereports,whichnow
start with a small grey box including a short summary and the conclusions drawn from
scientificresearch.Accordingtotheguidelines,thisshouldnotexceedoneparagraphand
should include an unambiguously formulated ‘take home message’ for politicians andthe general public (BfR 2010, p. 12). This ‘take home message’ is particularly valued bythe ministry as being ‘definitely the guidelines’ resounding success!’ because it helps totranslate the scientific findings into a ‘politically useful’ product (#2). For the ministry’sleadershipitisthesetranslationsthatparticularlyjustifyanddefendtheautonomyoftheBfRinriskcommunicationwhenitischallengedbyministerialstaffmembersattemptingtohaveasayinriskcommunication:‘Thenitalsowasmytask,toholddirecttalkswiththeinitiatorshereinthehouseandtomakeclearthatwehaveadifferentculturenow,itmayhurt you, but that’s how it is, but consumer information is now a main pillar of our con-sumerpolicyandwehavefoundsomeonewhodoesthis,whotranslatesthecomplicatedscientific language into a language which is also understood by the housewife in front ofthe stove, and that’s the BfR and it does this independently’ (#3) .
Remarkably,thistranslationandstandardizationregimewasacceptedbytheBfR’ssci-
entistsbecausetheygraduallyrecognizedthat‘thereisalsoacertainstrategyofthehouse
behindit!’(#5).Theguideline’sstrategicuseisseeninitsfunctionasaqualitymanagement
tool that in turn serves to safeguard the BfR’s scientists in disputes with other scientistsor experts. Having also been published in English, the guidelines became ‘an export hit,today,weevenhaveasummerschoolwithhundredsofapplicantsandtheyalllearnhowwe, how Germany, does risk assessment’ (#5). Moreover, the guidelines are strategicallyusedtodefinethecriteriaforobjectivelyassessingrisks(BfR2010,p.6),whichcanthenbeused to publicly legitimate BfR’s risk assessment practices. As a representative of the BfRexplained,itsinternalriskassessmentproceduresarelegitimatedbecausetheyaredefinedin guidelines that are publicly accessible and transparent.
Throughout the interviews, the BfR’s standardized approach to risk assessment is seen
as a crucial tool that is assisting it on its path to becoming a ‘reference authority’ (#1,5,3)thatcanproviderulesforresolvingdissentamongexpertsfromEuropeanriskassessmentagencies.Accordingtotheheadofthecommunicationdivision,theofficialguidancedocu-mentisinternallysupplementedbyadetailed‘no-golist’involvinganongoingcollectionof ‘typically wrong wordings’ (#5). The division for risk communication internally moni-tors risk assessors’ compliance with both the guidelines and the ‘no-go list’.
Summing up, what we see here is how in the phase of objectification the stories told
changed. Autonomy and control, both of which had been framed by the other party as adysfunctional and illegitimate authority expansion, now came to be portrayed as appro-priate and legitimate for achieving their mutual, reflexive self-interested goals of gainingormaintainingpoliticalandepistemicauthorityinthefoodsafetyfield.Inthisphase,thepredominantstorywasaboutexplainingtotheirownorganizationmemberswhy,where,and when precisely they should adapt to the other’s demands. In telling this story, actorsbecome more reflexive about their relation as independent risk assessors and risk man-agers whose hierarchical control competencies have been curtailed.
Public AdministrationVol. 93, No.1, 2015 (103–120)
© 2014JohnWiley &SonsLtd.
INSTITUTIONALIZATIONOFMINISTRY–AGENCY RELATIONSHIPS 117
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
The aim of this article was to understand how a new agency model situated at the
science–policy nexus became institutionalized over time. We studied the microlevel ofministry–agency interactions as they unfolded – and changed – in practice over more
thanonedecade.Ourreconstructionoftheempiricalmaterialwasgroundedinaheuristic
ofthreedifferenttypesofboundaryworkdevices,whichweexpectedtobehierarchically
patternedaccordingtothethreephasesoftheinstitutionalizationprocess(habitualization,
objectification, sedimentation).
Agency autonomy as a discursive relational phenomenon
Using a narrative approach to agencification we were able to systematically analyse
the way storytellers were making sense of their organizational realities after these hadchanged in an agencification reform and how they renegotiated new roles and rules
applying to their relationship within a lengthy iterative process. In the contested food
safetyfield,oneofthecentralidentitynormsconcernstheobjectivity(hereinthesenseof
disinterestedness from political or business interests) and scientific validity with which
food risks are assessed and communicated. The stories we were told were about howactors worked to enact objectivity and validity, thereby renegotiating when, where,
and why the ministry should concede scientific expert autonomy. Likewise, as much as
objectivityandvalidityareconstitutivenormsofscience,value-baseddecision-makingis
the identity constituting norm of politics. Thus, not only were the modes of ministerial
adaptation to the BfR’s rationality as a scientific advisory organization renegotiated butalso when, where, and why the BfR should adapt to politico-administrative demands
in order to grant the ministry room for political manoeuvre in relation to the agency’s
independent risk communication.
The perspective applied in this article thus highlights the qualitative and dynamic
(rather than quantitative) nature of changes in ministry–agency interactions following
agencification reforms. Accordingly, our suggestion for future research is twofold: we
propose considering agency autonomy as the dynamic and tense discursive intertwine-ment of autonomy demands on the one hand and utility expectations on the other hand
and thus as a discursive relational phenomenon (Jung 2014). Moreover, we propose that
the institutionalization of agencification reforms should be seen as a process in which
actors become more reflexiveconcerning their own organizational identity in relation to
other organizational identities in changing social environments, rather than as a matterof higher or lower degrees of autonomy.
Backstage coordination and front-stagereputation
Our empirical findings offer some constitutive insights that refine the strand of agen-
cification literature focusing on reputation management as a key resource for formally
independentagencies,whichallowsthemtocreateandcultivatedefactoautonomy(Car-
penter and Krause 2012). In the stories examined, conceding de facto agency autonomy
hasconsistentlybeenframedasaneffectivemeansofguaranteeingthattheagencymeets
expectations regarding its front-stage reputation, which involves producing risk assess-ments that are deemed both scientifically valid and objective andrelevant and robust by
stakeholders and the wider public. However, as our findings show, the ability to speak
with one unified voice and to produce reports that are deemed objective and robust can-
not be taken for granted; it is something that demands ‘backstage management’ – that is,
a tight coordination regime carefully concealed from the public (Hilgartner 2000).
Public AdministrationVol.93, No.1, 2015 (103–120)
© 2014JohnWiley &SonsLtd.
118 REBECCA-LEAKORINEKANDSYLVIAVEIT
Legally robust reports imply not only that they are deemed to be based on ‘sound
science’, but also that they are written using standardized legal terminology. Likewise,
socially robust risk assessment reports require not only the public attribution of scientific
validity and objectivity, but also easily comprehensible language. To fulfil these multiple
front-stage reputation requirements, both the ministry and the BfR have had to undergo
considerable intra-organizational hierarchization, centralization, and formalization.
Constructing the de facto autonomy of the agency as a whole required the individual
ministerial officials and risk assessors within the BfR to adapt to leadership expectations.
Yet, the story of strategic adaptation was at first only shared by the leadership of both
organizations; its acceptance at the lower levels required a lengthy process of top-down
management.
Drawing on these empirical results, our proposition for future research would be that
researchers should, rather than treating the expert authority of independent agencies as
a pre-existing property, examine how it is actively constructed by means of a carefully
orchestrated interplay between ‘front-stage performances’ and ‘backstage management’
practices involving the development of intra-organizational hierarchization, centraliza-
tion, and formalization (Hilgartner 2000; Hajer 2009; Korinek 2014).
The discursive embeddedness of agencification
Our findings suggest that boundary management practices and the working consen-
sus established through these practices are constitutively shaped by policy discourses
framing particular policy problems and policy solutions. The fundamental shift in the
framing of food safety policy that occurred in response to the BSE crisis had implications
for what the legitimate function of the science-based expertise produced by advisory
agencies is deemed to be, namely ‘public education’ that aims to enable consumers to
make rational choices on food risks. It is precisely in terms of this function that agency
autonomy is construed as a rational (utility argument) and a legitimate (normative
argument) solution to the policy problem of a dramatic loss of consumer trust. Thus, in
terms of future research we argue that to account for the identified patterns of de facto
agency autonomy, we must ask how policy problems were construed in different policy
sectors,andhowthesepolicyideasarere-embeddedintoexistingboundarymanagement
practices.
Of course, these propositions draw on a single case study and thus their generaliz-
ability needs to be explored in cross-national and/or cross-sectoral comparative studies.
Notwithstandingthecaveatsconcerningsinglecasestudies’generalizability,ouranalysis
underlinestheaddedvalueoffocusingonthemicroleveloforganizationsandthenegoti-
ation of boundaries (boundary work) in order to understand the mechanisms involved
in institutionalizing organizational change that remain – despite some important steps
made – to a surprising degree an unexamined issue in the existing literature. With this
article we hope to have made a further contribution in opening the ‘black box’ of intra-
and inter-organizational micropractices in ministry–agency relationships.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Theinterviewsonwhichthisarticleisbasedwereconductedinthecontextoftheresearch
project ‘Studying the Changing Orders of Political Expertise’ (SCOPE), carried out at the
WZB Berlin Social Science Center and funded by the Volkswagen Foundation. Interview
contributions from the Federal Ministry for Consumer Protection, Food and Agriculture
Public AdministrationVol. 93, No.1, 2015 (103–120)
© 2014JohnWiley &SonsLtd.
INSTITUTIONALIZATIONOFMINISTRY–AGENCY RELATIONSHIPS 119
(BMELV), the Federal Office of Consumer Protection (BVL), and the Federal Institute
for Risk Assessment (BfR) are gratefully acknowledged. In addition to two anonymous
reviewers,wewouldalsoliketothanktheparticipantsofthepanel‘DoesAdministrative
Structure Matter? The Effects of Agencification on the Policy Process’ at the XXII IPSA
World Congress of Political Science in Madrid, and the members of the Research Group‘Science Policy’ at the WZB for very helpful comments on earlier versions of this article.
NOTES
1This reorganization followed the institutional design of the EU-level administration, where, since 2002, risk assessment is
carried outseparately from riskmanagement.
2In addition, sufficiently taking into account issues of commercial confidentiality was regarded as a precondition forpolitico-administrative room for manoeuvre.
REFERENCES
Bach, T. and M. Döhler. 2012. ‘Mandated Science and the Problem of Neutral Expertise: The Case of Governmental Research
Agencies’. WZBDiscussionPaper SP III 2012–602.
Bevir, M.and R.A.W.Rhodes.2003. InterpretingBritishGovernance . London: Routledge.
BfR. 2010. LeitfadenfürgesundheitlicheBewertungen . Berlin: BfR.
BfR. 2012. 10JahreBundesinstitutfürRisikobewertung. Berlin: BfR.
Carpenter, D.P. and G.A. Krause. 2012. ‘Reputation and Public Administration’, Public Administration Review , 72, 1,
26–32.
Christensen,T.andP.Lægreid(eds).2006. AutonomyandRegulation:CopingwithAgenciesintheModernState. Cheltenham:Edward
Elgar.
Czarniawska, B. 1998. ANarrativeApproachtoOrganizationStudies . Thousand Oaks,CA: Sage.
Elston,T.2014. ‘NotSo“Arm’sLength”:ReinterpretingAgenciesinUKCentralGovernment ’,PublicAdministration ,92,2,458–76.
Feldman, M.S., K. Sköldberg, R.N. Brown and D. Horner. 2004. ‘Making Sense of Stories: A Rhetorical Approach to Narrative
Analysis’, JournalofPublicAdministrationResearchandTheory , 14, 2, 147–70.
Flinders, M. 2009. ‘Review Article: Theory and Method in the Study of Delegation: Three Dominant Traditions’, PublicAdminis-
tration, 87, 4, 955–71.
Gieryn, T.F. 1983. ‘Boundary-Work and the Demarcation of Science from Non Science: Strains and Interests in Professional Ide-
ologies of Scientists’, AmericanSociologicalReview , 48, 6, 781–95.
Gilardi, F. 2005. ‘The Institutional Foundations of Regulatory Capitalism: The Diffusion of Independent Regulatory Agencies in
WesternEurope’, AnnalsoftheAmericanAcademyofPoliticalandSocialScience , 598, 84–101.
Hajer, M. 2009. AuthoritativeGovernance:PolicyMakingintheAgeofMediatization. Oxford: OxfordUniversity Press.
Hay,C.2011.‘InterpretingInterpretivismInterpretingInterpretations:TheNewHermeneuticsofPublicAdministration’, Public
Administration , 89, 1, 167–82.
Hilgartner, S. 2000. ScienceonStage:ExpertAdviceasPublicDrama . Stanford, CA: StanfordUniversityPress.
Hoppe,R.2005.‘RethinkingtheScience–PolicyNexus:FromKnowledgeUtilizationandScienceTechnologyStudiestoTypesof
Boundary Arrangements’, Poiesis&Praxis , 3, 3, 199–215.
Janning, F. 2011. Die Spätgeburt eines Politikfeldes: Die Institutionalisierung der Verbraucherschutzpolitik in Deutschland und im inter-
nationalenVergleich. Baden-Baden: Nomos.
Jung, A. 2014. ‘Autonomieansprüche und Leistungserwartungen –(Dis)Kontinuitäten der Grenzarbeit wissenschaftlicher Poli-
tikberatung ’,inM.Franzen,A.JungandD.Kaldewey(eds), Autonomierevisted–BeiträgezueinemumstrittenenGrundbegrifffür
dieBeobachtungvonWissenschaft,KunstundPolitik, Special Issue of ZeitschriftfürTheoretischeSoziologie , forthcoming.
Jung,A.andR.-L.Korinek.2014. ‘CulpritsandProblemSolvers:ThePolitico-Epistemic AuthorityofScience-BasedEvidencein
German Employment and FoodSafetyPolicy’. Unpublishedmanuscirpt.
Korinek, R.-L. 2014. ‘Comparing the Construction of Expert Reputation of Food Safety Agencies in Britain and in Germany ’,
paper presented at the conference ‘What Makes Governmental Agencies Tick? ’,IPSA Research Committee ‘Structure and
Organization of Government ’,The Hebrew Universityof Jerusalem, January.
Korinek,R.-L.andS.Veit.2013. ‘WissenschaftlichePolitikberatungalsGrenzarbeit:EinKonzeptzurAnalyseinstitutionalisierter
BeratungsformeninPolitikfeldern ’,inS.Kr oppandS.Kuhlmann(eds), WissenundExpertiseinPolitikundVerwaltung, Special
Issue1of DerModerneStaat(DMS)–ZeitschriftfürPublicPolicy,RechtundManagement .
Krzy ̇zanowski, M. 2010. The Discursive Construction of European Identities: A Multi-Level Approach to Discourse and Identity in the
TransformingEuropeanUnion . Bern: Peter Lang.
Maggetti, M.2012. RegulationinPractice:TheDeFactoIndependenceofRegulatoryAgencies . Colchester: ECPR Press.
Public AdministrationVol.93, No.1, 2015 (103–120)
© 2014JohnWiley &SonsLtd.
120 REBECCA-LEAKORINEKANDSYLVIAVEIT
Meyer, R.E. 2008. ‘New Sociology of Knowledge: Historical Legacy and Contributions to Current Debates in Institutional
Research’, in R. Greenwood etal.(eds),The Sage Handbook of Organizational Institutionalism . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, pp.
517–36.
Moynihan, D.P.2006. ‘Ambiguity in Policy Lessons:The Agentification Experience’, PublicAdministration , 84, 4, 1029–50.
Ospina, S.M. and J. Dodge. 2005. ‘It’s About Time: Catching Method up to Meaning –The Usefulness of Narrative Inquiry in
Public Administration Research’, PublicAdministrationReview , 65, 2, 143–58.
Pollitt,C.,K.Bathgate,J.Caulfield,A.SmullenandC.Talbot.2001.‘AgencyFever?AnAnalysisofanInternationalPolicyFash-
ion’,JournalofComparativePolicyAnalysis , 3, 3, 271–90.
Pollitt, C., J. Caulfield, A. Smullen and C. Talbot. 2004. HowGovernmentsDoThingsthroughSemi-AutonomousOrganizations .B a s -
ingstoke:Palgrave Macmillan.
Roness, P.G., K. Verhoest, K. Rubecksen and M. MacCarthaigh. 2008. ‘Autonomy and Regulation of State Agencies: Reinforce-
ment,Indifference orCompensation?’, PublicOrganizationReview , 8,2, 155–74.
Smullen, A. 2010. ‘Translating Agency Reform through Durable Rhetorical Styles: Comparing Official Agency Talk across Con-
sensusand Adversarial Contexts’, PublicAdministration , 88, 4, 943–59.
Tolbert,P.andL.G.Zucker.1996. ‘TheInstitutionalizationofInstitutionalTheory ’,inS.R.Clegg,C.HardyandW.R.Nord(eds),
HandbookofOrganizationStudies . ThousandOaks,CA: Sage, pp.175–90.
VanThiel,S.,K.Verhoest,G.BouckaertandP.Lægreid.2012. ‘LessonsandRecommendationsforthePracticeofAgencification ’,
in K. Verhoest, S. van Thiel, G. Bouckaert and P. Lægreid (eds), Government Agencies: Practices and Lessons from 30 Countries .
Basingstoke:Palgrave Macmillan, pp.413–39.
Verhoest,K.,B.G.Peters,G.BouckaertandB.Verschuere.2004.‘TheStudyofOrganizationalAutonomy:AConceptualReview’,
PublicAdministrationandDevelopment , 24, 2, 101–18.
Verhoest,K.,P.G.Roness,B.Verschuere,K.RubecksenandM.MacCarthaigh.2010. AutonomyandControlofStateAgencies:Com-
paringStatesandAgencies . Basingstoke:Palgrave Macmillan.
Verhoest, K., S. van Thiel, G. Bouckaert, and P. Lægreid (eds). 2012. GovernmentAgencies:PracticesandLessonsfrom30Countries .
Basingstoke:Palgrave Macmillan.
von Wedel, H.2001. OrganisationdesgesundheitlichenVerbraucherschutzes:SchwerpunktLebensmittel . Stuttgart:Kohlhammer.
Weick, K.E.1995. SensemakinginOrganizations . ThousandOaks,CA: Sage.
Weick, K.E.,K.Sutcliffe and D.Obstfeld.2005. ‘Organizing and theProcessof Sensemaking’, OrganizationScience , 16, 4, 409–21.
Yesilkagit,K.2004.‘BureaucraticAutonomy,OrganizationalCulture,andHabituation:PoliticiansandIndependentAdministra-
tiveBodies in theNetherlands’, Administration&Society , 36, 5, 528–52.
Yesilkagit, K.and S.van Thiel. 2008. ‘Political Influence and Bureaucratic Autonomy’, PublicOrganizationReview , 8, 2, 137–53.
Zucker, L.G. 1977. ‘The Role of Institutionalization in Cultural Persistence’, AmericanSociologicalReview , 42, 5, 726–43.
Public AdministrationVol. 93, No.1, 2015 (103–120)
© 2014JohnWiley &SonsLtd.