AUDITING: A JOURNAL OF PRACTICE & THEORY American Accounting Association
Vol. 41, No. 2 DOI: 10.2308/AJPT-18-055
May 2022pp. 57–91
Managing the Offshoring of Audit Work: Spanning the
Boundaries Between Onshore and Offshore Auditors
Mary Canning
University College Dublin
Brendan O’Dwyer
The University of Manchester
University of Amsterdam
Roel Boomsma
The University of Sydney
SUMMARY: The offshoring of external audit work to so-called low-cost countries is prevalent among the Big 4
professional services firms. Despite this, our understanding of how this form of offshoring influences auditpractitioners and the audit process is limited. This study examines how and why offshoring emerged as an
organizational matter that changed the way audit work is organized in a Big 4 firm context. Our findings demonstrate
how changes in the design of offshoring processes influence interactions between onshore and offshore auditors.We uncover how individual ‘‘boundary spanners ’’struggle to coordinate audit work across the multiple boundaries
that separate onshore and offshore auditors. Furthermore, we show how the institutionalization of ‘‘boundary
spanning ’’functions in organizational structures and processes can have the unintended consequence of widening
the boundaries between onshore and offshore auditors. Finally, we offer evidence of the effect of offshoring on thelearning process of onshore and offshore auditors.
Keywords: audit; Big 4; boundary spanning; offshoring.
I. INTRODUCTION
Globalization has greatly inﬂuenced the accounting and auditing profession ( Durocher, Gendron, and Picard 2016 ).
Among other things, it has led to the development of international standards and the rise of global networks ofaccounting ﬁrms ( Barrett, Cooper, and Jamal 2005 ;Durocher et al. 2016 ). Prior accounting research on globalization
has tended to focus on the harmonization of standards and its impact on capital markets, with relatively little attention beingafforded to the inﬂuence of globalization on audit processes and practices ( Durocher et al. 2016 ). The few studies in this area
have examined the challenges of coordinating multinational audits ( Barrett et al. 2005 ;Downey and Bedard 2019 ;Downey and
Westermann 2021 ), the resilience of small accounting practitioners to the forces of globalization ( Durocher et al. 2016 ), and,
more recently, the offshoring of external audit work ( Downey 2018 ;Popova and Wright 2019 ).
We thank Yves Gendron (editor) and the two anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and suggestions. We also acknowledge the helpful
comments on prior versions of this paper provided by participants at the 2018 Interdisciplinary Perspectives on Accounting Conference in Edinburgh ; the
2018 European Accounting Association Annual Congress in Milan; the 2018 Irish Accounting and Financial Association Annual Conference in Limerick;
research presentations at the Alliance Manchester Business School, Birmingham Business School and the CHRONOS Working Life lunch research
seminar Royal Holloway, University of London in 2019, and at the Stockholm School of Economics in 2020. We also acknowledge the supportive
comments provided by the reviewer of our paper for the 2020 European Accounting Association Annual Congress, which was unfortunately cancelled. Wethank Velina Popova for sharing her work in progress. Finally, we thank the researcher who conducted the interviews and the interviewees who kindly
offered their time to participate in the study.
Mary Canning, University College Dublin, College of Business, Dublin, Ireland; Brendan O’Dwyer, The University of Manchester, Alliance Mancheste r
Business School, Department of Accounting, Manchester, U.K.; University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam Business School, Department of Accountancy,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Roel Boomsma, The University of Sydney, Business School, Department of Accounting, Sydney, Australia.
Editor’s note: Accepted by Yves Gendron, under the Senior Editorship of Christopher P. Agoglia.
Submitted: April 2018
Accepted: August 2021
Published Online: August 2021
57Recent estimates suggest that the Big 4 professional services ﬁrms (hereafter, Big 4 ﬁrms) use offshore services to perform
between 5 and 20 percent of core ﬁnancial audit work ( Daugherty, Dickins, and Fennema 2012 ;Downey 2018 ). This
signiﬁcant use of offshoring by Big 4 ﬁrms is driven primarily by a potential increase in economic efﬁciencies as it allows them
to draw from a pool of relatively inexpensive workers ( Flood 2018 ). While the professional practice literature suggests that
these inexpensive workers are well-trained and highly educated, regulators have warned of the potential risk associated with
offshoring in terms of audit quality. For example, Lewis Ferguson—a former member of the PCAOB (2011–2018)—has
argued that ‘‘offshoring external audit work for public companies ... raises many, many, many questions about compliance with
auditing standards, audit quality [and] the transparency of the audit work to regulators ’’(Lewis Ferguson cited in Whitehouse
2009 , para. 7). Similarly, Helen Munter, a former PCAOB Director of Registration and Inspections (2011–2018), has expressed
concerns about the impact of offshoring audit work on the training of audit staff and their ability to exercise professionalskepticism:
Offshoring offers great opportunities—as does the advent of new technology. But I ask—how do [audit] ﬁrms ensure
that staff at all levels and especially those at the early levels are being trained in the most fundamental areas of the
audit? How will they develop their professional judgment and experience that is needed to solve complex problems?
How will you supervise and train them? We have seen ﬁrms struggle with remediating how they supervise and review
audit work, how they apply their professional skepticism, and how they audit estimates. These areas pose a lot of risks,
many of which are long-term. ( Munter 2014 )
The PCAOB regulators are not alone in their concerns, with the Financial Reporting Council (FRC) in the United
Kingdom mentioning concern over the offshoring of audit work in their audit quality inspection reports. The FRC has warned
that ‘‘care is needed ’’in allocating ‘‘full sections of the audit ’’to offshore staff given that they ‘‘do not visit the audited entity
and, therefore, may not always have the necessary understanding of the speciﬁc risks associated with the audited entity ’’
(Financial Reporting Council 2014 , 9).
Given the increasing prevalence of offshoring in auditing and the audit quality concerns raised by regulators, it is important
to gain a better understanding of its emergence and its associated challenges ( Barrett et al. 2005 ;Hanes 2013 ). Prior
experimental research recognizes that offshoring produces ‘‘dynamic ’’changes in the audit process ( Downey 2018 ;Popova and
Wright 2019 ), but offers little empirical insight into how such changes are experienced by auditors. This study examines how
offshoring emerged as a plausible choice in a Big 4 ﬁrm based in Europe (code-named EU-TAM
1), changing the way audit
work is organized. More speciﬁcally, we analyze how EU-TAM sought to achieve the intended consequences and manage theunintended consequences of the decision to offshore some of its audit work to India.
The paper responds to calls for research into the process and the consequences of offshoring audit work ( Downey 2018 ).
On a broader level, our ﬁndings contribute to research on the nature of audit work in a world ‘‘where globalizing discourses
increasingly resonate ’’(Canning, Gendron, and O’Dwyer 2018 ;Durocher et al. 2016 , 70; Power and Gendron 2015 ). This
seeks to offer a better understanding of current developments in the context of audit ‘‘as carried out in the ﬁeld ’’(Canning et al.
2018 , 166), thereby responding to repeated requests to increase the practical and theoretical relevance of management (and
auditing) research ( Alvesson and Sandberg 2011 ,2013 ;Kieser, Nicolai, and Seidl 2015 ).
To carry out the investigation, we rely on a case study approach ( Cooper and Morgan 2008 ). We draw on internal and
external documentation, digital evidence, and in-depth interviews with ‘‘onshore ’’
2audit practitioners to investigate how
offshoring has become an organizational matter within EU-TAM and changed the way audit work is structured, managed, andperceived. First, we collected internal documents, such as staff newsletters and online request forms, and digital data, such as e-
learning sessions and a webcast on the offshoring process within EU-TAM. Second, we conducted 13 semi-structured
interviews with 12 (onshore) auditors who worked in the audit department of EU-TAM and had direct experience with the
offshoring of audit work to India.
3Third, we collected an extensive amount of publicly available information on the offshoring
of audit work, including: reports published by EU-TAM and other Big 4 ﬁrms, job advertisements, business news articles,professional proﬁles of onshore and offshore audit staff, articles and reports published by professional accounting bodies, and
video presentations of the offshoring process within Big 4 ﬁrms. The interview, documentary, and digital data were analyzed
through an iterative process of data reduction, data display, and data interpretation ( Miles and Huberman 1994 ;O’Dwyer
2004 ).
1The global network of professional services ﬁrms of which EU-TAM forms part will be referred to as the TAM network.
2We use the term onshore auditors to refer to personnel working for audit ﬁrms based in so-called highly developed countries, such as the United States,
Canada, or the United Kingdom. The term offshore auditors is used to refer to personnel working for the captive offshore centers operated by the Big 4
ﬁrms in lower cost countries like India.
3Institutional Review Board approval was granted by the University of Amsterdam.58 Canning, O’Dwyer, and Boomsma
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022The paper mobilizes the notion of boundary spanning (Barner-Rasmussen, Ehrnrooth, Koveshnikov, and Ma ¨kela¨2 0 1 4 ;
Birkinshaw, Ambos, and Bouquet 2017 ;Levina and Vaast 2005 ;Schotter, Mudambi, Doz, and Gaur 2017 )t oh e l pu s
uncover and explain how EU-TAM sought to build connections between onshore and offshore auditors. We also examine therange of frictions that boundary spanning endeavors engendered. We deﬁne boundary spanning as the creation of linkagesbetween different organizational units, such as different subsidiaries of a multinational corporation, that enable the
integration and coordination of activities across multiple geographical, cultural, and organizational contexts ( Birkinshaw et
al. 2017 ;Monteiro and Birkinshaw 2017 ;Schotter et al. 2017 ). In response to calls for research on ‘‘the joint role of
organizational and individual factors in dealing with the complexity associated with boundary spanning ’’(Schotter et al.
2017 , 410), our analysis considers the boundary spanning activities of key individuals as well as the boundary spanning
structures and processes implemented by EU-TAM. To better understand the role of individual actors in the process throughwhich EU-TAM has sought to span the boundaries between onshore and offshore auditors, we draw upon the distinction
between ‘‘nominated boundary spanners ’’—individuals nominated by EU-TAM to create linkages between onshore and
offshore auditors, and ‘‘boundary spanners-in-practice ’’—individuals actually involved in creating linkages between onshore
and offshore auditors ( Levina and Vaast 2005 ).
The paper extends emerging empirical work on the offshoring of audit work by unveiling how EU-TAM linked
onshore and offshore audit teams by engaging in different forms of boundary spanning. First, we illustrate how an
individual director who pioneered offshoring within EU-TAM acted as a boundary spanner-in-practice and was able to
bridge most of the boundaries between onshore and offshore auditors ( Birkinshaw et al. 2017 ;Levina and Vaast 2005 ). We
show how an attempt by EU-TAM’s senior management to increase the uptake of offshoring led to many onshore auditorsabandoning the offshoring of audit work. In response, EU-TAM redesigned the approach to offshoring by developingtraining sessions for onshore auditors; establishing a new European captive offshore center in India (the EU-COC)
dedicated to EU-TAM clients; creating a ‘‘mid-ofﬁce ’’to mediate communication between onshore and offshore auditors;
and seconding mid-ofﬁce managers ( ‘‘interim facilitators ’’) to the EU-COC. Under the redesigned approach, some of the
boundary spanning activities previously undertaken at the individual level became institutionalized in organizationalstructures and processes with the aim of limiting the dependence on speciﬁc individuals like the director who pioneeredoffshoring within EU-TAM.
Second, we show that while the mid-ofﬁce structure was created to intervene by lubricating the relationship between
onshore and offshore auditors ( Barner-Rasmussen et al. 2014 ;Birkinshaw et al. 2017 ), it had the unforeseen consequence of
exacerbating, instead of easing, perceived communication and quality problems experienced by onshore auditors. Whilenominated as boundary spanners, the mid-ofﬁce employees reportedly did not have the ‘‘skills, abilities, experience and ...
characteristics ’’required to enable them to become boundary spanners-in-practice ( Levina and Vaast 2005 ;Williams 2002 ,
114–115). Mid-ofﬁce employees seconded to the EU-COC purportedly improved communication but were ultimately unable to
become boundary spanners-in-practice as they were not seen as legitimate participants or negotiators in the relationship
between onshore and offshore auditors ( Levina and Vaast 2005 ).
Overall, these ﬁndings provide much needed insights into the ‘‘speciﬁcities of boundary spanning in global organizations ’’
(Tippmann, Sharkey Scott, and Parker 2017 , 473). Our ﬁndings highlight how the boundaries between onshore and offshore
auditors are not as stable and pre-given as is often assumed in the boundary spanning literature ( Langley et al. 2019 ). Instead,
we provide evidence that the boundaries between onshore and offshore auditors are socially constructed and subject to
reconﬁguration. Furthermore, we demonstrate that
‘‘the nomination of a formal boundary spanner role does not guarantee that
an individual will become a boundary spanner-in-practice ’’(Langley et al. 2019 , 718) and can have the unintended
consequence of widening the boundaries between onshore and offshore employees.
Third, our study offers evidence of the effect of offshoring on the learning process of auditors. Novice auditors learn how
to master the ‘‘craft ’’of auditing through the completion of progressively more complex work in a closely supervised
environment ( Westermann, Bedard, and Earley 2015 ). Within EU-TAM, the reduced exposure of audit assistants to basic audit
training reportedly stiﬂed their on-the-job learning. This contrasts with the ﬁndings of Popova and Wright (2019) who contend
that offshoring lower-level audit tasks does not hinder, and may even enhance the experiential learning of auditors. By beingexposed to more complex work at an earlier stage, novice auditors within EU-TAM were also expected to learn faster, whichcould be troubling considering that even experienced auditing professionals struggle with the ‘‘increased complexity of
technical accounting standards ’’(Westermann et al. 2015 , 890).
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section II provides background information on offshoring that
underpins our research question. We then present our theoretical framing drawing upon the notion of boundary spanning inSection III. This is followed by an outline of our research method in Section IV and a presentation of the case narrative inSection V. In Section VI, we discuss our ﬁndings in the context of the theoretical framing, reﬂect on the key contributions of
the paper, and present our conclusions.Managing the Offshoring of Audit Work: Spanning the Boundaries Between Onshore and Offshore Auditors 59
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022
II. BACKGROUND
The Inﬂuence of Globalization on Accounting and Auditing
The rise of economic globalization in the 1980s has led to signiﬁcant changes in society, including but not limited to
the emergence of global ﬁnancial markets, the increased interdependence of major economies, and the intensiﬁcation ofcross-cultural interactions ( B a r r e t te ta l .2 0 0 5 ). Globalization has also greatly inﬂuenced the accounting profession, most
prominently through the development of international ﬁnancial reporting standards ( B a r r e t te ta l .2 0 0 5 ;Durocher et al.
2016 ;Mennicken 2008 ). International auditing standards and practices followed as a ‘‘logical consequence ’’as global
ﬁnancial reporting necessitated ‘‘transnationally competent and comparable auditors ’’to ensure uniformity in the auditing
of ﬁnancial statements across jurisdictions ( Durocher et al. 2016 , 66). Globalization also stimulated the creation of large
networks of accounting ﬁrms that transcend the boundaries of nations and national economies ( Boussebaa 2015 ;Cooper,
Greenwood, Hinings, and Brown 1998 ). At present, the Big 4 ﬁrms—Deloitte, EY, KPMG and PwC—employ over 1
million people across more than 150 countries
4and dominate the audit market for public companies ( Carson, Simnett, Soo,
and Wright 2012 ;Francis, Michas, and Seavey 2013 ;Shore and Wright 2018 ). Their size and global reach has enabled
them to become inﬂuential actors in the development and implementation of global ﬁnancial reporting and auditingstandards and practices ( Boussebaa 2015 ;Cooper and Robson 2006 ;Durocher et al. 2016 ;Humphrey, Loft, and Woods
2009 ;Mennicken 2008 ).
Most accounting and auditing research on globalization has tended to focus on the harmonization of standards and its
impact on capital markets (e.g., Daske, Hail, Leuz, and Verdi 2008 ;Jones and Finley 2011 ;Wang 2014 ). The inﬂuence of
globalization on audit processes and practices has received far less attention ( Durocher et al. 2016 ). The few academic studies
in this space have examined the coordination of large multinational audits ( Barrett et al. 2005 ;Downey and Bedard 2019 ;
Downey and Westermann 2021 ), the audit quality effect of using foreign afﬁliated audit ﬁrms in multinational audits
5(Burke,
Hoitash, and Hoitash 2020 ;Dee, Lulseged, and Zhang 2015 ;Demek, Kaplan, and Winn 2020 ;Docimo, Gunn, Li, and Michas
2021 ;Gunn and Michas 2018 ), and the response of small accounting ﬁrms to global accounting standards and practices
(Durocher et al. 2016 ). More recently, scholars have also started to explore how offshoring—another important phenomenon of
globalization—inﬂuences audit ﬁrms and audit practices.
Domestic Outsourcing, Offshore Outsourcing, and Captive Offshoring
Offshoring is a widely used, but ill-deﬁned and very loosely applied, term to describe a form of outsourcing that
involves the relocation of organizational activities to a foreign location ( Jahns, Hartmann, and Bals 2006 ;Oshri, Kotlarsky,
and Willcocks 2009 ). Outsourcing refers to the contracting out or delegation of work to an internal or external entity that
could be physically located anywhere in the world ( Oshri et al. 2009 ). The management literature suggests that outsourcing
arrangements can be broadly classiﬁed into three categories: domestic outsourcing, offshore outsourcing, and captiveoffshoring. Domestic outsourcing involves the relocation of business activities to an external provider, which is located in
the same country as the client organization ( Contractor, Kumar, Kundu, and Pedersen 2010 ;Jahns et al. 2006 ;Oshri et al.
2009 ).Offshore outsourcing refers to the contracting out of work to an external provider that is situated in a different
country than the client organization ( Jahns et al. 2006 ;Kotlarsky and Oshri 2008 ;Oshri et al. 2009 ).Captive offshoring
involves the relocation of organizational activities to a so-called captive offshore center—a wholly owned subsidiarylocated in a foreign country that only provides services to the parent company ( Lewin and Volberda 2011 ;O s h r ie ta l .
2009 ).
Saving costs is the primary driver for organizations to engage in offshore outsourcing and captive offshoring, but
additional reasons include the ability to work ‘‘around the clock ’’and gain access to external technological knowledge, a
favorable regulatory environment, and highly skilled and motivated personnel ( Daugherty, Dickins, and Fennema 2012 ;
2013 ;Farrell 2005 ;Kotlarsky and Oshri 2008 ;Lewin and Peeters 2006 ;Martı ´nez-Noya and Garcı ´a-Canal 2011 ;O s h r ie ta l .
2009 ). Offshore outsourcing and captive offshoring have become extremely popular business strategies, with around 80 to
90 percent of Fortune 500 companies transferring part of their operations to overseas parties ( Peck 2017 ;Poster and Yolmo
2015 ).
4The Big 4 ﬁrms reported the following number of employees for the ﬁnancial year 2018: Deloitte 286,200 people in more than 150 countries ( Deloitte
2018 ); EY 261,559 people in more than 150 countries ( EY 2018 ); KPMG 207,500 people in 152 countries ( KPMG 2018 ); PwC 250,930 people in 157
countries ( PwC 2019 ).
5In the audit of companies with international operations, it is common for the principal auditor to rely upon the work of afﬁliated foreign member ﬁrms
(Dee et al. 2015 ).60 Canning, O’Dwyer, and Boomsma
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022Offshoring Audit Work
The Big 4 ﬁrms have been using offshore outsourcing for the preparation of income tax returns since the early 2000s ( Desai
and Roberts 2013 ;Robertson et al. 2004 ;Soled 2005 ). The use of captive offshoring for the completion of audit work, the focus of
this paper, is a more recent but rapidly expanding practice ( Brody, Coulter, and Jewell 2006 ;Daugherty et al. 2013 ;Downey
2018 ;Lyubimov, Arnold, and Sutton 2013 ;Shamis, Green, Sorensen, and Kyle 2005 ). Despite the growing prevalence of captive
offshoring (hereafter simply referred to as offshoring ) within the global networks of the Big 4 ﬁrms, it has received relatively little
academic attention in auditing research. And yet, according to Hanes (2013 ,1 ) ‘‘geographically distributed work, such as
offshoring, is likely to be very different from work performed in more traditional arrangements and therefore cannot be treated byaudit researchers, practitioners, or standard setters as replications of domestic processes abroad. ’’Hence, it is important that we
seek to learn more about the challenges that offshoring brings and the impact it has on audit practitioners.
The few existing academic studies on the offshoring of audit work have focused on: the effect of offshoring versus onshore
audit services on the litigation costs for auditors in the case of audit failures ( Chambers, Reckers, and Reinstein 2020 ;Daugherty
et al. 2013 ;Lyubimov et al. 2013 ); the impact of offshoring on the design of audit work processes and audit performance
(Andiola, Downey, Spilker, and Noga 2018 ;Downey 2018 ); the inﬂuence of offshoring on the learning and performance of
novice auditors ( Popova and Wright 2019 ); and outlining future research opportunities ( Hanes 2013 ). Prior academic and
professional practice literature has identiﬁed cost savings from relocating standardized, repetitive, non-judgmental procedures to
low-cost countries as the primary rationale for offshoring audit work. Using low wage personnel for repetitive tasks is consideredmore efﬁcient as it purportedly enables more experienced staff based in highly developed countries to work on judgmental andhigh-risk procedures ( Daugherty and Dickins 2009 ;Daugherty et al. 2012 ,2013 ;Downey 2018 ;Hanes 2013 ;Shamis et al. 2005 ).
Relocating audit procedures to captive offshore centers does, however, present some challenges.
First, offshoring reduces opportunities for novice onshore auditors to gain experience in conducting basic audit procedures
(Daugherty and Dickins 2009 ;Daugherty et al. 2012 ;Popova and Wright 2019 ). As learning on the job is key for auditor
development, offshoring work to captive offshore centers can potentially disrupt the process of knowledge sharing within audit
ﬁrms and harm the professional legitimacy of auditors ( Westermann et al. 2015 ). The professional practice literature suggests
that this may widen the expectation gap in auditing as onshore auditors are not fulﬁlling their expected duties at the required
level and thereby escalate litigation risk for audit ﬁrms ( Daugherty and Dickins 2009 ).Popova and Wright (2019) , however,
present contrasting evidence and suggest that exposing novice auditors to more complex experiences, like reviewing audit workconducted in a captive offshore center, does not have a detrimental effect on, and may even beneﬁt, their learning. That said,
Popova and Wright’s (2019) experiment only involved the conﬁrmation of accounts receivable; hence, further research is
warranted to determine whether the same effect applies to other tasks offshored by audit ﬁrms.
Second, prior research suggests that coordinating audit work across geographical and cultural boundaries can be
challenging ( Burke et al. 2020 ;Downey 2018 ;Downey and Westermann 2021 ;Sunderland and Trompeter 2017 ). Studies on
multinational audits have found that stereotype-driven expectations can negatively inﬂuence audit quality by reducing theconﬁdence ‘‘
local ’’auditors place in work conducted by ‘‘foreign ’’component auditors ( Barrett et al. 2005 ;Cooper et al. 1998 ;
Downey and Westermann 2021 ). Fears of litigation, review practices, and intergroup contact can ‘‘mitigate the difﬁculties of
coordinating work, but not completely ’’(Barrett et al. 2005 ,3 ;Downey and Westermann 2021 ). A heavy reliance on electronic
forms of communication and the absence of immediate feedback, both characteristics of offshoring arrangements, can,however, impede the review process and exacerbate, instead of mitigate, the challenges of coordinating work across
geographical and cultural boundaries ( Downey 2018 ;Kankanhalli, Tan, and Wei 2006 ). While prior research has explored the
communication and coordination challenges in multinational audits,
6little work has been done to examine the nature of such
challenges in the context of relocating audit work to captive offshore centers.
Third, Downey (2018) suggests that introducing offshoring without purposefully re-designing audit work processes can
undermine the expected beneﬁts of the practice, such as cost savings and freeing up onshore audit staff for more advancedtasks. She uncovered that onshore audit teams are often required to complete the work started by the captive offshore center and
then send it back to the offshore auditors when discrepancies are identiﬁed ( Downey 2018 ). While this can be perceived as an
effective approach for managing a lack of familiarity or trust in offshore audit staff, she ﬁnds that ‘‘completing ‘unﬁnished’
6The coordination and communication challenges of multinational (group) audits differ from those experienced in the offshoring of audit work to capt ive
offshore centers. In multinational (group) audits, the ‘‘group auditor, ’’i.e., the single audit ﬁrm that ‘‘takes responsibility for signing the audit opinion
for the consolidated [global] entity ’’(Downey and Bedard 2019 , 123), relies on work performed by foreign auditors from network member ﬁrms. The
network members ﬁrms are legally autonomous and separate national or regional ﬁrms with voting power at the network level (see Downey and
Westermann 2021 ). Captive offshore centers, on the other hand, are fully owned subsidiaries of Big 4 member ﬁrms based in the United States or
Europe without voting power at the network level. While multinational audits and captive offshoring both rely upon foreign personnel, offshoring is
concentrated in lower-level tasks that would otherwise be performed by junior onshore team members. In contrast, work sent to component auditors
often encompasses the audit of an entire business unit or subsidiary.Managing the Offshoring of Audit Work: Spanning the Boundaries Between Onshore and Offshore Auditors 61
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022
work that is perceived to be of less importance to the overall audit is associated with signiﬁcantly lower [audit] performance ’’
(Downey 2018 , 218). As the ﬁndings of Downey (2018) are primarily based upon an experiment involving one basic audit task,
i.e., the search for unrecorded liabilities, further research is needed to examine the impact of audit work design changes in theﬁeld ( Canning et al. 2018 ).
While the studies discussed above are indicative of an increasing academic interest in the practice of offshoring of audit
work, little is known empirically about how offshoring affects onshore auditors and the audit process. According to Downey
(2018 , 218) it is important to give greater consideration to ‘‘the offshoring process and team dynamics in this environment. ’’
She suggests that a better understanding of the facilitation of integration between onshore audit teams and captive offshorecenters could assist in assessing the effectiveness and efﬁciency of offshoring audit work ( Downey 2018 ). This paper aims to
contribute to our understanding in this respect by answering the following research question:
RQ: How does the offshoring of audit work affect onshore auditors and the audit process?
We frame our analysis of offshoring by looking at the intended and unintended consequences of the use of captive
offshoring for onshore auditors using a framework predicated on the concept of boundary spanning. We outline this concept inthe next section and relate it directly to our research focus.
III. BOUNDARIES AND BOUNDARY SPANNING
Offshoring arrangements are characterized by multiple and overlapping boundaries that can ‘‘present challenges to service
interactions and therefore to operational effectiveness ’’(Levina and Vaast 2008 ;Stringfellow, Teagarden, and Nie 2008 , 170).
Geographical boundaries between onshore and offshore staff—who can be thousands of kilometers apart—limit the available
means of communication ( Stringfellow et al. 2008 ). In most offshoring arrangements, electronic communication has replaced
face-to-face communication, which can lead to misunderstandings caused by not communicating contextual information and bynot communicating information evenly ( Kankanhalli et al. 2006 ).
7In the context of auditing, the increased reliance on
electronic communication has also been associated with increased distraction, an underdeveloped ability to think critically, anda reduced capability to ‘‘read people ’’(Westermann et al. 2015 ).
Cultural boundaries between onshore and offshore staff can prevent effective interaction through differences in time
orientation, interpretation, risk appetite, and the ability to work autonomously ( Stringfellow et al. 2008 ;Youngdahl,
Ramaswamy, and Dash 2010 ). Language barriers can result in a range of interpretation difﬁculties and become a major source
of frustration for both onshore and offshore staff ( Kankanhalli et al. 2006 ;Stringfellow et al. 2008 ). Differences in English
language proﬁciency are also at risk of placing offshore auditors at a disadvantage and can create status differences betweenthem and onshore auditors ( Downey 2018 ;Levina and Vaast 2008 ). In the context of global group audits, Barrett et al. (2005 ,
18) uncovered that ‘‘expectations and stereotypes about national culture of different auditors can reproduce (and change) social
understandings [and affect] the ability to plan and coordinate across national boundaries. ’’Downey and Bedard (2019 , 123)
found no supporting evidence for an association between cultural and language barriers for group auditors but did observe that‘‘it may be that these barriers are more salient to component ...auditors, i.e. those engaged in foreign jurisdictions to perform
work over local business units. ’’
While Barrett et al. (2005) andDowney and Bedard (2019) provide helpful insights into the role of language and cultural
barriers in multinational audits, little is known about how such barriers are experienced in the context of offshoring audit workto low-cost countries like India ( Downey 2018 ). Nonetheless, the offshoring literature suggests that the dynamic boundaries
between onshore and offshore can expose organizations to ‘‘the invisible costs of offshoring, ’’i.e., the ‘‘hidden communication-
related costs associated with the use of foreign service providers ’’(Stringfellow et al. 2008 , 166–167). Individuals working
across time and space often have problems bridging differences in their occupational knowledge and work practices. Therefore,it is important that function-speciﬁc contextual knowledge such as time constraints, requirements, or goals are conveyed suchthat both groups can work together ( Leonardi and Bailey 2008 ). We mobilize the notion of boundary spanning to conceptualize
the manner in which our case study organization, EU-TAM, sought to overcome the challenges caused by the presence of
multiple and overlapping boundaries between onshore and offshore auditors.
Boundary Spanning
Boundary spanning can be broadly deﬁned as the creation of linkages between different organizational units, such as
different subsidiaries of a multinational corporation, that enable the integration and coordination of activities across
7The ﬁndings of Downey, Obermire, and Zehms (2020) suggest that communication difﬁculties can also arise when auditors from the same ﬁrm work
from different physical locations within the same country.62 Canning, O’Dwyer, and Boomsma
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022multiple cultural, institutional, and organizational contexts ( Birkinshaw et al. 2017 ;Kane and Levina 2017 ;Levina and
Vaast 2005 ;Monteiro and Birkinshaw 2017 ;Schotter et al. 2017 ). Boundary spanning has become of central importance
for organizations that engage in practices—such as offshoring and global group audits ( Downey and Bedard 2019 ;
Downey and Westermann 2021 ;Levina and Vaast 2008 )—that involve the coordination of spatially dispersed activities
across different contexts ( Kane and Levina 2017 ;Schotter et al. 2017 ). In the context of this study, boundary spanning
relates to the construction of links between onshore auditors, located in Europe, and offshore auditors, located in India, toenable collaboration on audit assignments. According to the management literature, boundary spanning is an ‘‘inherently
...complex phenomenon ’’(Schotter et al. 2017 , 406) that encompasses a wide range of activities that can serve different
objectives and occur at different levels within an organization ( Barner-Rasmussen et al. 2014 ;Birkinshaw et al. 2017 ).
Drawing on relevant insights from studies on boundary spanning within multinational corporations ( Barner-
Rasmussen et al. 2014 ;Birkinshaw et al. 2017 ), we categorize boundary spanning activities into four main functions:
exchanging, linking, facilitating, and intervening (presented in order of increasing complexity). Exchanging ,t h em o s t
basic function of boundary spanning, refers to the sharing of information and knowledge across boundaries in informalsettings—such as informal coffee meetings, or formal settings—such as formal meetings or task forces ( Barner-
Rasmussen et al. 2014 ). It involves the transfer, i.e., the sending and receiving, of information or knowledge with very
little translation or transformation (see Carlile 2004 ).Linking involves using existing (personal) networks to create
connections across boundaries between previously disconnected actors. The function of linking has some overlap withactivities that Birkinshaw et al. (2017) label as spearheading—the use of existing (personal) relationships to broker a link
between previously disconnected parties. Facilitating involves assisting the spanning of boundaries between other parties
by creating a ‘‘channel ’’that facilitates cross-border communication or by acting as an interpreter to help other parties to
better understand each other ( Barner-Rasmussen et al. 2014 ). It can include activities such as making internal
introductions between employees in different organizational units, creating events and other opportunities that enablepeople from different parts of the organization to interact, and seconding employees to overseas locations to encourageshared understanding ( Birkinshaw et al. 2017 ).
Finally, intervening involves the active intervention in the cross-border interaction of others through ‘‘resolving
misunderstandings, managing conﬂicts, or building inter-group trust ’’(Barner-Rasmussen et al. 2014 , 888). In contrast to
facilitation, which entails relatively passive activities such as making introductions, intervention involves taking ‘‘an active role
in creating positive cross-group outcomes, often by seeking to turn negative interactions into positive ones and activelypromoting effective inter-group relations ’’(Barner-Rasmussen et al. 2014 , 888). As such, it is closely related to what
Birkinshaw et al. (2017) refer to as ‘‘lubricating ’’—the pro-active engagement in activities that seek to overcome differences
8
and conﬂicts between groups, such as exposing and challenging implicit biases held among employees or restructuring formal
procedures to ensure that employees from different business units are on an equal footing.
Most prior research has either examined boundary spanning activities at the organizational level—focusing on the
organizational structures and processes that institutionalize boundary spanning functions (see, for example, Schotter and
Beamish 2011 )—or at the individual level—focusing on the managerial skills of individual boundary spanners (see for example
Monteiro and Birkinshaw 2017 ). Recent work, however, suggests that fully developing the potential of research on boundary
spanning ‘‘requires integrating these two research steams ’’(Schotter et al. 2017 , 410). In response to this call for research, we
focus our attention on the ‘‘the joint role of organizational and individual factors in dealing with the complexity associated with
boundary spanning ’’(Schotter et al. 2017 , 410) in the context of offshoring audit work.
To better understand the role of individual actors in the process through which EU-TAM has sought to span the
boundaries between onshore and offshore auditors, we draw upon the distinction between ‘‘nominated boundary spanners ’’
and ‘‘boundary spanners-in-practice ’’(Levina and Vaast 2005 ).Nominated boundary spanners are the individuals
speciﬁcally assigned by an organization to perform boundary spanning activities ( Levina and Vaast 2005 ;Nochur and Allen
1992 ). Being nominated to perform boundary spanning activities within an organization, however, does not guarantee that an
individual will succeed and become what Levina and Vaast (2005) call a boundary spanner-in-practice .T h e ym a y ,f o r
example, lack the necessary ‘‘skills, abilities, experience and personal characteristics ’’(Levina and Vaast 2005 ;Williams
2002 , 114–115) to communicate and coordinate across multiple cultural, institutional, and organizational contexts ( Kane and
Levina 2017 ;Schotter et al. 2017 ).
Boundary spanners-in-practice are individuals within an organization who, with or without formal nomination, engage and
actually succeed in spanning the boundaries between different contexts ( Langley et al. 2019 ;Levina and Vaast 2005 ). As
boundary-spanners-in-practice, these individuals are able to successfully manage ‘‘the ambiguities of belonging to and
8When intervening is used speciﬁcally to ‘‘overcome the different worldviews of subsidiary managers and actors in their external network, ’’Birkinshaw
et al. (2017 , 436) refer to it as reconciling instead of lubricating .Managing the Offshoring of Audit Work: Spanning the Boundaries Between Onshore and Offshore Auditors 63
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022
navigating different [organizational] worlds ’’(Langley et al. 2019 , 718). To become a boundary spanner-in-practice, Levina
and Vaast (2005 , 353–354) suggest that individuals must become a ‘‘legitimate, but possibly peripheral, participant in the
practices of both ﬁelds ’’(p. 353), ‘‘have legitimacy ...as negotiators on behalf of the ﬁeld whose interests they are to
represent ’’(p. 353), and develop ‘‘an inclination to span the boundaries of diverse ﬁelds ’’(p. 354).
Tippmann et al. (2017 , 473) highlight the ‘‘need to develop the speciﬁcities of boundary spanning in global organizations. ’’
Similarly, Schotter et al. (2017 , 404, emphasis added) point out that ‘‘[t]he boundary spanning function in ...global
organizations includes a wide range of processes, all of which are under-researched .’’Our analysis of how EU-TAM sought to
span the multiple and overlapping boundaries between onshore and offshore auditors responds to these recent calls for moreresearch on boundary spanning in globally operating organizations ( Birkinshaw et al. 2017 ;Schotter et al. 2017 ;Tippmann et
al. 2017 ).
IV . RESEARCH METHOD
Given that the objective of this study is to develop our understanding of how and why offshoring emerged as an
organizational matter, changing the way audit work is organized and perceived in a Big 4 ﬁrm, a qualitative research
methodology was deemed most appropriate ( Cooper and Morgan 2008 ;Denzin and Lincoln 2003 ;Flick 2006 ;Given 2008 ;
Silverman 2000 ). More speciﬁcally, we used a case study approach ( Cooper and Morgan 2008 ) drawing upon multiple data
sources—documentary data, in-depth interviews, and digital data—to obtain detailed information about the complexitiesunderpinning the real-life phenomenon ( Miles and Huberman 1994 ;Patton 2002 ) of offshoring in audit.
Data Collection
The ﬁrst round of data collection, which took place between February and March 2017, involved the collection of internal
documents—including newsletters, stafﬁng details, online request forms, and digital data—including a webcast and three e-learning sessions on offshoring (see Table 1). A preliminary content analysis of the documentary and digital data collectedduring this ﬁrst round offered a picture of the information that employees were furnished with throughout the offshoringprocess, the chronology of the events giving rise to offshoring in EU-TAM, the key individuals involved, and the activities theyundertook to bring about this change in audit practice. This helped with the identiﬁcation of interview participants and assisted
the development of a broad interview guide.
In the second stage of data collection, 13 semi-structured interviews were conducted with 12 (onshore) auditors within EU-
TAM who were selected because of their direct experience of the offshoring process within EU-TAM.
9In order to capture the
broad level of knowledge in the ﬁeld ( Patton 2002 ), the interviewees comprised those at the level of ( junior) assistant (3
interviewees), senior assistant (3 interviewees), assistant manager (2 interviewees), manager (3 interviewees) and director (1interviewee) (see Table 2). The director was re-interviewed because of his deep knowledge and involvement in the offshoringof audit work within EU-TAM. Interviews were conducted face-to-face in the EU-TAM ofﬁce located in a European citybetween February and April 2017 and ranged from 30 to 75 minutes in length. Measures, as suggested by Lincoln and Guba
(1985) , were taken to ensure the trustworthiness of the interview data whereby all interview data were recorded electronically
and transcribed in full. Transcriptions were sent to interviewees for comment and additional comments and issues raised werenoted and formed part of the overall analysis.
The ﬁrst interview was with a director who had almost three decades of working experience in EU-TAM and who was the
protagonist behind the initial offshoring initiative in the ﬁrm. This offered essential background and assisted with thedevelopment of questions for the remaining interviews. Subsequent interviews began with a reﬂection on the interviewee’s ﬁrstexposure to offshoring within EU-TAM and then gradually developed into an exploration of more speciﬁc aspects including themotives behind the use of offshoring, changes in the approach to offshoring, the opportunities and challenges of offshoring, the
impact of offshoring on the training of audit assistants, and the future for offshoring in auditing. An interview guide containing
9A post-graduate researcher conducted the interviews under the close supervision and guidance of one of the authors. This researcher was working as an
intern within EU-TAM while researching for her post-graduate thesis. This enabled the identiﬁcation and contacting of individuals who were directl y
involved in the offshoring of audit work within EU-TAM. The aforementioned author co-designed the initial part of the research project on which this
study is based. This involved determining the initial research focus, designing initial interview questions and follow-up questions, holding reco rded
post-interview meetings with the researcher to reﬂect on the interview content and themes as the interviews progressed, and developing new lines of
enquiry as new interviews were planned and individuals were re-interviewed. As noted above, the raw data gathered in these interviews, in the form of
interview transcripts, forms just one element of the more extensive dataset drawn on to construct the study. The raw interview transcripts were analy zed
separately by all three authors as part of an overall analysis of the complete set of data collected in order to form a base for the construction of the cas e
narrative.64 Canning, O’Dwyer, and Boomsma
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022TABLE 1
Documentary and Digital Evidence Collected in the First Round of Data Collection
Reference Internal Source Short Description
EU-TAM-Webcast Webcast of the kick-off conference
call, which is led by the Head ofOperations (HOO)Details of why it was time to change and a comparison between the
old (Phase 1) and the new offshoring process (Phase 2) arepresented. The beneﬁts are brieﬂy explained, and a small
introduction is given to the three e-learnings.
EU-TAM-eLearn1 E-learning number 1, voice of the
HOOAddressed the concept of the EU-COC, its purpose and its structure.
EU-TAM-eLearn2 E-learning number 2, voice of a
female employeeExplanation of the audit services that can be offshored as well as an
illustration of the template to use for each of these services.
EU-TAM-eLearn3 E-learning number 3, voice of a
female employeeAn outline of the procedures to request EU-COC support, how to make
a change request, and an illustration of the workﬂow between the
different teams, such as engagement team, the mid-ofﬁce, and EU-COC operations.
EU-TAM-Intranet Website page on the intranet of the
Big 4 ﬁrm, code name EU-TAMShows the persons involved in the EU-COC process in an
organizational structure with their photograph and a short descriptionof their role, such as manager of the EU-COC or ‘‘interim
facilitator. ’’
EU-TAM-Newsletter Weekly newsletter This is sent to the EU-TAM audit department. In this newsletter the
employees are updated on quality and the latest ﬁnancial reporting
standards, but also occasionally on the EU-COC or other relevanttopics.
EU-TAM-Planning Planning in the ﬁnancial institution
audit departmentThis Excel sheet outlines for each person how many hours and on
which audit client they are planned for certain weeks.
EU-COC-Req Online EU-COC request form This form asks the local team to select the EU-COC services they wish
to use and the number of times they wish to use the services for
each account balance. Contact details of one of the local teammembers, the reviewer of the local team, the date when the team is
going to deliver the audit documents, and when the deadline for the
EU-COC to deliver are also included.
EU-COC-FAQ Frequently asked questions about the
EU-COCFrequently asked questions about the EU-COC included: what are the
lessons learned from the earlier cooperation with the US-COC; what
will be the amount charged by the EU-COC for services; how willthe EU-COC be rolled out?
TABLE 2
Overview of Interviews Undertaken in the Second Round of Data Collection
Interviewee Position in FirmDuration of Interview
(Minutes)
D1 (2 interviews) Director 75
M1 Manager 55
M2 Manager 50M3 Manager 60
AM1 Assistant Manager 60
AM2 Assistant Manager 45SA1 Senior Assistant 45
SA2 Senior Assistant 50
SA3 Senior Assistant 45A1 Assistant 40A2 Assistant 30
A3 Assistant 30Managing the Offshoring of Audit Work: Spanning the Boundaries Between Onshore and Offshore Auditors 65
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022
a broad set of questions10was used to assist in maintaining focus during the interviews. The questions included were, however,
open-ended thereby allowing for ﬂexibility during the interviews ( Ryan, Scapens, and Theobald 2002 ). In this way, a form of
‘‘reﬂective interviewing ’’(Roulston 2010 ) was conducted whereby interviewees were allowed to drive the issues that were
important to them in the context of the focus of the study ( Humphrey and Lee 2004 ).
The third stage of data collection occurred between June 2018 and December 2020 and involved the collection of publicly
available information on the offshoring of audit work by Big 4 ﬁrms (see Table 3). We engaged in this third stage of datacollection to obtain better insights into the emergence of offshoring in the broader ﬁeld of auditing, the offshoring practices ofTABLE 3
Summary of the Documents and Digital Evidence Collected in the Third Round of Data Collection
(See Appendix A for Further Detail)
SourceNumber of
Documents/
VideosNumber
of PagesDuration
of Videos
EU-TAM
EU-TAM annual report 1 184a
EU-TAM news article 1 1EU-TAM transparency reports 5 620
a
EU-COC job advertisements 5 24
EU-COC professional proﬁles 5 20
EU-COC video presentation 1 1:53 min
Mid-Ofﬁce
Mid-ofﬁce job advertisement 1 3
Mid-ofﬁce manager professional proﬁles 3 7Mid-ofﬁce video presentation 1 1:38 min
Other EU-TAM Member Firms
Job advertisements 4 10Professional proﬁles 1 1
Reports on offshoring 8 117
The Professional Accounting Body (PAB) in EU-TAM’s Home Country
Articles and reports on offshoring 14 112
International Professional Accounting bodies (IPABs)
Articles and reports on offshoring 8 397
Other Big 4 Firms
Annual reports 2 313
a
Newsletter articles 2 8
Professional proﬁles 2 2
Transparency reports 7 492a
Big 4 ﬁrm video on offshoring 1 1:45 minReport on offshoring 1 41
Business News
Business news articles on offshoring 12 59
Blogs
Online blogs on offshoring audit work 2 6
TOTAL 87 2,417 5:16 min
aNot all pages of the annual and transparency reports analyzed for this study were found to provide relevant information. Hence, not all pages of these
reports were coded.
10The interview guide included open questions such as: ‘‘Could you tell me about the use of offshoring within EU-TAM? ’’ ‘‘How did the offshoring of
audit work emerge within EU-TAM? ’’ ‘‘When were you ﬁrst involved in the offshoring of audit work? ’’ ‘‘What is the nature of audit work being
offshored? ’’ ‘‘What is the process of offshoring audit work within EU-TAM? ’’ ‘‘What do you see as the main beneﬁts of offshoring audit work? ’’ ‘‘What
do you see as the main challenges of offshoring audit work? ’’ ‘‘How do you perceive the quality of audit work conducted offshore? ’’ ‘‘How do you
communicate with offshore auditors? ’’ ‘‘How does the offshoring of audit work impact the work of onshore auditors? ’’and ‘‘How do you see the future
of offshoring audit work? ’’66 Canning, O’Dwyer, and Boomsma
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022EU-TAM and other Big 4 ﬁrms, and the views of professional accounting bodies about the offshoring of audit work. We
conducted extensive Google searches11to identify documentary and digital material published on the offshoring of audit work
by sources such as Big 4 ﬁrms, professional accounting bodies, regulatory bodies, and news outlets. After every search, wescanned through and assessed the relevance of the documents and videos that showed up in the search results. This resulted in atotal of 84 documents and 3 videos on the offshoring of audit work. Documents collected included reports published by EU-
TAM and other Big 4 ﬁrms, professional proﬁles of onshore and offshore auditors, job advertisements, articles published by
professional accounting bodies, and business news articles (see Table 3 and Appendix A). The three videos, which weretranscribed in full, provided an overview of the audit work conducted at captive offshore centers operated by Big 4 ﬁrms inIndia. The documentary and digital evidence collected during this stage offered additional insights into the process ofoffshoring audit work within EU-TAM. It also enabled us to develop a better understanding of the broader context surrounding
offshoring in the audit domain.
Our decision to collect evidence from a broad variety of data sources was inﬂuenced by the access negotiated with EU-
TAM, which prevented us from conducting further interviews. EU-TAM also agreed to participate in this study on thecondition that they would remain anonymous. Conducting context-based audit research often requires academics to ‘‘overcome
many obstacles when negotiating with practitioners’ gatekeepers ’’(Gendron 2000 , 178). The receptivity of Big 4 ﬁrms to
participating in context-based research can be particularly low when projects have the potential to ‘‘tarnish their legitimacy ’’
(Gendron 2000 , 178) or are ‘‘perceived as having a signiﬁcant potential to demystify the audit practice in the public’s eyes ’’
(Gendron 2000 , 187; see also Gendron 2018 ). While we were fortunate to be able to arrange interviews with onshore auditors
working in a Big 4 ﬁrm, our documentary analysis in stage 3 above suggests that the use of captive offshoring is very much a‘‘silent trend ’’(PAB14
12) in the audit profession because it has the potential to threaten the legitimacy of Big 4 ﬁrms:
There seems to be a deeper cause for the media silence [around the offshoring of audit work]: A number of audit ﬁrms
are afraid that the offshoring of accounting and auditing work to low-cost countries could destroy their raison d’ ˆetre.
(PAB5)
Many audit ﬁrms are experimenting with offshoring but preferably without any publicity, as the practice is considered
extremely sensitive. Which audit ﬁrms are involved [in the offshoring of audit work] is rather mysterious, becausemost of them do not want to open up about the practice. (PAB5)
Data Analysis
The analysis of the documentary, interview, and digital data collected was undertaken through an iterative process of data
reduction, data display, and data interpretation ( Miles and Huberman 1994 ;O’Dwyer 2004 ). NVivo
13—a qualitative data
analysis computer software package—was used to manage the data and to support our analytical processes14(Bazeley 2013 ;
Boomsma and O’Dwyer 2019 ). The ﬁrst step of data reduction involved a detailed review and coding of the material obtained
during the ﬁrst and second round of data collection. In this step, an open coding scheme was developed to identify key themesaround the emergence and use of offshoring within EU-TAM.
15In the second step of data reduction, we analyzed the evidence
gathered in the third round of data collection using a separate open coding scheme to identify themes around the use of
offshoring within EU-TAM and other Big 4 ﬁrms. During this process, the challenging, but seemingly essential, task of
building strong relationships and connections between onshore and offshore auditors emerged as an important theme and led usto the theoretical notion of boundary spanning .
16In the third step of data reduction, after reading the literature on boundary
11In searching for evidence, combinations of the following keywords were used: ‘‘offshoring, ’’ ‘‘offshore, ’’ ‘‘outsourcing, ’’ ‘‘outsource, ’’ ‘‘audit, ’’
‘‘auditing, ’’ ‘‘audit ﬁrm(s), ’’ ‘‘audit profession, ’’ ‘‘audit service(s), ’’ ‘‘accounting, ’’ ‘‘accountant, ’’ ‘‘Big 4, ’’ ‘‘Big Four, ’’ ‘‘delivery centre(s), ’’ ‘‘delivery
center(s), ’’ ‘‘service centre, ’’ ‘‘service(s) centre, ’’and ‘‘service(s) center. ’’The Big 4 ﬁrms use variations of the terms delivery center and service center
to refer to their captive centers in so-called low-cost countries like India.
12This code—PAB14—and similar codes used throughout the remainder of the paper—for example PAB5, IPAB1, BIG4-Report1, BIG4-Trans1,
BNEWS1—refer to sources outlined in Appendix A. We do not list the exact source of information in the reference list to maintain the anonymity of
EU-TAM. Instead, we provide an overview of the documentary and digital material collected in Tables 1 and 3, and in Appendix A.
13We used the Pro edition of NVivo 11 for Windows, which allows users to import, analyze, and code documents, audio ﬁles, video ﬁles, and pictures
(see: www.qsrinternational.com/nvivo-qualitative-data-analysis-software ).
14We made use of the basic functionality of NVivo such as creating a coding scheme, attaching codes to text and video segments to capture meaning in
the data, merging codes, and creating clusters of codes around key themes.
15The interview transcripts were initially coded using pen and paper and later coded using NVivo to facilitate the sorting and merging of codes to search
for emergent themes. Documentary and digital data was directly coded in NVivo.
16We initially used alternative theoretical ideas to help us conceptualize aspects of our analysis but these were later abandoned.Managing the Offshoring of Audit Work: Spanning the Boundaries Between Onshore and Offshore Auditors 67
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022
spanning, all our data were analyzed again in order to merge the two separate coding schemes and to add new codes where
necessary in an effort to incorporate theory into our analysis ( Gioia, Corley, and Hamilton 2013 ;Miles and Huberman 1994 ).
Data display involved visually displaying the coded data by preparing coding matrices and mind maps, allowing us to
construct a detailed overview of the themes and patterns emerging in the data. Our data interpretation process involved moving
repeatedly between the data and the literature and we continued to interrogate the data until we reached agreement on the key
themes for the case narrative ( Denzin and Lincoln 2000 ;Silverman 2000 ). In this way, we engaged in a ‘‘constant dialogue
between the views of the actors in the ﬁeld ’’and our interpretations in an effort to understand how the practice of offshoring
audit work was ‘‘made and reproduced ’’(Power and Gendron 2015 , 156). We continually challenged our interpretations
(Lincoln and Guba 1985 ) until we were satisﬁed that we could build a narrative that could be defended with the data (see Figure
1 for an overview of our data structure). This narrative is presented in the following section.FIGURE 1
Data Structure
68 Canning, O’Dwyer, and Boomsma
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022V . CASE NARRATIVE
We present the case analysis in this section. It is divided into two distinct phases to reﬂect the two attempts made to
introduce offshoring in EU-TAM. In each phase, we focus our analysis on understanding how offshoring (re-)emerged as a
plausible choice in EU-TAM, changing the way audit work is organized. More speciﬁcally, we explore how EU-TAM soughtto achieve the intended consequences and manage the unintended consequences of the decision to offshore some of its auditwork to India.
Phase 1—Experimenting with the Offshoring of Audit Work
The rapid advancements in telecommunications technologies such as high-speed internet, videoconferencing, and
advanced network-computing have enabled the transmission of information over long distances at low cost and with little loss
of quality. This has propelled the offshoring of business services to lower cost countries ( Levy 2005 ;McKinsey Global Institute
2003 ;Shamis et al. 2005 ). The spread of globalizing accounting and auditing standards (see Durocher et al. 2016 ) made it
possible for the Big 4 ﬁrms to latch onto this trend:
As reporting regimes are becoming more and more similar, there is actually not a single valid argument against
offshoring audit work. (PAB4)
Attracted by lower wages and English language skills, the Big 4 ﬁrms started to employ entry-level workers in captive
offshore centers in India in the early 2000s (PAB1; PAB3; PAB5). These captive offshore centers—referred to by the Big 4ﬁrms as shared services centers or global delivery centers—are established as fully owned subsidiaries of Big 4 member ﬁrmsbased in the United States (U.S.) or Europe, or as a joint venture between Big 4 member ﬁrms based in the U.S., Europe, and
India (EU-COC-Proﬁle1; BIG4-Proﬁle1; BIG4-Proﬁle2). Unlike ‘‘normal ’’members of global Big 4 ﬁrm networks, which are
legally separate and autonomous entities (see Downey and Westermann 2021 ), the captive offshore centers do not have their
own client base and solely provide services to member ﬁrms based in the U.S., Canada, and Europe. Similar to othermultinational corporations (see Boehe 2010 ;Kedia and Mukherjee 2009 ;Lewin and Volberda 2011 ), the Big 4 ﬁrms reportedly
prefer the use of captive offshore centers over offshore outsourcing because it provides them with more operational and qualitycontrol as well as more effective knowledge protection:
[Big 4 ﬁrms] consciously opt for offshoring and not for outsourcing to a third party. This is in line with the trend that is
visible internationally ... What you see is that audit ﬁrms choose to outsource front ofﬁce activities within their ownnetwork. The reason is to keep things like the quality of services in their own hands. (PAB6)
The responsibility for the work done in India remains in [EU-TAM’s home country]. This means that clients can hold
us to account on the basis of [the home country’s] quality requirements. We obviously want to guarantee matters suchas quality, care and conﬁdentiality. We are also required to do this by law. Furthermore, it is important for the clientthat his point of contact is not in India, but with his regular contact in [home country]. (EU-TAM partner cited inPAB4)
Initially, the offshoring of basic audit work was perceived by the Big 4 ﬁrms as an effective way to ‘‘reduce cost while
maintaining the same level of quality ’’(PAB4) and quickly gained in popularity. Our documentary evidence suggests that the
percentage of audit hours offshored to India by the Big 4 ﬁrms has increased from less than 5 percent in 2007 to more than 10 to20 percent in 2019 (BIG4-Report1; BIG4-Trans5; BNEWS9; BNEWS10; IPAB5). To accommodate the increase in audit (andconsulting) hours offshored, the number of people employed by captive offshore centers operated by the Big 4 ﬁrms in Indiaincreased from a few thousand in 2007 to tens of thousands in 2019 (BNEWS9; BNEWS10; PAB4):
At the moment, we are constructing more buildings in India ... When all of these [new] buildings in the photo will be
in operation, around 22,000 people will be based there [in the captive offshore center]. (D1
17)
In 2005, our case organization EU-TAM became one of the ﬁrst member ﬁrms outside of the U.S. to explore the possibility
of relocating some audit work to India. EU-TAM was able to use the services of the Indian captive offshore center operated byTAM’s national ofﬁce in the U.S.
18At the time, this captive offshore center (code-named U.S.-COC) had around 500 to 700
17The codes used to represent each interviewee—D1, M1–3, AM1–2, SA1–3 and A1–3—are presented in Table 2.
18The national ofﬁce does not provide services to clients but coordinates the activities of its regions. Each region offers services in certain geograp hic
areas, such as major cities or territories of the U.S. The U.S.-COC was set up and coordinated as if it was a region in the U.S. While the employees at
the U.S.-COC were from India, the responsibility for hiring, training, supervising, and ﬁring U.S.-COC employees rested with the U.S. national ofﬁc e.Managing the Offshoring of Audit Work: Spanning the Boundaries Between Onshore and Offshore Auditors 69
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022
staff members performing audit work for U.S. clients (D1; PAB4). The initiative to pursue this practice in EU-TAM was driven
by the belief that offshoring could offer a solution to high staff turnover and recruitment difﬁculties:
The people we train [in EU-TAM] are attractive to other companies. Auditors are also more likely to leave the
profession due to the increasing risk of legal claims or disciplinary actions. And more stringent regulations are not
only making our work but also our training increasingly formal. That is why fewer students choose for the [audit]profession ... We can bring [new recruits] here, but we can also take the work to other countries ... This trend of
relocating work is reinforced by our clients who are offshoring ﬁnancial-economic functions within their own
organizations. (EU-TAM CEO cited in BNEWS7)
Within EU-TAM, offshoring was piloted by one of its directors who believed that it could offer a solution to an emerging
stafﬁng crisis for some of his large audit clients as well as cut costs considerably (see also Downey and Bedard 2019 ;Farrell
2005 ;Lewin, Massini, and Peeters 2009 ):
We started by offshoring audit work for several large clients, such as investments funds and hedge funds, where I was
involved. It was almost impossible for us to do this work because it was busy season, so we standardized large parts
[of the audit] and relocated the work to there [the captive offshore center in India]. We were the ﬁrst foreign, [non-U.S.], member ﬁrm who was going to do this in India. It worked really well, especially when we standardized the
process: outlining this is what you have to do and these are the ﬁles. (D1)
Using offshoring to address staff shortages was, however, not unique to EU-TAM. Other Big 4 ﬁrms in EU-TAM’s home
country had also discovered offshoring as a promising and practical solution to the increasing workload of onshore auditors and
audit fee pressure from clients (see also Beardsley, Lassila, and Omer 2019 ):
Clients are asking us to run the audit process more efﬁciently, with increasingly tight timelines. Through offshoring
we can use capacity ﬂexibly and reduce the peak load for our [onshore audit] colleagues. This is a practical method,especially in times of a tight [onshore] labor market. Furthermore, the market forces us to work efﬁciently and to
reduce [audit] costs. (Big 4 ﬁrm partner cited in PAB6)
Even the professional accounting body in EU-TAM’s home country noted that ‘‘the offshoring of audit work has a lot of
advantages ’’and at the time was considered ‘‘very attractive considering the structural shortages in the labor market for
[onshore] auditors. ’’(PAB5)
Spanning Boundaries through Building Strong Relationships
When EU-TAM started offshoring audit work to India, the U.S.-COC decided which employees to allocate to each
offshoring audit job. The director who piloted offshoring within EU-TAM, however, recognized the importance of audit team
continuity (see also Christensen, Newton, and Wilkins 2021 ) and had requested and received access to ‘‘a permanent team in
India of around 10 people ’’(D1) that he employed on all his offshore audit assignments. He engaged in extensive interaction
efforts to ensure strong connections between EU-TAM and these employees in India by spending considerable time theredeveloping relationships with them:
Every year I worked with the same team members from India ...During this time, I also visited India several times
and during my stay I built up a relationship with the Indian employees. (D1)
The director believed that these direct relationships ‘‘worked very well ’’(D1) to ensure that the offshore auditors were clear
on the existing audit practices used by EU-TAM onshore. Having ‘‘direct contact with the [offshore auditor] responsible for the
work ’’(AM1) was deemed beneﬁcial because ‘‘when you know someone, you can ask questions, you can ask them to spend an
hour on this, say I need you ’’(M2). The arrangement whereby EU-TAM would have direct contact with ‘‘a ﬁxed team ’’(D1) in
India reportedly resulted in the offshore auditors being integrated into the onshore audit team:
One of my team members in India even came to say goodbye to me because she was getting married to an American.
They were part of the team. (D1)
Direct and frequent communication between onshore and offshore auditors while working on an assignment resulted in
onshore practices becoming sanctioned and reﬂected in the work undertaken by offshore auditors. These relationships were
therefore critical for the communication and coordination of audit work across the multiple and overlapping boundaries that
separated onshore and offshore auditors ( Barner-Rasmussen et al. 2014 ;Levina and Vaast 2008 ):
The team here [onshore] and the team in India also had regular contact with each other. For example, we [onshore
team] reviewed all their [offshore] work and provided them with feedback which they processed. (D1)70 Canning, O’Dwyer, and Boomsma
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022However, bringing offshoring employees ‘‘up to speed ’’on onshore practices and processes through the development of
strong relationships was also costly from a time perspective ( Leonardi and Bailey 2008 ). Working with the captive offshore
center in India reportedly ‘‘took more time and money ’’than originally anticipated because onshore auditors were spending ‘‘a
lot of time instructing, coordinating and calling ’’(M1), and experienced some language barriers:
After you invested an hour to explain the work, she [the offshore auditor] still wanted another call to ask questions.
During this call, 10 men sat on the other end of the line [in the captive offshore center in India] asking questions in
difﬁcult to understand English. (M1)
Spanning Boundaries Through Standardization and Onshore Knowledge and Information Exchange
The onshore audit team was encouraged to provide the offshore team with standardized audit templates comprising step-
by-step instructions. These templates sought to further ensure that the offshore team performed the audit work in a manner that
was consistent with how it was completed onshore, to the extent that it was ‘‘as if the [audit] work was undertaken by the local
[onshore] team ’’(D1):
We [onshore auditors] made templates to illustrate how the audit work should be executed ...We created packages
which included the Excel template and a document with detailed instructions and procedures that should be followed
when executing the work ...It really worked excellently because we standardized the work program for the
employees in India. (D1)
Believing in the beneﬁts of offshoring, the director worked hard to convince his colleagues in EU-TAM to follow his lead
and support the use of the U.S.-COC. He continually exchanged information and knowledge with them obtained from hisescalating offshoring experiences (see also Barner-Rasmussen et al. 2014 ):
I explained how I was using the [U.S.-COC] and mentioned that if they were interested or preferred to receive more
information, they could contact me. (D1)
He suggested that ‘‘they [his audit onshore colleagues] could piggyback ’’(D1) on his prior experience in sending work to
India and explained how offshoring was especially suitable for ‘‘bulk work and relatively standard work ’’(M2), ‘‘work with a
lot of number crunching ’’(D1), and work mainly concerned with balance sheet accounts such as ‘‘cash accounts ’’(D1) (see also
Downey 2018 ). He also prepared a business case promoting the beneﬁts of offshoring, including cutting costs to ‘‘help reduce
the shortage of staff during the busy season ’’and offering ‘‘more interesting work for younger [onshore] employees ’’(EU-TAM
senior manager cited in PAB6). These persuasion tactics gradually resulted in the U.S.-COC being used more both within and
‘‘also outside [his] department ’’(D1).
The Move to Mandate Offshoring
EU-TAM’s senior management was convinced by the director’s business case arguments and started to see offshoring as a
cost-effective way to ‘‘support and unburden the [onshore] auditing team by having less complex work performed by a
specialist central auditing team in India ’’(EU-TAM-Trans2). This was expected to reduce the workload of onshore auditors,
allowing them to ‘‘focus on the more complex and interesting aspects ’’(M2) and ‘‘risk areas considered more important ’’(M1).
Senior management was, however, frustrated by what they considered to be the low uptake of offshoring. They decided to ‘‘up
the ante ’’
and make it ‘‘mandatory for each partner to send a ﬁxed percentage of their audit hours to India ’’(D1). Mandating
offshoring without carefully managing its introduction on the ground resulted in this hardline approach unexpectedly
backﬁring, with only ‘‘some people continu[ing] to send certain tasks to India ’’(D1). Certain partners even ‘‘refused [outright]
to use the US-COC ’’(D1) for their audits, claiming that it was unsuitable for clients with tight deadlines or for so-called ‘‘real ’’
audit work. It also led to onshore auditors devoting little time to selecting appropriate work to offshore, which resulted in the
audit work that came back from the U.S.-COC being perceived as low quality:
I sent only small assignments to them [the U.S.-COC], such as [IFRS]-checklist or loading [trial balances] but real
audit working papers [such as cash working papers reconciling the cash balance to the bank statements] were not
executed by the [U.S.-COC]. (M2)
[The mandating of offshoring] led to friction [within EU-TAM] and people started accumulating hours [offshored to
India] with little attention to organizing it well, which led to poor quality of work. (D1)
The low uptake of offshoring was also reﬂective of what was happening in other European Big 4 ﬁrms at this time who
saw ‘‘the India effect remain[ing] modest for the time being ’’(PAB5). This resulted from onshore auditors reportedly ‘‘stillManaging the Offshoring of Audit Work: Spanning the Boundaries Between Onshore and Offshore Auditors 71
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022
[having] some hesitation when it [came] to communicating in English ’’(PAB5) and feeling apprehensive about the potential
loss of local audit jobs to offshore locations:
The potential loss of [local] jobs is also one of the inhibiting factors—[onshore] auditors think ‘‘that’s just not done. ’’
(PAB5)
That said, senior management in EU-TAM admitted to making two crucial mistakes when mandating their offshoring
arrangements. First, while convinced of the opportunities presented by offshoring, they had failed to clearly articulate and
‘‘sell ’’the business case to onshore audit teams. Second, insufﬁcient time and resources had been committed to ensure a
structured and smooth transition to the widespread use of offshoring within EU-TAM. They sought to correct these mistakes
when they later engaged in a major redesign of their offshoring approach.
Phase 2—Redesigning the Approach to Offshoring
Technological advancement in the 2010s, such as cloud computing ( Kshetri 2011 ), provided the Big 4 ﬁrms with ‘‘a
variety of efﬁcient and convenient methods to increase connectivity across geographies ’’(IPAB3). This enabled ‘‘more timely
interactions and almost instantaneous delivery of the required audit materials ’’(IPAB3), purportedly creating a more
‘‘connected world ’’where ‘‘any [audit] work that can be done on computers, can be done anywhere in the world ’’(IPAB3):
Technology makes it easier for data to travel across borders in large numbers. This trend makes [audit] work easier to
offshore. This is not a trend of auditing alone, but of every professional service organization. (PAB11)
Driven by enhanced remote collaboration and shared work arrangements (see also Canning et al. 2018 ), the Big 4 ﬁrms
started to expand their captive offshore centers in India. Some U.S. based Big 4 ﬁrms had even started to ‘‘layer on more
complex tasks in the offshore centers ’’and it had become possible for offshore employees to ‘‘ris[e] to senior positions in the
auditing ranks ’’(BNEWS10). Inﬂuenced by these developments, a new head of operations19decided to revisit EU-TAM’s use
of offshoring. Aware of the previous challenges experienced at EU-TAM, he realized that fundamental design changes within
the offshoring process were required to overcome the resistance to offshoring among onshore auditors and encourage its more
widespread use. He developed a series of e-learning sessions to encourage support for the redesigned approach in which the
business case for offshoring was more clearly articulated to onshore teams (see Table 1). The e-learning sessions explained to
onshore auditors that offshoring was ‘‘needed to accommodate rising costs and staff shortages in [the home country] ’’(EU-
TAM-eLearn1; EU-TAM-Webcast20), so that EU-TAM could avoid having ‘‘to reject clients because [it did] not have enough
human resources ’’(SA2).21These design changes, which we elaborate on and analyze below, included the establishment of a
new captive offshore center called the European captive offshore center, the creation of a ‘‘mid-ofﬁce, ’’and the use of ‘‘interim
facilitators. ’’
Establishing the European Captive Offshore Center (EU-COC)—Confronting Unintended Consequences
In 2015, EU-TAM launched a new captive offshore center—the European captive offshore center (EU-COC)22—in India.
EU-COC employees would work only on EU-TAM audits to ensure that EU-TAM had ‘‘full authority ’’(D1) over how the
offshored work was undertaken:
We started the [offshore] audit delivery center at [EU-TAM], abbreviated as the [EU-COC], as a new initiative to
make our audits even better. At each client, approximately 20 percent of the audit work can be performed remotelywithout direct client contact. This part can be done smarter and more efﬁciently—that is exactly what [EU-TAM] does
in the [EU-COC]. (MID-Video)
The nature of the work offshored to India was still dominated by repetitive and standardized tasks
23that were time
consuming but ‘‘did not require a lot of judgment ’’(M2), with the intention of allowing onshore auditors ‘‘to focus on the more
19The head of operations was responsible for all audit and assurance related operations within EU-TAM.
20See Table 1 for details of internal material accessed.
21We found further support for claimed client rejection in the Big 4 ﬁrms’ transparency reports where it was reported that new clients could not be
accepted due to inadequate resources. For example, one of the other Big 4 ﬁrms reported that ‘‘new engagements are accepted only when we know we
have sufﬁcient suitable resources and technical expertise available to guarantee a sufﬁciently high level of quality ’’(BIG4-Trans1).
22EU-TAM made use of the U.S.-COC systems for payment and security of EU-COC employees as these systems were ‘‘already organized and
accessible ’’(D1) but took responsibility for hiring Indian people to work in the EU-COC directly itself. The head of operations personally recruited the
ﬁrst 50 employees from business schools nearby the EU-COC (EU-TAM-Webcast).
23Examples of work performed by the EU-COC include the ‘‘pre-processing of [ﬁnancial] information ...necessary for each audit phase ’’and the
‘‘preparation of audit documentation in [EU-TAM] software using templates to support the [onshore] audit teams ’’(MID-Proﬁle1).72 Canning, O’Dwyer, and Boomsma
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022interesting and complex accounts instead of focusing on documentation and processing ’’(EU-TAM-Webcast). In practice,
however, these promised beneﬁts did not transpire and the use of the EU-COC did ‘‘not have an impact on the complexity of
tasks assigned to new hires ’’(AM2). Instead, the audit work returned by the newly created captive offshore center was
reportedly of low quality causing further inefﬁciencies in the efforts required to rectify it as well as disrupting the on-the-job
learning by the onshore audit assistants. We examine these consequences in depth in the remainder of the case narrative.
Defective audit work: a consequence of commodiﬁcation. Public statements by the Big 4 ﬁrms suggest that ‘‘offshored
work meets the same quality standards as work done in the United States ’’(BNEWS10). The captive offshore centers in India
allegedly ‘‘work and document to global [Big 4 ﬁrm] quality standards ’’(BIG4-Trans3), ‘‘fall under the strict quality
requirements set by the global [Big 4 ﬁrm] network ’’(BIG4-Trans5), and are ‘‘reviewed periodically by a team from the global
[Big 4 ﬁrm] network ’’(BIG4-Trans5):
Once inside [the captive offshore center] you would not tell a difference compared to US ofﬁces in terms of design and
equipment. Also, just as in any other [Big 4 ﬁrm] ofﬁce, everyone here is professional, very friendly, hardworking,
always willing to help, and committed to the [Big 4 ﬁrm] culture. (BIG4-Article1)
Offshore auditors working at the EU-COC reportedly ‘‘receive[d] training consistent with their [onshore] colleagues and
their work [was] reviewed and supervised by [onshore] professionals ’’(BNEWS10). Offshore auditors at the EU-COC
reportedly comprised experienced staff24with a ‘‘chartered accountant/certiﬁed public accountant certiﬁcation ’’(EU-COC-
Job2; EU-COC-Job3; EU-COC-Job4; EU-COC-Job5; EU-COC-Video). According to our interviewees, however, much of thework the offshore auditors returned was reportedly incomplete or of poor quality. The perceived lack of quality of workconducted by the EU-COC was attributed to offshore auditors ‘‘not hav[ing] the same substantive knowledge ’’(A1) that
onshore auditors had:
I tend to compare [the captive offshore center in] India to a robot. If a robot cannot do it, then India cannot do it. I
doubt that there is enough knowledge in India to handle something like speciﬁc client information or [onshore]regulations. (M2)
This, in turn, required the onshore auditors, at both lower and higher levels, to invest signiﬁcant time following up and
rectifying less complex and low risk work (see also Leonardi and Bailey 2008 ):
For example, I noticed during the offshoring of the planning phase of our audit that the delivered work was not
executed at a sufﬁcient level. In the end, you are performing this work by yourself because items remain open or they
[the EU-COC employees] write sentences which make no sense. (SA3)
I could have performed the work better by myself. The ﬁle [of work] that I received back from the [EU-COC]
consisted of 20 items that were marked as: ‘‘client [onshore] team to follow-up. ’’So I still needed to document and
audit 20 items. (M3)
Anecdotal evidence from online blogs discussing the offshoring of audit work suggests that this negative experience is
more widely shared in the profession. In discussing the quality of audit work conducted by captive offshore centers in India,several users—all claiming to work or have worked as onshore auditor in a Big 4 ﬁrm—noted that the quality of work
completed by the captive offshore center ‘‘just isn’t the same ’’(Big 4 ﬁrm auditor, BLOG1) and often requires rectiﬁcation:
The work comes back late [and] when the work does come back there are errors everywhere, so I have to spend time
ﬁguring out what is happening. I am seriously considering doing the work myself from scratch. It would probably saveme time. (Big 4 ﬁrm auditor, BLOG1)
My ﬁrst project as staff in compliance was ﬁxing errors made by the [captive offshore center] in India and it took way
longer than it would have if I had done it myself. (Big 4 ﬁrm auditor, BLOG1)
According to our interviewees, reviewing offshore audit work proved especially challenging for the onshore audit
assistants who, similar to participants in Popova and Wright’s (2019) study, were less able to review work that they had not
performed themselves in the ﬁrst instance:
24Managers were expected to have ‘‘more than six years of accounting or equivalent experience ’’(EU-COC-Job 2, EU-COC-Job3), senior assistants were
expected to have ‘‘more than two years of auditing experience ’’(EU-COC-Job4, EU-COC-Job5), and junior assistants were expected to have ‘‘Bachelor
of Commerce, Bachelor of Business Administration, Bachelor of Management Studies, or a Bachelor of Business management ’’with a ‘‘minimum of
60% of equivalent grades in graduation ’’(EU-COC-Job1).Managing the Offshoring of Audit Work: Spanning the Boundaries Between Onshore and Offshore Auditors 73
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022
I noticed that the [onshore audit] assistants had problems with the [EU-COC] because they had also just started [their
role]. (M1)
If you have never performed the work yourself, how can you review work executed by somebody else? (M2)
Instead, the more senior onshore auditors were forced to undertake this review task:
The follow-up items from the [EU-COC] were sometimes ﬁnished by the supervisor of those assistants. If the
supervisors could not solve all the open items they came to me [manager] to solve them. (M1)
Following up the work of the [EU-COC] takes a lot of time. This not only costs the assistants time but also costs me
[assistant manager] because sometimes I am doing overtime to ﬁnish the follow-up work we received from the [EU-
COC]. (AM2)
Undertaking this work themselves goes against the rational principle of audit review, which is intended to lead to ‘‘error
avoidance and correction and as a way of training and evaluating staff ’’(Pentland 1993 , 614). Therefore, offshore auditors, who
were not told about their errors, were unable to learn from them. The essential elements of training and future error avoidancewere lost and offshore auditors were frequently viewed by onshore staff as incompetent and unreliable. Some onshore auditors
within EU-TAM, however, recognized that by denying the offshore auditors feedback on their work, they were partly to blame
for the perceived ‘‘lack of quality ’’(AM2) of work conducted by the captive offshore center (see also Andiola et al. 2018 ):
They [the offshore auditors] are currently not learning from the mistakes they have made earlier ... This is sometimes
disappointing and perhaps something that we should communicate back [to the offshore auditors]. So better
communication of feedback on the work completed, identifying areas of improvement for the next task. We [the
onshore auditors] often neglect to do this because other work considered to be more urgent presents itself. (AM2)
Introducing inefﬁciency. A more ﬂexible approach to offshoring, which involved less planning, was seen as more
favorable as it would allow onshore auditors ‘‘to switch to India at the last minute when we [onshore auditors] know that we
cannot complete tasks here [at EU-TAM] due to time pressure ’’(M1). However, for the redesigned offshoring process to
function as intended, onshore audit teams were required to submit offshoring requests ‘‘well in advance of the audit ’’(M2). Yet,
onshore auditors often ‘‘only start[ed] to think about the use of the EU-COC at the start of the audit ’’(AM1) because onshore
auditors had either not yet been allocated to clients or EU-TAM ‘‘had not yet entered into an agreement with the client ’’(M1),
which made planning to use the EU-COC very difﬁcult:
They wait until that moment in time to request a speciﬁcation from the client and the client does of course not respond
immediately ...The fact that people here [in EU-TAM] do not plan well, does not assist the use of the [EU-COC] and
it actually works against it. (AM1)
Obtaining documents from their clients in good time was reportedly also difﬁcult, even from clients who appreciated that
‘‘the [audit] profession is potentially very suitable for offshoring ’’(M1) as it can make ‘‘the audit as efﬁcient as possible ’’
(AM1):
We still have a lot of trouble requesting documents on time ...The reality is that we [the onshore audit teams] as well
as the client are always late with delivering documents to the [EU-COC]. (SA1)
Hence, many onshore auditors believed that the offshoring process was not efﬁcient as it took them more time to plan for
using the EU-COC than to complete the work themselves:
It now takes a lot of time in the initial phase to make all the logistical arrangements. Someone [within EU-TAM]
spends as much time planning for the use of the [EU-COC] as that person would by doing the work themselves. (M2)
If I hear that we will use [EU-COC], then I have to search for, complete and submit the application form. In addition, I
have to make sure that the client delivers invoices on time and that has to be forwarded to [EU-COC] etc. All in all,
there are a lot of things that I need to arrange that take a lot more time than the four hours I would spend if I did it [the
audit work] myself. (SA1)
Stiﬂing on-the-job learning for audit assistants. A further unintended consequence arising from the use of the EU-COC
was its impact on the on-the-job learning by onshore audit assistants (see also Westermann et al. 2015 ). As audit assistants were
no longer exposed to basic audit training through audit documenting and processing work, their ability to subsequently audit
more complex issues themselves was reportedly limited:74 Canning, O’Dwyer, and Boomsma
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022I think the tasks that the [EU-COC] are picking up are also the tasks that are useful to give a ﬁrst year or second year
[audit assistant] here so that they can gain experience with those tasks and build up experience. So that they [onshore
assistant auditors] ﬁrst learn the basics of the audit so that they can later apply the trick to more complex accounts. It
sometimes seems that some [onshore] assistants ﬁnd the concept of reliability of information rather abstract. This isbecause they sometimes start with accounts that are too complex. (M3)
Similar concerns have been expressed by professional accounting bodies, who expected that the ‘‘continuing trend for low-
level transaction work to be offshored ’’would ‘‘create structural problems for professional accountants and the ‘ecosystem’ that
includes, surrounds, supports and relies on it ’’(IPAB4):
There will be fewer opportunities for newly qualiﬁed accountants in the most developed [onshore] countries where
outsourcing to offshore locations is most likely. More widely, there will also be fewer opportunities for career
progression via the mid-tier roles that are becoming automated. (IPAB4)
Some interviewees were less concerned by this lack of basic training, believing instead that the onshore assistants’ new
role would enhance their people management, critical thinking, and communications skills and, in turn, lead to improvements
in future audits:
The assistants need to think more instead of only documenting when they review. For example, they need to think ‘‘is
it logical that we document this and why do we document that? ’’I see it [offshoring work] as an opportunity for
improvement for the assistants ...The [EU-COC] really facilitates the development of skills as they [onshore audit
assistants] will be supervising and reviewing people [at the EU-COC]. (AM1)
[Onshore] audit assistants will have client contact more quickly and they will learn how to review the work of others ...
They will learn how to communicate more. You might be less involved with [Microsoft] Excel, but more involved
with the alignment of the [EU-COC] and other parties. These kinds of [communication] skills can be useful if
someone becomes a manager. (SA2)
Nevertheless, it was also claimed that as the EU-COC would be undertaking work previously undertaken by onshore audit
assistants, the assistants would be ‘‘forced to learn faster ’’(M2) and would be exposed to ‘‘more complex accounts sooner
which [would] require them to become creative and have enough insight into the audit at an earlier point ’’(M2). Some senior
managers within EU-TAM felt that this would provide junior assistants with a more satisfying work experience:
I hear from my students and recent graduates that in the early years they often have to do work at accounting ﬁrms that
is below their level. There is some truth in that. By offshoring basic audit work, the work that remains in [EU-TAM’s
home country] becomes more interesting for young employees. In this way, you can allow junior staff to focus more
on the professional content of auditing. (EU-TAM senior manager cited in PAB6)
There were concerns that the steepness of the required learning curve for assistants in this new role was, however, too
great. This could be concerning for EU-TAM especially as Westermann et al. (2015) ﬁnd that the increasing complexity of
technical accounting standards has led to even more seasoned auditing professionals having difﬁculty understanding and
applying them:
I think that the learning curve of the assistants will be impacted negatively. I think the idea behind the [EU-COC] is
that the people over here can focus on more complex accounts. However, I do not think that a ﬁrst year has the
experience to work on these complex accounts. It will cost us a lot of time to teach the assistants these accounts.
Instead, it would be better if they learn the documenting with easier accounts in order to ensure that they can use this
skill later on in more complex accounts. In the end, I think that the learning curve will become steeper but less
efﬁcient. (M3)
Junior audit assistants would also be required to develop different skills as the emphasis of their work would shift toward
the coordination and review of work conducted by the captive offshore center in India:
If the trend of [offshoring] continues, it will have a dramatic impact on our own [onshore] talent pool of highly
educated people. They will be even more in demand, because then most of the work will involve high-qualitycoordination and relationship building work. Our [onshore] staff structure will therefore radically change, with many
expensive employees and hardly any cheap ones. (EU-TAM partner cited in BNEWS7)
The [onshore] assistants will have a more coordinating role of the [EU-COC]. This [people management] skill will
become more important in the future with the use of data analytics and IT in the audit. (M1)Managing the Offshoring of Audit Work: Spanning the Boundaries Between Onshore and Offshore Auditors 75
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022
To summarize, while establishing the EU-COC was intended to bring beneﬁts to onshore auditors by allowing them to
focus on more complex interesting audit issues as well as making the audit process more efﬁcient, what came to pass was
somewhat different. The quality of the work performed by the EU-COC was reportedly low such that onshore auditors had to
devote additional time to reviewing and rectifying it. This left less time for them to devote to the more complex and‘‘interesting ’’audit issues. They also had to spend more time than expected planning to use the EU-COC, so much so that they
believed it would be more efﬁcient for them to do the audit work onshore rather than to offshore it. Hence, the claimed
offshoring efﬁciencies were often not realized on the ground and instead raised ‘‘questions about the commercial success ’’of
offshoring ( Curtis and Turley 2007 , 457). Finally, unanticipated changes also affected the on-the-job learning of the onshore
audit assistants such that senior auditors frequently felt that the assistants had neither the skillset to review audit work nor weresufﬁciently equipped to perform the more complex audit work.
The Creation of a ‘‘Mid-Ofﬁce ’’—Confronting Boundary Spanning Aspirations with Unintended Consequences
Seeking smooth connections—creating a boundary spanning unit. In his attempt to ensure a structured and smooth
transition to the widespread use of offshoring within EU-TAM, the head of operations introduced what was termed ‘‘the mid-
ofﬁce ’’
25(see Figure 2) in 2015. This ofﬁce was situated in EU-TAM’s home country and had responsibility for deﬁning within
the redesigned audit structure the rules to be applied by both the onshore and offshore auditors:
You ﬁll in the request form with the client details, number of hours, and the work that you want to offshore. You send
this form to the mid-ofﬁce and the mid-ofﬁce processes the form and, if needed, asks additional questions. After that,
you receive an e-mail with the conﬁrmation and with the deadlines and when you need to deliver the documents [for
example, bank statements for reconciliation of cash balances] to the [EU-COC]. (SA2)FIGURE 2
The Structure of Offshoring in Phase 1 and 2
25The mid-ofﬁce employs a number of assistant managers who are trained ﬁnancial auditors. Details of who is involved in the mid-ofﬁce were disclosed
on the internal EU-TAM website page where you can meet the mid-ofﬁce team virtually and see which roles they have in the offshoring process (EU-
TAM-Intranet).76 Canning, O’Dwyer, and Boomsma
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022All work conducted by the [EU-COC] is carefully reviewed by the mid-ofﬁce to safeguard the quality of the work and
to ensure that the [onshore] client facing team’s request had been fulﬁlled. (Mid-ofﬁce manager, MID-Proﬁle1)
It was expected that the mid-ofﬁce would serve a pivotal role as a ‘‘boundary spanning unit ’’—a specialized entity created
for the sole purpose of mediating the ﬂow of information between other organizational departments ( Monteiro and Birkinshaw
2017 )—by connecting the onshore and offshore teams and making the offshoring process more efﬁcient:
The mid-ofﬁce acts as the link between [onshore] client facing teams and the [EU-COC]. It plays a crucial role in the
cooperation between these teams, the continuous monitoring of the quality and the planning of the work conducted by
the [EU-COC] such that it meets the [onshore] client facing team’s request. (Mid-ofﬁce manager, MID-Proﬁle1)
It may be efﬁcient to work with an intermediary [the mid-ofﬁce] in the sense that we [onshore auditors] do not spend
the whole day answering questions from the [EU-COC]. (A1)
Mid-ofﬁce employees were reportedly required to have ‘‘between 3 to 8 years of audit experience ’’and ‘‘hold or be
studying towards a CA, CPA, or ACCA certiﬁcate ’’(MID-Job). To serve as the ‘‘linking pin ’’(MID-Job; EU-TAM-Intranet)
between onshore and offshore audit teams, EU-TAM expected mid-ofﬁce staff to be ‘‘open minded, ’’ ‘‘strong communicators, ’’
and ‘‘proﬁcient in multiple languages ’’in order ‘‘to bridge cultural differences [and] bring different parties together ’’(MID-
Job). As a boundary spanning unit, the mid-ofﬁce was expected to establish a shared context in which it would coordinate the
offshore and onshore audit teams ( Monteiro and Birkinshaw 2017 ):
I am a manager in the mid-ofﬁce. In this role I have been actively involved in the development, improvement, and
expansion of this new branch within [EU-TAM]. Much of the practical [audit] work is carried out in India butmanaging [this offshored audit work] is my responsibility. I put together the [offshore] teams, manage them and
review the work that comes back from [the EU-COC in] India. The great thing about my job is that I am very free to
plan and organize my own activities ... Unlike a traditional [onshore] auditor, you really get to deal with the dynamics
that come with connecting two teams. (MID-Video)
Staff working within the mid-ofﬁce were responsible for ‘‘planning the work of a large group of [offshore audit] colleagues
in India ’’as well as ‘‘reviewing the work prepared by the EU-COC to determine whether it meets the demands of client facing
[onshore] teams ’’(MID-Job). The mid-ofﬁce structure was designed to eliminate the necessity for a direct relationship between
onshore and offshore auditors thereby allowing their distinct identities and associated core activities to remain intact ( Carlile
2004 ;Zietsma and Lawrence 2010 ):
Because [mid-ofﬁce employees] are the linking pin between two teams, [they] will also have to manage any tensions
[between onshore and offshore auditors] and/or have to develop solutions to problems that might arise. (Mid-ofﬁce
manager job advert, MID-Job)
Details of the redesigned audit structure wherein all communication between onshore and offshore audit teams was
managed by the mid-ofﬁce were set out in one of the e-learning sessions (EU-TAM-eLearn3). The revised offshoring process is
summarized in Figure 3.
Reinforcing boundaries—The unintended consequences of the mid-ofﬁce structure. While it was expected that the
quality of audit work offshored would be consistently higher because of the additional ‘‘monitoring and review by several
people ’’(D1), including the mid-ofﬁce (see also Leonardi and Bailey 2008 ), in practice this was not the case. Most of our
interviewees lauded the original offshoring process (outlined in Phase 1) where they were able to make ‘‘contact directly ’’(M3)
with offshore auditors:
[In the earlier offshoring process] the onshore audit team and the team in India regularly contacted each other, gave
advice and feedback about the work that had been done and the team in India processed the feedback in the [next]
assigned work. (D1)
It was widely believed that the introduction of the mid-ofﬁce had led to offshore auditors receiving confused feedback
through communication ‘‘noise ’’
or no feedback at all. The introduction of the mid-ofﬁce was seen to act as ‘‘an extra link in the
chain ’’(A2) and ‘‘the more links in the chain, the more noise in the communication ’’(A1). Hence, the mid-ofﬁce was perceived
as contributing to rather than ‘‘preventing miscommunication ’’(SA2):
It [audit work] has to go through all these links [the mid-ofﬁce] before it has arrived in India. I would like to connect
directly with someone [at the EU-COC] who conducts my work ...The problem with all those different parties
involved is that communication is disrupted (AM1).Managing the Offshoring of Audit Work: Spanning the Boundaries Between Onshore and Offshore Auditors 77
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022
I think the process would be better if you could contact the persons in India directly. It is some kind of chain that is
used to inform somebody at the end. This information will always be changed during the chain. (A1)
When contact was direct, the offshore auditors were able to ask questions and, in this way, seek clariﬁcation immediately
from the onshore auditors and learn from the feedback in undertaking their audit work (see also Andiola et al. 2018 ):
They [offshore auditors] could have called and discussed these [open] items for 5 to 10 minutes. Then the quality
immediately goes up. But calling from India is now stopped. We do it all through a channel, the mid-ofﬁce now andwhile the mid-ofﬁce informs us that differences have been identiﬁed, they have not yet been sorted out. I think thatIndia [offshore auditors] can develop better when [they] explain the differences and talk [directly] ...to us [onshore
auditors]. (SA2)
Interviewees also considered direct communication as more effective because onshore auditors had the relevant client
knowledge (see also Aron and Singh 2005 ) and were therefore better equipped to communicate audit requirements with
offshore employees compared to the mid-ofﬁce:
The intermediary [mid-ofﬁce employee] is often a person who is not involved with the [onshore audit] team that is
working on a speciﬁc assignment ...We [as onshore auditors] are much better able to explain things [to the EU-COC]
than an intermediary [the mid-ofﬁce], because they just disrupt the communication. (A1)
While it was claimed that having an extra pair of review eyes, by means of the mid-ofﬁce, would enhance the quality of the
work offshored, some interviewees were skeptical of the reviews undertaken by mid-ofﬁce staff as they frequently failed to
identify incomplete audit work returned by the EU-COC:
For example, in the sample we checked if the cut-off [of the invoices] was correct. However, the [EU-COC] did not
check the cut-off of the invoices, although this is mentioned in the risk procedures of the ﬁle. This was also not noticedby the other reviewers [such as the mid ofﬁce]. (AM2)FIGURE 3
The Redesigned Offshoring Process in Phase 2
Source: EU-TAM-eLearn3.78 Canning, O’Dwyer, and Boomsma
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022Hence, it is not surprising that the quality of offshored work returned to the onshore teams was reportedly low as the
offshore teams were not receiving feedback from the mid-ofﬁce that their work was defective. This contrasts with the ﬁndingsofLeonardi and Bailey (2008 , 424) whose onshore engineers saw few errors in the work of the offshore engineers. Their
equivalent mid-ofﬁce (on-site coordinators) picked up such errors and sent work back to the offshore site for further revisionswhen it was considered not to be up to standard, thereby protecting the onshore engineers from poor quality offshore work. In
our case, instead, the mid-ofﬁce was viewed as a bureaucratic boundary that prevented onshore auditors from dealing directly
with offshore auditors when issues arose. This caused scheduling delays and perceived inﬂexibility on the part of the offshoreauditors. Perhaps directing this criticism at the offshore auditors seems to be somewhat misplaced as the problem appeared tolie not with them but with the mid-ofﬁce and the role it played in trying to control the process:
I do not think that the offshoring process is very ﬂexible. I think the main reason for this is the many links that there
are between the [EU-COC] and the [onshore] engagement team. For example, the mid-ofﬁce accepts the request and
communicates the request to India. I think it is better if there is a small change in the request or a last-minute request,that we can directly contact the [EU-COC] in India. (AM1)
The mid-ofﬁce structure reportedly imposed additional time pressure on onshore auditors, so much so that they chose not
to share feedback with offshore employees on the work that they had undertaken. As highlighted by Westermann et al. (2015 ,
881) feedback has a ‘‘dramatic impact on auditors’ ability to learn ’’(Andiola et al. 2018 ,Goodman 1998 ). In our case, there was
a risk of no feedback and offshore employees, therefore, frequently failed to learn from their mistakes.
26As alluded to earlier,
this lack of feedback may help explain the reportedly persistent quality issues that onshore auditors encountered with the workoffshored under the redesigned offshoring process:
The [EU-COC auditors] never sees their faults so they cannot learn from their mistakes. I have less conﬁdence in their
work because I know they will make the same mistakes next time I use them on audits. (M3)
I acknowledge that we [onshore auditors] do not have time to give feedback [to the offshore auditors] about the work
that is performed because we [onshore auditors] are busy ﬁnishing the audit. So, they [offshore auditors] are notlearning from the mistakes they made earlier. (AM2)
To summarize, it was anticipated that creating the mid-ofﬁce, a specialized boundary spanning unit ( Monteiro and
Birkinshaw 2017 ), would lead to a smooth transition in the widespread use of offshoring by enhancing the offshoring process
experience. By ‘‘actively intervening ’’in the interactions between onshore and offshore teams, the mid-ofﬁce was expected to
‘‘create positive outcomes ...by resolving misunderstandings, managing conﬂicts, [and] building inter-group trust ’’(Barner-
Rasmussen et al. 2014 , 888). However, the mid-ofﬁce was instead seen as bringing ‘‘noise ’’to the system, leading to confused
or no feedback to offshore auditors on the work they were performing and sending to the onshore auditors. Hence, onshore
auditors reported disappointment in the persistent errors they found in this work and did not perceive the mid-ofﬁce employees
to be operating as a boundary spanners-in-practice ( Levina and Vaast 2005 ).
Employing Interim Facilitators—Intended Knowledge Sharing Confronts Unintended Blockages
Shortly after the creation of the mid-ofﬁce in 2015, EU-TAM sought to bolster its boundary spanning efforts by
introducing ‘‘interim facilitator ’’roles. Interim facilitators were experienced assistant managers from the mid-ofﬁce who were
‘‘seconded to work in India for a 6-month period to manage teams ’’(D1) and to train, educate and guide the offshore auditors at
the EU-COC ‘‘on the local [onshore] audit standards that they were expected to apply in their audit work ’’(MID-Proﬁle1):
The [interim facilitator] is located in India and has a similar [managing] role. Together we ensure that the entire audit
process runs smoothly from start to ﬁnish and that we can deliver a quality project to the [onshore] audit teams. (Mid-
ofﬁce manager, MID-Video)
Interviewees believed that having the interim facilitators at the EU-COC ‘‘worked well ’’as they ‘‘already [knew] how to
communicate with the teams ’’(M1) when work was sent across from the onshore team. Interim facilitators were able to monitor
how this work was performed by the offshore team and check that it was performed correctly before sending it back to the
onshore team:
They [offshore auditors] do the work and it is being watched and assessed by the ‘‘interim facilitators ’’and adjusted by
the auditor in India as required and afterwards it is placed in the ﬁle and signed off by us [onshore auditor]. (D1)
26Andiola et al. (2018) provide insight into how feedback is perceived by offshore auditors when it is provided by onshore or offshore supervisors.Managing the Offshoring of Audit Work: Spanning the Boundaries Between Onshore and Offshore Auditors 79
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022
By ‘‘acting as channels through which ...messages [were] delivered and interpreted ’’(Barner-Rasmussen et al. 2014 , 888)
and by educating offshore employees on onshore audit standards and practices, the interim facilitators sought to improve theboundary spanning ability of the mid-ofﬁce by facilitating shared understanding between mid-ofﬁce and EU-COC employees.According to our interviewees, remaining re-located at the EU-COC for signiﬁcant periods allowed interim facilitators toobserve the work and organizational culture of the EU-COC and to uncover where synergies and/or blockages were likely to
arise in the overall offshoring process. Hence, they reportedly facilitated a two-way knowledge exchange—one involving the
sharing of audit knowledge with the EU-COC or acting as a knowledge broker, and the other encompassing the sharing of‘‘cultural ’’knowledge about the EU-COC with onshore teams and knowledge about EU-TAM to offshore auditors. In a way,
their role implies the combination of knowledge delivery with knowledge gathering roles that connected the two ofﬁces(Barner-Rasmussen et al. 2014 ;Birkinshaw et al. 2017 ):
The interim facilitators in India train the people in India about our culture. For example, during the ﬁrst week of
training it is mentioned that they have to appear on time at work. (D1)
These people [interim facilitators] who go there will know very well how the [EU-COC] works and then they can also
teach us [onshore auditors] about the [EU-COC]. (M2)
While the interaction between onshore and offshore employees was supposedly improved by sending interim facilitators to
the EU-COC, interviewees were concerned by the interim facilitators’ lack of ‘‘practical experience ’’(M1) and knowledge of
clients:
I doubt whether there is enough knowledge in India about my client. You can argue that there are interim facilitators in
India who view it but what do those people know about my client? Can they interpret, for example, whether
operational costs are properly classiﬁed? (M2)
This perceived lack of practical experience was due to the interim facilitator positions being ﬁlled by employees from the
mid-ofﬁce
27rather than by onshore auditors. This helps explain their widely perceived inability to pick up mistakes made by
the offshore team, as reﬂected by the high number of errors reported by interviewees of offshore work that had been reviewedby the interim facilitators:
You [onshore team] ﬁnally receive back the document signed by the interim facilitator. But when you open the
document, you still ﬁnd quite a number of comments where you yourself are kept busy for a long time. In my view,too many mistakes are made. (M1)
The interim facilitators’ perceived inability to identify mistakes made by offshore teams helps further explain the feedback
problem identiﬁed earlier in respect of the mid-ofﬁce. As indicated by Leonardi and Bailey (2008) , a lack of occupational
knowledge or work experience could act to ‘‘block ’’rather than transfer knowledge to the offshore team (see also Carlile 2002 ).
In addition, while interim facilitators were able to ‘‘see people working [at the EU-COC] ’’and were able to identify ‘‘what
could be improved with regards to the work and communication ’’(AM2), they seemingly did not assist in facilitating closer
bonds between onshore and offshore audit teams:
In the end, you still miss that connection that should arise [between onshore and offshore staff]. You just never really
feel that they [the offshore employees] are part of the [audit] team. That might be a bit of a bad thing. (A1)
It would be ideal if you have a ﬁxed number of senior [onshore audit] people to send out there [to the EU-COC] as the
interim facilitators. I do not believe that an interim facilitator can assess all those activities [conducted at the EU-COC]
in a short period of time, they can only check whether the quality [of work conducted at the EU-COC] is consistent.
(M2)
While our interviewees felt that there were certain beneﬁts from having interim facilitators in place, in terms of providing
an additional layer of review of offshored work, they nonetheless did not view the interim facilitators as boundary spanners-in-practice ( Levina and Vaast 2005 ). The dominant view was that to become legitimate boundary spanners between onshore and
offshore auditors, thereby ensuring that offshoring within EU-TAM functioned as intended, the interim facilitators would
reportedly need greater practical audit experience and client knowledge. Furthermore, the onshore auditors noted that
‘‘communication simply need[ed] to improve and the integration between the team in the [home country] and India need[ed] to
be better ’’(AM2) for offshoring to operate as envisioned. To facilitate better communication and integration between onshore
27Only (assistant) managers within the mid-ofﬁce were eligible for a secondment at the EU-COC (MID-Proﬁle1).80 Canning, O’Dwyer, and Boomsma
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022and offshore audit teams, some of the Big 4 ﬁrms have recently started to experiment with the secondment of offshore auditors
to onshore locations:
The best of the [offshore auditors] will have a chance to go to the United States for a rotation and bring back their
experience and expertise. (BIG4-Article1)
The Future of Offshoring: Partner Persistence in the Face of Adverse on-the Ground Consequences
The head of operations continually promised that tangible beneﬁts would come from the revised approach to offshoring.
He preached patience when warning that ‘‘it would take several years before [using the EU-COC] w[ould] pay off ’’(A2).
However, the onshore auditors we interviewed were unconvinced. Many interviewees claimed that ‘‘more enthusiasm for
offshoring [was being shown] at the higher levels [in EU-TAM] ’’(M1) than by the lower levels where there was a noticeable
‘‘resistance to using the [EU-COC] ’’(SA1) given the ‘‘experiences in the team[s] ’’(M1) of using it in practice. These
experiences, as discussed above, revolved around the unintended adverse consequences of the redesigned approach to
offshoring: poor quality audit work performed in the EU-COC leading to onshore audit work inefﬁciencies; disruption to on-
the-job learning by onshore audit assistants; ineffective lines of communication between onshore and offshore employees
resulting from the mid-ofﬁce structure; and nominated interim facilitators failing to act as boundary spanners-in-practice. Thatsaid, offshoring remains in use within EU-TAM with all partners submitting a certain percentage of their audit work to the EU-
COC. Partners remain hopeful that the lead-time for jobs will eventually shorten and that the quality of audit work undertaken
by the EU-COC employees will improve as their knowledge and experience increases:
I have conﬁdence that the lead times of the [EU-COC] will be shorter. It is logical that there are still some problems ...
I think that we should be realistic about the process of implementing a new way of working, and that we do not
complain after two years that it is not working ﬂuently. (M2)
VI. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
Like many other practices underpinning the globalization of professional work, offshoring is often depicted as an
unproblematic practice with many assumed beneﬁts such as cost reductions and enhanced opportunities for onshore
professionals ( Downey 2018 ;Durocher et al. 2016 ). Our case study in a Big 4 professional services ﬁrm (code-named EU-
TAM), however, unveils that integrating offshoring into the audit process is not without challenges and ‘‘involves profound
alterations at the ...occupational and individual levels ’’(Durocher et al. 2016 , 84). By adopting a qualitative research
approach, we sought to understand the intended and unintended consequences of offshoring for auditors and the audit process.
Our case study responds to calls for research into the process of offshoring audit work and contributes to a better understanding
of the challenges associated with facilitating the integration between onshore audit teams and offshore auditors located incaptive offshore centers in low-cost countries like India ( Downey 2018 ). On a broader level, our ﬁndings contribute to research
seeking a richer understanding of the audit process and the nature of the auditor’s work in a world ‘‘where globalizing
discourses increasingly resonate ’’(Canning et al. 2018 ;Durocher et al. 2016 , 70; Power and Gendron 2015 ). Below, we reﬂect
on our ﬁndings in the context of prior empirical work and consider their theoretical implications. First, we mobilize the concept
of ‘‘boundary spanning ’’(Barner-Rasmussen et al. 2014 ;Birkinshaw et al. 2017 ;Fennell and Alexander 1987 ;Schotter et al.
2017 ) to conceptualize how EU-TAM sought to create linkages between onshore and offshore auditors in an effort to facilitate
the coordination of audit work across multiple and overlapping boundaries ( Birkinshaw et al. 2017 ;Levina and Vaast 2005 ;
Monteiro and Birkinshaw 2017 ;Schotter et al. 2017 ). Second, the distinction between four core boundary spanning
functions— exchanging, linking, facilitating, andintervening (Barner-Rasmussen et al. 2014 ;
Birkinshaw et al. 2017 )—is used
to unpack ‘‘the joint role of organizational and individual factors in dealing with the complexity associated with boundary
spanning ’’(Schotter et al. 2017 , 410) in the context of offshoring audit work. Finally, we draw on the notions of ‘‘nominated
boundary spanners ’’and ‘‘boundary spanners-in-practice ’’(Levina and Vaast 2005 ) to characterize the role of individual staff
members in the process through which EU-TAM sought to span the boundaries between onshore and offshore auditors.
This study extends empirical work on the offshoring of ﬁnancial audit work. Prior research recognizes that offshoring is
producing ‘‘dynamic ’’changes in the audit process ( Downey 2018 ;Popova and Wright 2019 ), but provides little empirical
insight into how such changes are experienced by auditors. Our in-depth case analysis allowed us to uncover how onshore
auditors experienced the integration of offshoring into the audit process. From the management literature we know thateffective offshoring ‘‘requires close collaboration amongst all participants ’’(Levina and Vaast 2008 , 307). The management
and coordination of work and people across the multiple and overlapping boundaries that characterize offshoring arrangements
is, however, highly complex ( Barner-Rasmussen et al. 2014 ). Offshoring presents a context in which boundary spanning is
particularly challenging due to the high degree of dependence and knowledge asymmetry between onshore and offshoreManaging the Offshoring of Audit Work: Spanning the Boundaries Between Onshore and Offshore Auditors 81
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022
auditors ( Tippmann et al. 2017 ). Our analysis of the evolution of offshoring within EU-TAM uncovered a range of boundary
spanning activities with intended and unintended consequences for the interaction between onshore and offshore auditors.
The ﬁrst phase of our narrative described how an individual director trialed offshoring within EU-TAM by sending work to
the captive offshore center operated by its U.S. member ﬁrm in India (U.S.-COC). During this ﬁrst phase, the director was notofﬁcially nominated to construct links with the U.S.-COC; instead he demonstrated ‘‘entrepreneurial qualities ’’in that he
responded to ‘‘an opportunity that [was] lying unfulﬁlled ’’(Birkinshaw et al. 2017 , 431). He saw offshoring as a solution to an
emerging stafﬁng crisis and as a way to cut costs. As a result, the initial interactions between the director and offshore auditors
‘‘happen[ed] [quite] naturally and without any sort of external intervention ’’from EU-TAM’s senior management ( Birkinshaw
et al. 2017 , 431). According to Birkinshaw et al. (2017) this is common for boundary spanners-in-practice —individuals who
are able to span the boundaries between different contexts ( Langley et al. 2019 ;Levina and Vaast 2005 )—who take the
initiative and pro-actively ‘‘seek opportunities to mediate the ﬂow of information ’’between different contexts ( Birkinshaw et al.
2017 , 431, emphasis added).
The director demonstrated three essential characteristics that enabled him to become a boundary spanner-in-practice . First,
he obtained legitimacy as a participant in both the onshore and offshore ‘‘ﬁeld ’’by holding a senior position within EU-TAM
and spending considerable time with the offshore auditors in India ( Levina and Vaast 2005 ). Second, he was able to persuade
some of his colleagues within EU-TAM to send work to India. This suggests that he was able to operate as a ‘‘legitimate
negotiator, ’’i.e., he had the ‘‘symbolic capital that ma[d]e others see [him] as being capable of reshaping ...[audit] practices in
the ﬁeld ’’(Levina and Vaast 2005 , 353). Third, he ‘‘engage[d] in boundary spanning because [he] develop[ed] an inclination to
do so ’’due to the ‘‘perceived advantages [he] associated with spanning boundaries, ’’not because senior EU-TAM partners
instructed him to do so ( Levina and Vaast 2005 , 353). By linking onshore and offshore auditors and facilitating regular contact
and feedback sharing, the director was reportedly able to bridge most of the boundaries between onshore and offshore auditors
(Birkinshaw et al. 2017 ;Levina and Vaast 2005 ).
Convinced by the demonstrated beneﬁts of offshoring and in an effort to increase its uptake, EU-TAM’s senior
management made it mandatory for all audit partners to offshore a percentage of their audit hours. This shift away from the
more gentle persuasion efforts of the director, however, had the unintended consequence of widening the boundaries between
onshore and offshore auditors ( Levina and Vaast 2008 ). Partners were required to offshore a minimum amount of hours, but
received little or no guidance on the type of work appropriate for offshoring or on how to best communicate with the offshoringcenter operated by its U.S. member ﬁrm in India (the U.S.-COC). This resulted in disappointment with the quality of work
returned by the U.S.-COC and led to many onshore auditors abandoning the practice. This situation illustrates that the
boundaries between onshore and offshore auditors are not stable and pre-given, as is often assumed in the boundary spanningliterature ( Langley et al. 2019
), and can shift due to the unintended consequences of changes in the offshoring arrangement.
Phase two of our case narrative described how a new head of operations revisited EU-TAM’s approach to offshoring.
Under the redesigned approach, some of the boundary spanning activities previously undertaken at the individual level became
institutionalized in organizational structures and processes. This was intended to make possible the wider adoption of
offshoring within EU-TAM by limiting the dependence on the boundary spanning skills and efforts of speciﬁc individuals likethe director ( Schotter et al. 2017 ). The boundary spanning structures and processes introduced by EU-TAM in phase two
included: training sessions for onshore auditors; the establishment of a new captive offshore center in India dedicated to EU-
TAM clients (the EU-COC); the creation of the ‘‘mid-ofﬁce ’’; and the secondment of mid-ofﬁce managers (interim facilitators)
to the EU-COC. While these changes were designed to overcome the resistance to offshoring among onshore auditors and to
make the offshoring of audit work more efﬁcient, we uncovered several unintended consequences. For example, our
interviewees indicated that the low quality and incompleteness of work returned by the EU-COC required onshore auditors to
spend additional time reviewing and rectifying mistakes, leaving less time for the completion of more complex and
‘‘interesting ’’audit issues (see also Downey 2018 ).
Instead of spanning boundaries between onshore and offshore auditors, the newly created EU-COC seemingly reinforced
them. Aware of the need to forge closer links, the new head of operations introduced the ‘‘mid-ofﬁce ’’as a specialized boundary
spanning unit situated in EU-TAM’s home country ( Birkinshaw et al. 2017 ;Monteiro and Birkinshaw 2017 ). As a boundary
spanning unit, the sole raison d’ ˆetre of the mid-ofﬁce was to actively intervene in the interaction between onshore and offshore
auditors to reduce misunderstandings, build trust, and improve the ﬂow of information between the two groups ( Barner-
Rasmussen et al. 2014 ;Monteiro and Birkinshaw 2017 ). The creation of the mid-ofﬁce was intended to enable smoother
interactions by creating a dedicated space to mediate relations while ‘‘allowing participants [onshore and offshore auditors] to
remain behind ...established boundaries ’’(Birkinshaw et al. 2017 ;Langley et al. 2019 , 723; Pawlowski and Robey 2004 ).
The resulting reconﬁguration of the boundaries between onshore and offshore auditors, however, had the unforeseen
consequence of exacerbating, instead of easing, the communication and quality problems experienced by onshore auditors. Aclear separation between ‘‘us’’and ‘‘them ’’was constructed ( Barrett et al. 2005 ;Hanes 2013 ) and was worsened by the
restrictions imposed on onshore employees having a direct relationship with EU-COC employees. The prevention of direct82 Canning, O’Dwyer, and Boomsma
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022contact between onshore and offshore auditors had the unintended consequence of transforming the mid-ofﬁce into a
‘‘boundary roadblock ’’(Carlile 2002 , 451) that encouraged fragmentation ( Durocher et al. 2016 ).
EU-TAM attempted to address the perceived inadequacies of the mid-ofﬁce arrangement by seconding assistant managers
from the mid-ofﬁce to India to facilitate smoother interactions between mid-ofﬁce employees and the EU-COC. By observing
the work, experiencing the culture, and educating offshore employees on onshore standards and practices, EU-TAM sought totransform mid-ofﬁce managers into boundary spanners-in-practice—individuals able to navigate and negotiate the boundariesbetween the onshore and offshore auditors ( Levina and Vaast 2005 ). While the interim facilitators reportedly improved the
communication, their lack of practical audit experience and client knowledge prevented them from identifying mistakes madeby the EU-COC. Consequently, the interim facilitators were not seen as legitimate participants or negotiators in the work
relationship between onshore and offshore auditors ( Levina and Vaast 2005 , 353). By not being the ﬁnal users of work
produced by the EU-COC, mid-ofﬁce employees and interim facilitators may also have been less inclined—compared to theEU-TAM director in Phase 1—to span the boundaries between onshore and offshore auditors ( Levina and Vaast 2005 ).
Our analysis also shows how the introduction of the EU-COC and the mid-ofﬁce structure inﬂuenced the learning process
of both onshore and offshore auditors. Novice auditors learn how to master the ‘‘craft ’’of auditing through the completion of
progressively more complex work in a closely supervised environment ( Westermann et al. 2015 ). The reduced exposure of
onshore audit assistants to basic audit training through audit documentation and processing work reportedly stiﬂed their on-the-job learning. This contrasts with the ﬁndings of Popova and Wright (2019) , who found that offshoring lower-level audit tasks
does not hinder, and may even beneﬁt the experiential learning of novice auditors. We uncovered that novice auditors in EU-TAM were exposed to more complex work at an earlier stage and were expected to learn faster. This ﬁnding could beconcerning given that even experienced auditing professionals encounter difﬁculties understanding and applying increasinglycomplex accounting and auditing standards ( Westermann et al. 2015 ). Not all of our interviewees shared this concern, with
some noting that the offshoring of basic audit tasks would enhance the higher-level skills of audit assistants such as their abilityto communicate, manage people, and think critically.
28This contrasts with Westermann et al. (2015 , 893) who found that
reduced face-to-face interaction with other auditors and with audit clients limits the ability of auditors to ‘‘learn how to ‘read
people,’ think critically and probe for answers. ’’We also uncovered evidence suggesting that the introduction of the mid-ofﬁce
reduced the learning opportunities for offshore auditors as they no longer received feedback from or interacted directly with theonshore audit team. One-on-one interaction between more senior auditors and novice auditors and face-to-face feedback areessential elements of auditor training and future error avoidance ( Westermann et al. 2015 ).
Overall, our ﬁndings demonstrate that global organizational boundaries are capricious, they inevitably engender friction,
and they are far from being easily manageable. We ﬁnd that global organizational boundaries, at least in the context ofoffshoring audit work, are not as stable and pre-given as is often assumed in the boundary spanning literature ( Langley et al.
2019 ). Even the so-called ‘‘traditional drivers of boundaries ...such as culture and geography are evolving and changing ’’
(Schotter et al. 2017 , 409), requiring global organizations to continuously adapt and re-conﬁgure their boundary spanning
strategies. Our ﬁndings support prior literature on multinational organizations that suggests that boundary spanning functionscan only be formalized to a certain extent ( Ma¨kela¨, Barner-Rasmussen, Ehrnrooth, and Koveshnikov 2019 ;Schotter et al.
2017 ), primarily due to the critical role that the skills and efforts of individual employees—such as the director in our case—
play in the effectiveness of boundary spanning ( Birkinshaw et al. 2017 ;Kane and Levina 2017 ;Levina and Vaast 2005 ;
Roberts and Beamish 2017 ;Schotter et al. 2017 ). Within EU-TAM, the institutionalization of boundary spanning functions in
formal structures and processes had the unintended consequence of widening the boundaries between geographically,culturally, and linguistically dispersed employees. While intended to improve linkages between onshore and offshore auditors,the creation of a specialized boundary spanning unit (the mid-ofﬁce) had the opposite effect of blocking connections andevoking ‘‘ethnocentrism, ’’i.e., the ‘‘tendency of a group to consider its own members and values as superior to the members
and values of other inferior groups ’’(Downey and Westermann 2021 , 1423).
Recent research on global group audits suggests that ‘‘intergroup contact ’’through secondment or site visits can be an
effective way to reduce such ethnocentrism as it enables the group auditor to build an appreciation of the perspective of thecomponent auditor ( Downey and Westermann 2021 ). However, in our case the secondment of mid-ofﬁce employees to the EU-
28Schaefer and Alvesson (2020) stress that scholars should not uncritically accept statements made during interviews. The authors suggest source
critique —’’a careful evaluation, reﬂection, questioning, rejection, and probing of interview accounts (and other empirical material) ’’—is essential to
obtain ‘‘strong evidence for derivative knowledge claims ’’in qualitative research ( Schaefer and Alvesson 2020 , 33). Interviews are not neutral, and
answers given can be inﬂuenced by a range of factors including time, space, gender relations, power relations, organizational norms, societal norms ,
and mutual expectations. Hence, Schaefer and Alvesson (2020) urge qualitative researchers to pay close attention to ‘‘signs for expressions of political
correctness, norms for corporate ideology, exercise in ‘‘management lingo, ’’situated identity work, or efforts to make the researcher happy ’’(p. 40). In
our case, we acknowledge that it could be that interviewees who argued that the offshoring of basic audit tasks enhances the higher-level skills of aud it
assistants merely reiterated their ﬁrm’s frontstage rhetoric regarding the alleged beneﬁts of offshoring.Managing the Offshoring of Audit Work: Spanning the Boundaries Between Onshore and Offshore Auditors 83
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022
COC did not have the desired effect of facilitating better linkages between onshore and offshore auditors ( Downey and
Westermann 2021 ). The ﬁndings of Downey and Westermann (2021) suggest that seconding onshore auditors, instead of mid-
ofﬁce employees, may prove to be more effective to reduce the clear separation between ‘‘us’’—onshore auditors, and
‘‘them ’’—offshore auditors. Secondment to India would allow onshore auditors to ‘‘observe and experience ﬁrst-hand the socio-
cultural norms and conditions under which the [offshore auditors] operate ’’(Downey and Westermann 2021 , 1427) and help
onshore and offshore auditors to better understand and appreciate each other.
Our ﬁndings also suggest that the effectiveness of boundary spanning is highly dependent on de facto boundary spanners
(Ma¨kela¨ et al. 2019 ).De facto boundary spanners, like the director who trialed offshoring within EU-TAM, are ‘‘driven by
intrinsic motivation and a personal inclination to connect people or knowledge ’’(Levina and Vaast 2005 ;Ma¨kela¨ et al. 2019 ,
336) even if this does not form part of their formal role or position within the organization ( Barner-Rasmussen et al. 2014 ).
This echoes prior work on boundary spanning in global organizations and suggests that nominated boundary spanners —
individuals formally assigned by an organization to perform boundary spanning activities—may not always be the ‘‘most active
or effective in such roles, wasting substantial organizational resources ’’(Levina and Vaast 2005 ;Ma¨kela¨ et al. 2019 , 336). This
poses signiﬁcant challenges for the coordination of (audit) work across different national, cultural, institutional, andorganizational contexts ( Kane and Levina 2017 ;Schotter et al. 2017 ) as organizational structures, processes, and roles are
generally ‘‘easier to inﬂuence than personal characteristics and competencies of individuals ’’(Ma¨kela¨ et al. 2019 , 335). To
better equip auditors with the skills they need to communicate and collaborate across the multiple and overlapping boundariesthat characterize offshoring arrangements, the Big 4 ﬁrms may need to pay more attention to the development of boundary
spanning capabilities as part of the on-the-job learning of audit staff (see also Popova and Wright 2019 ;Westermann et al.
2015 ).
Furthermore, universities may need to review to their curricula to ensure that audit graduates will have the skills required to
operate in an ever-changing audit environment ( Canning et al. 2018 ;Durocher et al. 2016 ;Popova and Wright 2019 ). That said,
the focus of universities should not be limited to the production of ‘‘useful [audit] machines ’’(Nussbaum 2010 , 2), especially
when this involves facilitating practices, like offshoring, which may be detrimental to the profession in the longer run. In an eracharacterized by widespread concern about the quality and social signiﬁcance of the audit, it is arguably essential that auditing
students are invited to criticize the status quo
and encouraged to re-imagine the audit ‘‘in ways that could make a more direct
and valued contribution to society ’’(Humphrey, Sonnerfeldt, Komori, and Curtis 2021 , 447; Nussbaum 2010 ). As recent
research suggests that early career auditors often struggle to inﬂuence professional debates ( Detzen, De Vries, and Wong 2021 ),
more could also be done to ensure that graduates are able to effectively ‘‘deploy the political craft ’’(p. 578) that is needed to
make a difference and instigate change in the auditing profession.
Whereas we have uncovered some of the intended and unintended consequences of the offshoring of audit work for
onshore auditors in this paper, there is an opportunity for future research to consider the experiences of offshore auditors. Todate, little is known about the training and day-to-day practices of those working within the captive offshore centers operated
by the Big 4 ﬁrms in countries like India.
REFERENCES
Alvesson, M., and J. Sandberg. 2011. Generating research questions through problematization. Academy of Management Review 36 (2):
247–271.
Alvesson, M., and J. Sandberg. 2013. Constructing Research Questions: Doing Interesting Research . London, U.K.: SAGE Publications
Inc.
Andiola, L. M., D. H. Downey, B. C. Spilker, and T. J. Noga. 2018. An examination of the interactive effect of feedback source and sign
in the offshoring environment: A social identity perspective. Behavioral Research in Accounting 30 (2): 1–21. https://doi.org/10.
2308/bria-52182
Aron, R., and J. Singh. 2005. Getting offshoring right. Harvard Business Review 83 (12): 135–143.
Barner-Rasmussen, W., M. Ehrnrooth, A. Koveshnikov, and K. Ma ¨kela¨. 2014. Cultural and language skills as resources for boundary
spanning within the MNC. Journal of International Business Studies 45 (7): 886–905. https://doi.org/10.1057/jibs.2014.7
Barrett, M., D. J. Cooper, and K. Jamal. 2005. Globalization and the coordinating of work in multinational audits. Accounting,
Organizations and Society 30 (1): 1–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aos.2004.02.002
Bazeley, P. 2013. Qualitative Data Analysis: Practical Strategies . London, U.K.: SAGE Publications Ltd.
Beardsley, E. L., D. R. Lassila, and T. C. Omer. 2019. How do audit ofﬁces respond to audit fee pressure? Evidence of increased focus on
nonaudit services and their impact on audit quality. Contemporary Accounting Research 36 (2): 999–1027. https://doi.org/10.1111/
1911-3846.12440
Birkinshaw, J., T. C. Ambos, and C. Bouquet. 2017. Boundary spanning activities of corporate HQ executives insights from a
longitudinal study. Journal of Management Studies 54 (4): 422–454. https://doi.org/10.1111/joms.1226084 Canning, O’Dwyer, and Boomsma
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022Boehe, D. M. 2010. Captive offshoring of new product development in Brazil: How does arbitrage inﬂuence local, collaborative
relationships? MIR. Management International Review 50 (6): 747–773. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11575-010-0054-z
Boomsma, R., and B. O’Dwyer. 2019. Constituting the governable NGO: The correlation between conduct and counter-conduct in the
evolution of funder-NGO accountability relations. Accounting, Organizations and Society 72: 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aos.
2018.05.012
Boussebaa, M. 2015. Professional service ﬁrms, Globalisation and the new imperialism. Accounting, Auditing & Accountability Journal
28 (8): 1217–1233. https://doi.org/10.1108/AAAJ-03-2015-1986
Brody, R. G., J. M. Coulter, and J. Jewell. 2006. Losing the public’s trust: Third-party service providers and disclosure. The CPA Journal
76 (9): 66–70.
Burke, J. J., R. Hoitash, and U. Hoitash. 2020. The use and characteristics of foreign component auditors in U.S. multinational audits:
Insights from Form AP disclosures. Contemporary Accounting Research 37 (4): 2398–2437. https://doi.org/10.1111/1911-3846.
12605
Canning, M., Y. Gendron, and B. O’Dwyer. 2018. Auditing in a changing environment and the constitution of cross-paradigmatic
communication channels. Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory 37 (2): 165–174. https://doi.org/10.2308/ajpt-10577
Carlile, P. R. 2002. A pragmatic view of knowledge and boundaries: Boundary objects in new product development. Organization
Science 13 (4): 442–455. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.13.4.442.2953
Carlile, P. R. 2004. Transferring, translating, and transforming: An integrative framework for managing knowledge across boundaries.
Organization Science 15 (5): 555–568. https://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.1040.0094
Carson, E., R. Simnett, B. S. Soo, and A. M. Wright. 2012. Changes in audit market competition and the Big N premium. Auditing: A
Journal of Practice & Theory 31 (3): 47–73. https://doi.org/10.2308/ajpt-10295
Chambers, V. A., P. M. J. Reckers, and A. Reinstein. 2020. Drivers of juror’s malpractice assessments in auditor litigation involving
offshoring and overtime: Generation and a management mindset. Advances in Accounting 50: 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.adiac.
2020.100488
Christensen, B. E., N. J. Newton, and M. S. Wilkins. 2021. How do team workloads and team stafﬁng affect the audit? Archival evidence
from U.S. audits. Accounting, Organizations and Society 92: 101225. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aos.2021.101225 published
online29January2021
Contractor, F. J., V. Kumar, S. K. Kundu, and T. Pedersen. 2010. Reconceptualizing the ﬁrm in a world of outsourcing and offshoring:
The organizational and geographical relocation of high-value company functions. Journal of Management Studies 47 (8): 1417–
1433. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-6486.2010.00945.x
Cooper, D. J., and W. Morgan. 2008. Case study research in accounting. Accounting Horizons 22 (2): 159–178. https://doi.org/10.2308/
acch.2008.22.2.159
Cooper, D. J., and K. Robson. 2006. Accounting, professions and regulation: Locating the sites of professionalization. Accounting,
Organizations and Society 31 (4-5): 415–444. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aos.2006.03.003
Cooper, D. J., R. Greenwood, B. Hinings, and J. L. Brown. 1998. Globalization and nationalism in a multinational accounting ﬁrm: The
case of opening new markets in Eastern Europe. Accounting, Organizations and Society 23 (5–6): 531–548. https://doi.org/10.
1016/S0361-3682(98)00026-9
Curtis, E., and S. Turley. 2007. The business risk audit: A longitudinal case study of an audit engagement. Accounting, Organizations and
Society 32 (4-5): 439–461. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aos.2006.09.004
Daske, H., L. Hail, C. Leuz, and R. Verdi. 2008. Mandatory IFRS reporting around the world: Early evidence on the economic
consequences. Journal of Accounting Research 46 (5): 1085–1142.
Daugherty, B. E., and D. Dickins. 2009. Offshoring the independent audit function: Certiﬁed public accountant. The CPA Journal 79 (1):
60–65.
Daugherty, B. E., D. Dickins, and M. G. Fennema. 2012. Offshoring tax and audit procedures: Implications for U.S.-based employee
education. Issues in Accounting Education 27 (3): 733–742. https://doi.org/10.2308/iace-50141
Daugherty, B. E., D. Dickins, and M. G. Fennema. 2013. The effects of offshoring audit tasks on jurors’ evaluations of damage awards
against auditors. Advances in Accounting Behavioral Research 16: 55–84. https://doi.org/10.1108/S1475-1488(2013)0000016008
Dee, C. C., A. Lulseged, and T. Zhang. 2015. Who did the audit? Audit quality and disclosures of other audit participants in PCAOB
ﬁlings. The Accounting Review 90 (5): 1939–1967. https://doi.org/10.2308/accr-50968
Deloitte. 2018. 2018 Global impact report: A new mindset for action . Available at: https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/
global/Documents/About-Deloitte/deloitte-2018-global-impact-report.pdf .
Demek, K. C., S. E. Kaplan, and A. Winn. 2020. Who really performs the audit? Examining the effects of voluntary disclosure of the use
of other Auditors on investors’ perceptions of audit quality. Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory 39 (1): 1–9. https://doi.org/
10.2308/ajpt-52529
Denzin, N. K., and Y. S. Lincoln. 2000. The discipline and practice of qualitative research. In Handbook of Qualitative Research, edited
by Norman K Denzin and Yvonna S Lincoln, 1–29. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications Ltd.
Denzin, N. K., and Y. S. Lincoln. 2003. Collecting and Interpreting Qualitative Materials . Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications Ltd.
Desai, R., and R. Roberts. 2013. Deﬁciencies in the code of conduct: The AICPA rhetoric surrounding the tax return preparation
outsourcing disclosure rules. Journal of Business Ethics 114 (3): 457–471. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10551-012-1329-zManaging the Offshoring of Audit Work: Spanning the Boundaries Between Onshore and Offshore Auditors 85
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022
Detzen, D., M. De Vries, and A. Wong. 2021. Young professionals and the institute: Giving a voice to the next generation of accountants?
European Accounting Review 30 (3): 557–582. https://doi.org/10.1080/09638180.2021.1878921
Docimo, W. M., J. L. Gunn, C. Li, and P. N. Michas. 2021. Do foreign component auditors harm ﬁnancial reporting quality? A
subsidiary-level analysis of foreign component auditor use. Contemporary Accounting Research 38 (4): 3113–3145. https://doi.org/
10.1111/1911-3846.12699 published online28May2021
Downey, D. H. 2018. An exploration of offshoring in audit practice and the potential consequences of associated work ‘‘redesign ’’on
auditor performance. Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory 37 (2): 197–223. https://doi.org/10.2308/ajpt-51771
Downey, D. H., and J. C. Bedard. 2019. Coordination and communication challenges in global group audits. Auditing: A Journal of
Practice & Theory 38 (1): 123–147. https://doi.org/10.2308/ajpt-52016
Downey, D. H., and K. D. Westermann. 2021. Challenging global group audits: The perspective of U.S. group audit leads. Contemporary
Accounting Research 38 (2): 1395–1433. https://doi.org/10.1111/1911-3846.12648
Downey, D. H., K. M. Obermire, and K. M. Zehms. 2020. Toward an understanding of audit team distribution and performance quality.
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory 39 (4): 87–112. https://doi.org/10.2308/AJPT-18-147
Durocher, S., Y. Gendron, and C. F. Picard. 2016. Waves of global standardization: Small practitioners’ resilience and intra-professional
fragmentation within the accounting profession. Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory 35 (1): 65–88. https://doi.org/10.2308/
ajpt-51303
EY. 2018. Global review 2018: How do we create value and build trust in this transformative age? Available at: https://assets.ey.com/
content/dam/ey-sites/ey-com/en_gl/topics/global-review/2018/ey_global_review_2018_v11_hr.pdf
Farrell, D. 2005. Offshoring: Value creation through economic change. Journal of Management Studies 42 (3): 675–683. https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1467-6486.2005.00513.x
Fennell, M. L., and J. A. Alexander. 1987. Organizational boundary spanning in institutionalized environments. Academy of Management
Journal 30 (3): 456–476.
Financial Reporting Council. 2014. Deloitte LLP: Audit quality inspection . Available at: https://www.frc.org.uk/getattachment/8eca3892-
5372-49ee-a5af-251929e6e213/Deloitte-Public-Report-May-2014.pdf .
Flick, U. 2006. An Introduction to Qualitative Research . London, U.K.: SAGE Publications Ltd.
Flood, J. 2018. Professions and professional services ﬁrms. In Professions and Professional Services Firms: Private and Public Sector
Enterprises in the Global Economy , edited by M. Saks and D. Muzio, 26–45. London, U.K.: Routledge.
Francis, J. R., P. N. Michas, and S. E. Seavey. 2013. Does audit market concentration harm the quality of audited earnings? Evidence
from audit markets in 42 countries. Contemporary Accounting Research 30 (1): 325–355. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1911-3846.
2012.01156.x
Gendron, Y. 2000. Openness to context-based research: The gulf between the claims and actions of Big Six ﬁrms in the USA. Accounting,
Auditing & Accountability Journal 13 (2): 175–196. https://doi.org/10.1108/09513570010323335
Gendron, Y. 2018. Beyond conventional boundaries: Corporate governance as inspiration for critical accounting research. Critical
Perspectives on Accounting 55: 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpa.2017.11.004
Gioia, D. A., K. G. Corley, and A. L. Hamilton. 2013. Seeking qualitative rigor in inductive research. Organizational Research Methods
16 (1): 15–31. https://doi.org/10.1177/1094428112452151
Given, L. M. 2008. The SAGE Encyclopedia of Qualitative Research Methods . Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications Inc.
Goodman, J. S. 1998. The interactive effects of task and external feedback on practice performance and learning. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes 76 (3): 223–252. https://doi.org/10.1006/obhd.1998.2805
Gunn, J. L., and P. N. Michas. 2018. Auditor multinational expertise and audit quality. The Accounting Review 93 (4): 203–224. https://
doi.org/10.2308/accr-51925
Hanes, D. R. 2013. Geographically distributed audit work: Theoretical considerations and future directions. Journal of Accounting
Literature 32 (1): 1–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acclit.2013.09.001
Humphrey, C., and B. Lee, eds. 2004. A Real Life Guide to Accounting Research: A Behind the Scenes View of Using Qualitative
Research Methods . Amsterdam, NL: Elsevier.
Humphrey, C., A. Loft, and M. Woods. 2009. The global audit profession and the international ﬁnancial architecture: Understanding
regulatory relationships at a time of ﬁnancial crisis. Accounting, Organizations and Society 34 (6–7): 810–825. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.aos.2009.06.003
Humphrey, C., A. Sonnerfeldt, N. Komori, and E. Curtis. 2021. Young professionals and the institute: Giving a voice to the next
generation of accountants? European Accounting Review 30 (3): 557–582. https://doi.org/10.1080/09638180.2021.1878921
Jahns, C., E. Hartmann, and L. Bals. 2006. Offshoring: Dimensions and diffusion of a new business concept. Journal of Purchasing and
Supply Management 12 (4): 218–231. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pursup.2006.10.001
Jones, S., and A. Finley. 2011. Have IFRS made a difference to intra-country ﬁnancial reporting diversity? The British Accounting Review
43 (1): 22–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bar.2010.10.004
Kane, A. A., and N. Levina. 2017. ‘‘Am I still one of them? ’’: Bicultural immigrant managers navigating social identity threats when
spanning global boundaries. Journal of Management Studies 54 (4): 540–577. https://doi.org/10.1111/joms.12259
Kankanhalli, A., B. C. Y. Tan, and K. K. Wei. 2006. Conﬂict and performance in global virtual teams. Journal of Management
Information Systems 23 (3): 237–274. https://doi.org/10.2753/MIS0742-122223030986 Canning, O’Dwyer, and Boomsma
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022Kedia, B. L., and D. Mukherjee. 2009. Understanding offshoring: A research framework based on disintegration, location and
externalization advantages. Journal of World Business 44 (3): 250–261. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jwb.2008.08.005
Kieser, A., A. Nicolai, and D. Seidl. 2015. The practical relevance of management research: Turning the debate on relevance into a
rigorous scientiﬁc research program. The Academy of Management Annals 9 (1): 143–233. https://doi.org/10.5465/19416520.2015.
1011853
Kotlarsky, J., and I. Oshri. 2008. Country attractiveness for offshoring and offshore outsourcing: Additional considerations. Journal of
Information Technology 23 (4): 228–231. https://doi.org/10.1057/jit.2008.17
KPMG. 2018. 2018 KPMG global review: The future. Delivered together . Available at: https://home.kpmg/xx/en/home/campaigns/2018/
12/global-review.html .
Kshetri, N. 2011. Cloud computing in the global south: Drivers, effects and policy measures. Third World Quarterly 32 (6): 997–1014.
https://doi.org/10.1080/01436597.2011.586225
Langley, A., K. Lindberg, B. E. Mørk, D. Nicolini, E. Raviola, and L. Walter. 2019. Boundary work among groups, occupations, and
organizations: From cartography to process. The Academy of Management Annals 13 (2): 704–736. https://doi.org/10.5465/annals.
2017.0089
Leonardi, P. M., and D. E. Bailey. 2008. Transformational technologies and the creation of new work practices: Making implicit
knowledge explicit in task-based offshoring. Management Information Systems Quarterly 32 (2): 411–436. https://doi.org/10.2307/
25148846
Levina, N., and E. Vaast. 2005. The emergence of boundary spanning competence in practice: Implications for implementation and use of
information systems. Management Information Systems Quarterly 29 (2): 335–363. https://doi.org/10.2307/25148682
Levina, N., and E. Vaast. 2008. Innovating or doing as told? Status differences and overlapping boundaries in offshore collaboration.
Management Information Systems Quarterly 32 (2): 307–332. https://doi.org/10.2307/25148842
Levy, D. 2005. Offshoring in the new global political economy. Journal of Management Studies 42 (3): 685–693. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1467-6486.2005.00514.x
Lewin, A. Y., and C. Peeters. 2006. Offshoring work: Business hype or the onset of fundamental transformation? Long Range Planning
39 (3): 221–239. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lrp.2006.07.009
Lewin, A. Y., and H. W. Volberda. 2011. Co-evolution of global sourcing: The need to understand the underlying mechanisms of ﬁrm-
decisions to offshore. International Business Review 20 (3): 241–251. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ibusrev.2011.02.008
Lewin, A. Y., S. Massini, and C. Peeters. 2009. Why are companies offshoring innovation? The emerging global race for talent. Journal
of International Business Studies 40 (6): 901–925. https://doi.org/10.1057/jibs.2008.92
Lincoln, Y. S., and E. G. Guba. 1985. Naturalistic Inquiry . Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications Inc.
Lyubimov, A., V. Arnold, and S. G. Sutton. 2013. An examination of the legal liability associated with outsourcing and offshoring audit
procedures. Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory 32 (2): 97–118. https://doi.org/10.2308/ajpt-50354
Ma¨kela¨, K., W. Barner-Rasmussen, M. Ehrnrooth, and A. Koveshnikov. 2019. Potential and recognized boundary spanners in
multinational corporations. Journal of World Business 54 (4): 335–349. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jwb.2019.05.001
Martı ´nez-Noya, A., and E. Garcı ´a-Canal. 2011. Technological capabilities and the decision to outsource/outsource offshore R&D
services. International Business Review 20 (3): 264–277. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ibusrev.2011.01.008
McKinsey Global Institute. 2003. Offshoring: Is It a Win-Win Game? San Francisco, CA: McKinsey & Company.
Mennicken, A. 2008. Connecting Worlds: The translation of international auditing standards into post-Soviet audit practice. Accounting,
Organizations and Society 33 (4–5): 384–414. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aos.2007.06.001
Miles, M. B., and A. M. Huberman. 1994. Qualitative Data Analysis: A Sourcebook . Beverly Hills, CA: SAGE Publications.
Monteiro, F., and J. Birkinshaw. 2017. The external knowledge sourcing process in multinational corporations. Strategic Management
Journal 38 (2): 342–362. https://doi.org/10.1002/smj.2487
Munter, H. 2014. Audit essentials for 2015: AICPA conference on current SEC and PCAOB developments . Available at: https://pcaobus.
org/news-events/speeches/speech-detail/audit-essentials-for-2015_548 .
Nochur, K. S., and T. J. Allen. 1992. Do nominated boundary spanners become effective technological gatekeepers? IEEE Transactions
on Engineering Management 39 (3): 265–269. https://doi.org/10.1109/17.156560
Nussbaum, M. C. 2010. Not for Proﬁt: Why Democracy Needs the Humanities . Oxford, U.K.: Princeton University Press.
O’Dwyer, B. 2004. Qualitative data analysis: Illuminating a process for transforming a ‘‘messy ’’but ‘‘attractive ’’ ‘‘nuisance. In A Real Life
Guide to Accounting Research: A Behind the Scenes View of Using Qualitative Research Methods , edited by C. Humphrey and B.
Lee, 391–407. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Oshri, I., J. Kotlarsky, and L. P. Willcocks. 2009. The Handbook of Global Outsourcing and Offshoring . New York, NY: Palgrave
McMillan.
Patton, M. Q. 2002. Qualitative Evaluation and Research Methods . Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications.
Pawlowski, S. D., and D. Robey. 2004. Bridging user organizations: Knowledge brokering and the work of information technology
professionals. Management Information Systems Quarterly 28 (4): 645–672. https://doi.org/10.2307/25148658
Peck, J. 2017. Offshore: Exploring the Worlds of Global Outsourcing . Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.
Pentland, B. T. 1993. Getting comfortable with the numbers: Auditing and the micro-production of macro-order. Accounting,
Organizations and Society 18 (7–8): 605–620. https://doi.org/10.1016/0361-3682(93)90045-8Managing the Offshoring of Audit Work: Spanning the Boundaries Between Onshore and Offshore Auditors 87
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022
Popova, V., and N. Wright. 2019. Taking on too much, too soon? An exploration of experiential learning of novice auditors in an
offshoring setting. Current Issues in Auditing 13 (1): A1–A14. https://doi.org/10.2308/ciia-52330
Poster, W. R., and N. L. Yolmo. 2015. Globalization and outsourcing. In The SAGE Handbook of the Sociology of Work and Employment ,
edited by S. Edgell, H. Gottfried, and E. Granter, 576–596. London, U.K.: SAGE Publications.
Power, M. K., and Y. Gendron. 2015. Qualitative research in auditing: A methodological roadmap. Auditing: A Journal of Practice &
Theory 34 (2): 147–165. https://doi.org/10.2308/ajpt-10423
PwC. 2019. Global annual review 2019 . Available at: https://www.pwc.com/gx/en/about/global-annual-review-2019.html .
Roberts, M. J. D., and P. W. Beamish. 2017. The scaffolding activities of international returnee executives: A learning based perspective
of global boundary spanning. Journal of Management Studies 54 (4): 511–539. https://doi.org/10.1111/joms.12266
Robertson, J. C., D. N. Stone, L. R. Niederwanger, M. Grocki, E. Martin, and E. Smith. 2004. The coming accounting revolution:
Offshore outsourcing of tax return preparation. The CPA Journal 75 (6): 54–58. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.588381
Roulston, K. 2010. Considering quality in qualitative interviewing. Qualitative Research 10 (2): 199–228. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1468794109356739
Ryan, B., R. W. Scapens, and M. Theobald. 2002. Research Method and Methodology in Finance and Accounting . London, U.K.:
Thomson.
Schaefer, S. M., and M. Alvesson. 2020. Epistemic attitudes and source critique in qualitative research. Journal of Management Inquiry
29 (1): 33–45. https://doi.org/10.1177/1056492617739155
Schotter, A., and P. W. Beamish. 2011. Performance effects of MNC headquarters–subsidiary conﬂict and the role of boundary spanners:
The case of headquarters initiative rejection. Journal of International Management 17 (3): 243–259. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
intman.2011.05.006
Schotter, A. P. J., R. Mudambi, Y. L. Doz, and A. Gaur. 2017. Boundary spanning in global organizations. Journal of Management
Studies 54 (4): 403–421. https://doi.org/10.1111/joms.12256
Shamis, G. S., M. C. Green, S. M. Sorensen, and D. L. Kyle. 2005. Outsourcing, offshoring, nearshoring: What to do? Journal of
Accountancy 199 (6): 57–61.
Shore, C., and S. Wright. 2018. How the Big 4 got big: Audit culture and the metamorphosis of international accountancy ﬁrms. Critique
of Anthropology 38 (3): 303–324. https://doi.org/10.1177/0308275X18775815
Silverman, D. 2000. Doing Qualitative Research: A Practical Handbook . London, U.K.: SAGE Publications.
Soled, J. A. 2005. Outsourcing tax return preparation and its implications. The CPA Journal 75 (3): 14–15.
Stringfellow, A., M. B. Teagarden, and W. Nie. 2008. Invisible costs in offshoring services work. Journal of Operations Management 26
(2): 164–179. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jom.2007.02.009
Sunderland, D., and G. M. Trompeter. 2017. Multinational group audits: Problems faced in practice and opportunities for research.
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory 36 (3): 159–183. https://doi.org/10.2308/ajpt-51667
Tippmann, E., P. Sharkey Scott, and A. Parker. 2017. Boundary capabilities in MNCs: Knowledge transformation for creative solution
development. Journal of Management Studies 54 (4): 455–482. https://doi.org/10.1111/joms.12253
Wang, C. 2014. Accounting standards harmonization and ﬁnancial statement comparability: Evidence from transnational information
transfer. Journal of Accounting Research 52 (4): 955–992. https://doi.org/10.1111/1475-679X.12055
Westermann, K. D., J. C. Bedard, and C. E. Earley. 2015. Learning the ‘‘craft ’’of auditing: A dynamic view of auditors’ on-the-job
learning. Contemporary Accounting Research 32 (3): 864–896. https://doi.org/10.1111/1911-3846.12107
Whitehouse, T. 2009. Offshored external audits expose regulatory issues . Available at: https://www.complianceweek.com/offshored-
external-audits-expose-regulatory-issues/5228.article
Williams, P. 2002. The competent boundary spanner. Public Administration 80 (1): 103–124. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-9299.00296
Youngdahl, W. E., K. Ramaswamy, and K. C. Dash. 2010. Offshoring: The evolution of offshore operations. International Journal of
Operations & Production Management 30 (8): 798–820. https://doi.org/10.1108/01443571011068171
Zietsma, C., and T. B. Lawrence. 2010. Institutional work in the transformation of an organizational ﬁeld: The interplay of boundary work
and practice work. Administrative Science Quarterly 55 (2): 189–221. https://doi.org/10.2189/asqu.2010.55.2.18988 Canning, O’Dwyer, and Boomsma
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022APPENDIX A
Detailed Overview of the Documents and Digital Evidence Collected in the Third Round of Data Collection
Reference Year Source Short Description
EU-TAM
EU-TAM-Annual 2017 EU-TAM annual report 2016–2017 Annual report published by EU-TAM.EU-TAM-Article 2018 EU-TAM news article A short interview with the Head of Operations (HOO) of EU-TAM published in the external newsletter of
EU-TAM.
EU-COC-Job1 2019 EU-COC job advert Job advert for an analyst in the European Captive Offshore Center (EU-COC) in India.EU-COC-Job2 2019 EU-COC job advert Job advert for an audit manager in the European Captive Offshore Center (EU-COC) in India.
EU-COC-Job3 2019 EU-COC job advert Job advert for an audit manager in the European Captive Offshore Center (EU-COC) in India.
EU-COC-Job4 2019 EU-COC job advert Job advert for senior audit staff in the European Captive Offshore Center (EU-COC) in India.EU-COC-Job5 2019 EU-COC job advert Job advert for senior audit staff in the European Captive Offshore Center (EU-COC) in India.
EU-COC-Proﬁle1 2018 Professional proﬁle page
offshore auditorProfessional proﬁle page of an offshore auditor working for the European Captive Offshore Center (EU-COC)
in India.
EU-COC-Proﬁle2 2020 Professional proﬁle page
offshore auditorProfessional proﬁle page of an offshore auditor working for the European Captive Offshore Center (EU-COC)
in India.
EU-COC-Proﬁle3 2020 Professional proﬁle page
offshore auditorProfessional proﬁle page of an offshore auditor working for the European Captive Offshore Center (EU-COC)
in India.
EU-COC-Proﬁle4 2020 Online proﬁle of the EU-COC Online proﬁle page of the European Captive Offshore Center (EU-COC) in India.
EU-COC-Proﬁle5 2020 Online proﬁle of the EU-COC Webpage providing an overview of the activities undertaken at the European Captive Offshore Center ( EU-
COC) in India.
EU-TAM-Trans1 2014 TAM transparency report
2013–2014Transparency report published by EU-TAM to inform stakeholders about the strategy, governance structure,
internal quality and control, ethical requirements, and human resource strategy of the ﬁrm.
EU-TAM-Trans2 2016 TAM transparency report
2015–2016Transparency report published by EU-TAM to inform stakeholders about the strategy, governance structure,
internal quality and control, ethical requirements, and human resource strategy of the ﬁrm.
EU-TAM-Trans3 2018 TAM transparency report
2017–2018Transparency report published by EU-TAM to inform stakeholders about the strategy, governance structure,
internal quality and control, ethical requirements, and human resource strategy of the ﬁrm.
EU-TAM-Trans4 2019 TAM transparency report
2018–2019Transparency report published by EU-TAM to inform stakeholders about the strategy, governance structure,
internal quality and control, ethical requirements, and human resource strategy of the ﬁrm.
EU-TAM-Trans5 2020 TAM transparency report
2019–2020Transparency report published by EU-TAM to inform stakeholders about the strategy, governance structure,
internal quality and control, ethical requirements, and human resource strategy of the ﬁrm.
EU-COC-Video 2018 Video presentation Short recruitment video outlining the role of audit assistants at the EU-COC in India.
The Mid-Ofﬁce
MID-Job 2018 Mid-ofﬁce job advert Job advert for a mid-ofﬁce manager.MID-Proﬁle1 2018 Professional proﬁle mid-ofﬁce
managerProfessional proﬁle page of a junior mid-ofﬁce manager.
MID-Proﬁle2 2018 Professional proﬁle mid-ofﬁce
managerProfessional proﬁle page of a senior mid-ofﬁce manager.
MID-Proﬁle3 2020 Professional proﬁle interim
facilitatorProfessional proﬁle page of an interim facilitator.
MID-Video 2016 Video presentation Short video outlining the offshoring of audit work and providing insight into the work of the mid-ofﬁce and
the EU-COC.
(continued on next page)Managing the Offshoring of Audit Work: Spanning the Boundaries Between Onshore and Offshore Auditors 89
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022
APPENDIX A (continued)
Reference Year Source Short Description
Other TAM Member Firms
TAM-COC-Job1 2018 Captive offshore center job advert Job advert for a position in the captive offshoring center of one of TAM’s other member ﬁrms.
TAM-COC-Job2 2018 Captive offshore center job advert Job advert for a position in the afﬁliated offshoring center of one of TAM’s other member ﬁrms.
TAM-COC-Job3 2018 Captive offshore center job advert Job advert for a position in the afﬁliated offshoring center of one of TAM’s other member ﬁrms.TAM-MID-Job 2020 Mid-ofﬁce job advert. Job advert for a manager in the mid-ofﬁce of one of TAM’s other member ﬁrms.
TAM-Proﬁle 2020 Online proﬁle of TAM Online proﬁle page of the global TAM network.
TAM-Report1 2008 TAM report on offshoring Report on the drivers and risks of offshoring one of TAM’s other member ﬁrms.TAM-Report2 2013 TAM report on offshoring Report on the beneﬁts and challenges of offshoring one of TAM’s other member ﬁrms.
TAM-Report3 2013 TAM report on offshoring Report on the offshoring and education opportunities in India for one of TAM’s other member ﬁrms.
TAM-Report4 2013 TAM report on offshoring Report on the beneﬁts and challenges of offshoring published by one of TAM’s other member ﬁrms.TAM-Report5 2018 TAM report on offshoring Report on the impact of cloud services and automation on the development of offshoring by one of TAM’s
other member ﬁrms.
TAM-Report6 2013 TAM report on offshoring Report on the future of auditing one of TAM’s other member ﬁrms.TAM-Report7 2014 TAM report on offshoring Report on the rise of offshoring and suitable offshoring locations by one of TAM’s other member ﬁrms.TAM-Report8 2014 TAM report on offshoring Report on the future of offshoring and shared services centers for one of TAM’s other member ﬁrms.
The Professional Accounting Body (PAB) in EU-TAM’s Home Country
PAB1 2005 PAB article Opinion piece on the beneﬁts and challenges of offshoring ﬁnancial accounting work.
PAB2 2005 PAB article Article on the increasing popularity of offshoring audit work and the use of afﬁliated offshore centers.
PAB3 2007 PAB article Article on the opportunities of offshoring audit work.PAB4 2007 PAB article Article on the popularity of offshoring within audit ﬁrms.PAB5 2009 PAB article Article on the experiences of audit ﬁrms with the offshoring of audit work.
PAB6 2010 PAB article Article on the beneﬁts and challenges of offshoring audit work.
PAB7 2011 PAB article Article on the increasing popularity of offshoring within audit ﬁrms.PAB8 2012 PAB article Article on the effects of offshoring on the governance of onshore audit ﬁrms.
PAB9 2012 PAB article Article on the effect of offshoring on the pyramid stafﬁng model of audit ﬁrms.
PAB10 2012 PAB article Article on the effect of competition among audit ﬁrms on audit quality.PAB11 2012 PAB report Report reﬂecting on current trends, including offshoring, in the audit profession.
PAB12 2017 PAB article Article on the inﬂuence of technological advancements on the audit profession.
PAB13 2016 PAB article Article on the inﬂuence of offshoring on the onshore job market for auditors.PAB14 2009 PAB article Opinion piece on the offshoring of audit work.
International Professional Accounting Bodies (IPABs)
IPAB1 2010 IPAC article Article on the beneﬁts and challenges of offshoring audit work.IPAB2 2012 IPAB report Report on the beneﬁts and challenges of outsourcing accounting work.
IPAB3 2015 IPAB report Report on the inﬂuence of offshoring on the accounting profession.
IPAB4 2016 IPAB report Report on the main drivers of change in the audit profession.IPAB5 2015 IPAB report Report on future prooﬁng the audit profession.IPAB6 2017 IPAB report Research report on the offshoring of audit work funded by a professional accounting body.
IPAB7 2018 IPAB report Report on the impact of technology on auditing.
IPAB8 2014 IPAB article Article on audit quality inspections and offshoring audit work.
(continued on next page)90 Canning, O’Dwyer, and Boomsma
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022APPENDIX A (continued)
Reference Year Source Short Description
Other Big 4 Firms
BIG4-Annual1 2014 Big 4 annual report Annual report published by one of the other Big 4 ﬁrms covering the 2013-2014 ﬁnancial year.
BIG4-Annual2 2019 Big 4 annual report Annual report published by one of the other Big 4 ﬁrms covering the 2018-2019 ﬁnancial year.
BIG4-Article1 2016 Newsletter article A manager of one of the other Big 4 ﬁrm’s equivalent of the mid-ofﬁce reﬂecting on this interaction with
offshore auditors in the ﬁrm’s newsletter.
BIG4-Article2 2020 Newsletter article Overview of the services provided by the captive offshore center of one of the other Big 4 ﬁrms.
BIG4-Proﬁle1 2020 Online proﬁle Online proﬁle page of the captive offshore center of one of the Big 4 ﬁrms in India.
BIG4-Proﬁle2 2020 Online proﬁle Online proﬁle page of the captive offshore center of one of the Big 4 ﬁrms in India.BIG4-Trans1 2012 Big 4 transparency report 2011–2012 transparency report published by one of the other Big 4 ﬁrm to inform stakeholders about the
strategy, governance structure, internal quality and control, ethical requirements, and human resource
strategy of the ﬁrm.
BIG4-Trans2 2013 Big 4 transparency report 2012–2013 transparency report published by TAM to inform stakeholders about the strategy, governance
structure, internal quality and control, ethical requirements, and human resource strategy of the ﬁrm.
BIG4-Trans3 2014 Big 4 transparency report 2013–2014 transparency report published by TAM to inform stakeholders about the strategy, governance
structure, internal quality and control, ethical requirements, and human resource strategy of the ﬁrm.
BIG4-Trans4 2015 Big 4 transparency report 2014–2015 transparency report published by TAM to inform stakeholders about the strategy, governance
structure, internal quality and control, ethical requirements, and human resource strategy of the ﬁrm.
BIG4-Trans5 2016 Big 4 transparency report 2015–2016 transparency report published by TAM to inform stakeholders about the strategy, governance
structure, internal quality and control, ethical requirements, and human resource strategy of the ﬁrm.
BIG4-Trans6 2017 Big 4 transparency report 2016–2017 transparency report published by TAM to inform stakeholders about the strategy, governance
structure, internal quality and control, ethical requirements, and human resource strategy of the ﬁrm.
BIG4-Trans7 2018 Big 4 transparency report 2017–2018 transparency report published by TAM to inform stakeholders about the strategy, governance
structure, internal quality and control, ethical requirements, and human resource strategy of the ﬁrm.
BIG4-Video 2018 Video presentation Short video produced by one of the other Big 4 ﬁrms outlining the offshoring of audit work and providing
insight into their version of the mid-ofﬁce.
BIG4-Report1 2014 Big 4 report on offshoring Report published by one of the other Big 4 ﬁrms outlining the offshoring opportunities in India.
Business News
BNEWS1 2004 Business news article Article on the process of offshoring audit work.
BNEWS2 2012 Business news article Article on the beneﬁts of offshoring accounting work.
BNEWS3 2014 Business news article Article on the consequences of offshoring audit work.BNEWS4 2016 Business news article Article on how technology is replacing offshoring.
BNEWS5 2016 Business news article Article on the lack of transparency around the offshoring of accounting work.
BNEWS6 2016 Business news article Article on the expansion of the activities of TAM’s US member ﬁrm in India.BNEWS7 2007 Business news article Article on the offshoring of audit work.BNEWS8 2015 Business news article Article on the quality of offshored audit work.
BNEWS9 2009 Business news article Article on the beneﬁts and challenge of offshoring of audit work.
BNEWS10 2012 Business news article Article on the concerns around offshoring audit work.BNEWS11 2020 Business news article Article on the expansion of captive offshore centers operated by Big 4 ﬁrms in India.
BNEWS12 2020 Business news article Article on the expansion of captive offshore centers operated by Big 4 ﬁrms in India.
Blogs on Offshoring Audit Services
BLOG1 2017 Online accounting blog Discussion thread on the quality of audit work offshored to India by Big 4 ﬁrms.
BLOG2 2017 Online accounting blog Discussion thread on the offshoring of audit work to India.Managing the Offshoring of Audit Work: Spanning the Boundaries Between Onshore and Offshore Auditors 91
Auditing: A Journal of Practice & Theory
Volume 41, Number 2, 2022
Copyright
of
Auditing:
A
Journal
of
Practice
&
Theory
is
the
property
of
American
Accounting
Association
and
its
content
may
not
be
copied
or
emailed
to
multiple
sites
or
posted
to
a
listserv
without
the
copyright
holder's
express
written
permission.
However,
users
may
print,
download,
or
email
articles
for
individual
use.
