1 
Boosting the confidence of new product development teams: The role of team boundary 
spanning, team size and functional diversity1 
Abstract 
In today’s highly interconnected, uncertain, and dynamic business environment, team boundary 
spanning has become an important determinant of the performance of new product development 
(NPD) projects. Despite the positive evidence supporting the use of boundary spanning activities 
by NPD teams, little is still known about how boundary spanning teams become high-performance 
teams. The current study advances research on this subject by examining the mediating effect of 
team potency on the relationship between team boundary spanning and new product performance, 
as well as the moderating effects of team size and functional diversity on the relationship between 
team boundary spanning and team potency. Data from a time-lagged survey study of 140 NPD 
projects found that team boundary spanning can promote team potency which, in turn, results in 
greater product quality and new product creativity. The positive effect of team boundary spanning 
on team potency was found to be more pronounced for NPD teams of medium size and high levels 
of functional diversity. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                          
1 This work was supported in part by the Junta de Castilla y León (Spain) under Project VA219P20 
and in part by the Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovacion, Plan Estatal de Investigación Científica y 
Técnica y de Innovación 2021-2023 under Project PID2021-123004NB-I00. 
 
 

2 
Boosting the confidence of new product development teams: The role of team boundary 
spanning, team size and functional diversity 
1. Introduction 
In today’s highly networked and volatile business world, team boundary spanning has emerged 
as a critical activity for new product development (NPD) teams and their performance (Carboni et 
al., 2021; Zhang and Li, 2021). Thus, research in NPD has shown that team boundary spanning 
positively influences several new product outcomes including adherence to budgets and schedules, 
technical quality and new product competitive advantage (Ancona and Caldwell, 1992a; Carbonell 
and Rodriguez-Escudero, 2019; Howell and Shea, 2006). Team boundary spanning refers to a 
team’s actions to establish links and manage interactions with individuals and groups inside and 
outside the organization with the purpose of achieving team’s goals and objectives (Ancona et al., 
2009; Joshi et al., 2009). Despite the relevance of team boundary spanning in NPD, there is great 
deal we still do not know about these activities. For example, little is still known about how team 
boundary spanning impacts new product performance (Marrone, 2010; Edmondson and Harvey, 
2018). The current study advances research on this subject by examining the mediating effect of 
team potency on the relationship between team boundary spanning and new product performance.  
Team potency, defined as a group’s belief in its ability to perform successfully (Guzzo et al., 
1993), has been described as “one of the most important ingredients of team motivation and team 
effectiveness” (Hu and Liden, 2011; p. 851). With a strong sense of confidence, teams set more 
challenging goals, persevere in the face of unexpected challenges and adversity, and are ultimately 
more likely to succeed (Gully et al., 2002; Larson and LaFasto, 1989; Lee et al., 2002). The notion 
of team potency carries high significance for NPD teams. The development of new products is a 
highly uncertain and ambiguous process during which NPD teams encounter numerous obstacles 

3 
and unexpected difficulties (Edmondson and Nembhard, 2009). In this context, having a strong 
conviction in the team’s ability to succeed can become an important asset, as such conviction can 
help a NPD team adapt to and meet the challenges it will likely face during the NPD process. In 
this study, we expect team boundary spanning activities to foster a NPD team’s sense of potency. 
Team boundary spanning activities can provide NPD teams with access to highly relevant and 
valuable resources (Ancona and Caldwell, 1992a; Ancona et al., 2009; Marrone, 2010) which, 
according to team potency’s research, will positively influence team members’ assessment of their 
own ability to successfully complete the NPD project, thus contributing to the development of a 
sense of potency in the group (Guzzo et al., 1993). Higher levels of team potency are, in turn, 
expected to result in greater new product quality and new product creativity. Both new product 
quality (Molina-Castillo and Munuera-Aleman, 2011; McNally et al., 2011) and new product 
creativity (Cho and Hahn, 2004; Kim and Slater, 2013) are strong predictors of new product 
performance. 
Prior research has speculated that team’s design features may impact a team’s ability to carry 
out boundary spanning activities effectively (Marrone, 2010). Accordingly, a second objective of 
the current study is to investigate how team size and functional diversity impact the relationship 
between team boundary spanning and team potency. In particular, we contend that because of 
fewer external connections and lower manpower, functionally homogenous teams and smaller 
teams, respectively, may find boundary spanning activities too onerous and difficult to execute 
(Marrone et al., 2007). At the same time, larger teams and teams with high levels of functional 
diversity, which often suffer from poor internal communication and coordination (Cannon-Bowers 
and Bowers, 2011; Keller, 2001), may also experience challenges in leveraging the fruits of their 
boundary spanning work.  

4 
The current study makes four significant contributions to the literature. Firstly, while prior 
studies have examined the impact of team internal processes, team design variables, and 
organizational context variables on team potency (de Jong et al., 2005; Tröster et al., 2014; Hu and 
Liden, 2011), team external processes such as team boundary spanning activity has been left 
unexplored. As NPD teams increasingly rely on their ability to span functions and organizational 
boundaries to perform their work (Marrone, 2010), understanding how boundary spanning 
influences team potency is an important matter to academics and practitioners alike. Secondly, 
despite its relevance to NPD performance, empirical research of the impact of team potency on 
NPD performance is very sparse and limited to only two empirical studies namely, Howell and 
Shea (2006) and Akgün et al., (2007) which report positive effects of team potency on team 
performance, NPD speed, NPD cost, and market success. By examining, for the first time, the 
influence of team potency on new product creativity and new product quality, the current study 
furthers our understanding of the benefits of team potency for NPD teams. Thirdly, while prior 
research has examined the mediating effects of role overload (Marrone et al., 2007) and 
psychological safety (Faraj and Yan, 2009) on the relationship between team boundary spanning 
and team performance, no research to date has addressed the mediating role of team potency. Thus, 
by investigating the role of team potency in explaining the impact of team boundary spanning on 
NPD performance, the current study extents research on the mechanisms by which team boundary 
spanning influences team performance. Finally, by incorporating the moderating effects of team 
size and functional diversity on the relationship between team boundary spanning and team 
potency, the study provides important new insights into the conditions under which team boundary 
spanning is likely to deliver the best results to NPD teams.  
The rest of the article is organized as follows. The first section defines team boundary spanning, 

5 
team potency and introduces the theoretical model. Next, the study’s hypotheses are developed. 
After that, the data collection process is presented, followed by the description of the study’s 
measures, data analysis technique and results. The study closes with the discussion of the results, 
theoretical and managerial implications, study’s limitations and future research lines. 
2. Definitions and theoretical framework 
2.1. Team boundary spanning activity and team potency 
Team boundary spanning is defined as a team’s actions to establish linkages and interact with 
relevant actors inside and outside the organization for the purpose of meeting team’s goals and 
objectives (Marrone, 2010). Team boundary spanning encompasses a broad range of external 
activities. Ancona and Caldwell (1992a) identified three broad categories of boundary spanning 
activities: ambassador, task coordination and scouting. Activities such as developing relationships 
with external groups, keeping them informed of the team’s progress and talking up the NPD project 
represent ambassador activities. Task coordination activities include discussing technical and 
marketing problems with others, getting feedback on product concepts, prototypes and team’s 
ideas and monitoring cross-team progress and workflow (Ancona and Caldwell, 1992a). Scouting 
activities reflect team interactions with external parties to gain access to various types of 
information including competition, market and technological information as well as political data 
about support or opposition to the group activities. Collectively, ambassador, scouting and task 
coordination activities define team boundary spanning activity (Ancona and Caldwell, 1992a; 
Marrone, 2010).  
Team potency refers to a group’s shared belief that it can be effective (Guzzo et al., 1993). The 
construct of potency is parallel to that of team efficacy because both are motivational constructs 
that reflect appraisals of capabilities (de Jong et al., 2005). Yet, they differ in one important aspect. 

6 
Thus, whereas team efficacy refers to a team’s belief that it will succeed in relation to a specific 
task (de Jong et al., 2005; Hu and Liden, 2011; Shelton et al., 2010; Stajkovic et al., 2009), team 
potency refers to a more generalized belief. It concerns beliefs about overall effectiveness across 
multiple tasks encountered by groups in complex environments (Guzzo et al., 1993). Given that 
NPD is a complex process involving multiple interdependent activities (e.g., concept design, 
product development, manufacturing, testing, etc.), we believe that team potency is a construct 
well-suited to be investigated in the context of NPD teams. 
2.2. Theoretical framework 
Figure 1 depicts the study’s theoretical model. As shown, team boundary spanning is expected 
to positively influence team potency. Research in NPD suggests that boundary spanning activities 
can provide NPD teams with access to highly relevant and valuable resources, such as information, 
project- and problem-specific expertise, feedback on progress and support from key external 
parties (Ancona and Caldwell, 1992a; Ancona et al., 2009; Marrone, 2010). According to Guzzo 
et al.’s (1993) seminal work on team potency, having access to highly relevant and valued 
resources will positively influence team members’ appraisal of their ability to successfully 
complete the NPD project and contribute to the development of a sense of potency within the team. 
Team potency, in turn, is theorized to have a positive impact on new product quality and new 
product creativity. Both of these effects are based on extensive research in team potency suggesting 
that a group’s sense of potency can have a profound effect on the actions that teams take, their 
level of effort and their perseverance in the face of insurmountable obstacles (de Jong et al., 2006; 
Gully, et al., 2002; Guzzo et al., 1993; Mathieu et al., 2008). New product creativity is defined as 
the degree to which a new product is novel and has the potential to change thinking and practice 
(Moorman and Miner, 1997). New product quality refers to how well the new product meets the 

7 
demands of target customers (Koufteros et al., 2005; Sheremata, 2000). Finally, our theoretical 
model depicts functional diversity and team size as moderators of the relationship between team 
boundary spanning and team potency. These relationships are in keeping with research on team 
boundary spanning which suggests that the impact of team boundary spanning on team outcomes 
may be contingent on team’s design characteristics (Marrone, 2010). Team size concerns the 
number of members in the team and functional diversity alludes to the number of functional 
departments represented on the team (Sethi et al., 2001). 
(Insert Figure 1 here) 
3. Hypotheses development 
3.1. Impact of team boundary spanning on team potency 
Team boundary spanning is expected to strengthen a NPD team’s sense of confidence in their 
capacity to be effective across the multiple tasks that characterize the development of new 
products. For example, task coordination activities can enable NPD teams to coordinate and 
synchronize NPD activities with external parties, thus improving a team’s ability to meet deadlines 
and keep work flowing (Ancona et al., 2009). Also, through task coordination activities, NPD 
teams can resolve technical and marketing problems arising during the NPD process by recruiting 
the assistance of other groups inside and outside the organization and seeking feedback on their 
work, all of which may well influence a group’s sense of potency. Ambassadorial activities can 
also boost a team’s sense of confidence by allowing NPD teams to build needed support for the 
NPD project and team decisions (Ancona and Caldwell, 1992a; Howell and Shea, 2006; Joshi et 
al., 2009). Finally, scouting activities can enrich team members’ expertise and knowledge by 
keeping the team abreast of the latest technical, organizational and market developments (Ancona 
et al., 2009; Howell and Shea, 2006). Also, these activities can enable a better understanding of 

8 
the needs and demands of the project’s key internal and external stakeholders (Benoliel and 
Somech, 2015) and provide the opportunity to learn from the experiences of others (Bresman, 
2010) which, according to team potency’s research, can elevate a team’s belief in their capacity to 
be effective (Guzzo et al., 1993). Drawing on the previous discussion, we propose that: 
H1: Team boundary spanning is positively related to team’s potency 
3.2. Impact of team potency on new product quality and new product creativity 
The current study proposes a positive effect of team potency on new product quality. Research 
on team potency has noted that a characteristic of high-potency teams is their strong conviction 
that they can deliver high quality work (Guzzo et al., 1993). It is because of such conviction that 
NPD teams with high potency are expected to set high goals for new product quality and to commit 
to those goals (Lee et al., 2002; Lester et al., 2002). Also, when NPD teams have strong beliefs 
about their capability to deliver a high-quality product, they can be expected to invest more time, 
energy and effort at identifying and solving any technical problems that might arise during the 
development of the new product (Akgün et al., 2007). Based on these arguments, we propose that: 
H2: Team potency is positively related to new product quality. 
Team potency is expected to enhance new product creativity for two main reasons. First, 
because of their strong beliefs in their capabilities, teams with high levels of potency are more 
willing to engage in creative activities and experiment with new methods, approaches and 
behaviors (Tierney and Farmer, 2002). Secondly, teams with a strong sense of potency are said to 
show high resilience in the face of adversity (Lester et al., 2002; Tierney and Farmer, 2002), a 
quality that research on creativity regards as important in achieving creative outcomes. In this vein, 
Kwon et al. (2015) noted that “creative effort is usually a demanding activity that requires time 
and hard work; because it has a high risk of failure, it is paramount to remain persistent” (p. 678). 

9 
At the individual level, Kwon et al. (2015) has shown a positive relationship between designers’ 
creative self-efficacy and new product creativity. Other studies have shown a positive effect 
between individual self-efficacy and innovative behaviour (e.g., generating and promoting new 
ideas, seeking out new working methods and techniques) (Nisula and Kianto, 2016). Drawing on 
the previous arguments and evidence, we expect NPD teams with high potency to produce products 
with higher levels of creativity. Thus, we propose that: 
H3: Team potency is positively related to new product creativity. 
3.3. Mediating effect of team potency 
As noted earlier (H1), team boundary spanning activities can assist NPD teams in acquiring needed 
resources, support and guidance from external parties, positively influencing the development of 
a sense of potency in the group. In this study, we contend that the feeling of potency accrued from 
the team’s boundary spanning efforts will lead to higher new product creativity and new product 
quality. This is based on extensive research in team potency suggesting that a group’s sense of 
potency can have a profound effect on the actions that the team takes, its level of effort and its 
perseverance in the face of obstacles (de Jong et al., 2006; Gully, et al., 2002; Guzzo et al., 1993; 
Mathieu et al., 2008). Because of the feeling of potency accrued from the team’s boundary 
spanning efforts, boundary spanning NPD teams are expected to set higher goals for new product 
quality and expend more time, energy and effort to ensure that they produce a high-quality product. 
Also, these teams will be more likely to engage in creative activities and be less deterred by the 
obstacles that come along the creative process (Tierney and Farmer, 2011), making it more likely 
for them to produce new products with high levels of creativity. Thus, we propose that: 
H4a-b: Team potency mediates the effect of team boundary spanning on (a) new product creativity 
and (b) new product quality 

10 
3.4. Moderating effects of team size and functional diversity 
Team size is expected to have a curvilinear (inverted U-shaped) moderating effect on the 
relationship between team boundary spanning and team potency. Previous studies suggest that 
team boundary spanning requires considerable effort and time from team members due to the fact 
that those engaged in boundary spanning are responsible for actively managing a variety of internal 
(e.g., building trust among team members, defining goals, etc.) and external activities (i.e., 
ambassador, task coordination and scouting) either simultaneously or sequentially (Marrone et al., 
2007). It seems then reasonable to hypothesize that smaller teams carrying out team boundary 
spanning activities will likely experience work overload due to the lesser number of individuals in 
the team among whom to distribute the work. As a result, we expect smaller NPD teams to show 
lower levers of team potency. 
At the same time, larger teams, although more capable to manage the overload associated with 
team boundary spanning, may also experience challenges in leveraging the fruits of this activity. 
Thus, previous studies have noted that as groups grow in size, they often experience increasing 
problems in communication and coordination (Cannon-Bowers and Bowers, 2011, Cohen et al., 
1996; De Cremer and Leonardelli, 2003) which, we argue, can lead to losses in relation to the 
resources and information obtained through the team’s boundary spanning wok. That is, due to 
poor communication and coordination within large teams, some of the information and resources 
obtained through boundary spanning can be overlooked or disregarded and not put to use in the 
NPD project which, in turn, could tone down the group’s perception of boundary spanning activity 
as a facilitator of the group’s success.  
Drawing on the previous arguments, we expect team boundary spanning activity to have a 
greater positive effect on team potency for medium-sized teams than for smaller and larger teams. 

11 
Unlike smaller teams, medium-sized teams would have enough manpower to handle the additional 
workload associated with boundary spanning. Moreover, their in-between size (i.e., not too small 
or not too large) spares medium-size teams from experiencing the coordination and 
communication problems that often affect larger teams.  Thus, we propose that:  
H5. Team size has a curvilinear (inverted U-shaped) moderating effect on the relationship between 
team boundary spanning and team potency so that the positive effect of team boundary spanning 
on team potency will be stronger for medium-size teams than for smaller or larger teams.  
Regarding functional diversity, we predict that too little and too much functional diversity can 
decrease the positive effect of team boundary spanning on team potency. Thus, prior research 
suggests that functionally diverse teams have access to larger and more diverse networks of 
contacts than less functionally diverse teams (Ancona and Caldwell, 1992b; Keller, 2001; Scott, 
1997). Given that team boundary spanning requires members to reach out and interact with people 
external to the team (Marrone, 2010), we argue that, in the context of team boundary spanning, the 
smaller and less diverse networks of low functionally diverse teams will make it more difficult for 
boundary-spanning teams to reach out and seek interactions with external actors (Hoegl et al., 
2003). Thus, we expect boundary spanning teams to show lower levels of team potency when 
functional diversity is low than when it is high. However, past some optimal point, too much 
functional diversity may become detrimental to team boundary spanning. This prediction is in 
keeping with prior research in NPD suggesting that due to differing functional goals and 
orientations, NPD teams with very high levels of functional diversity are likely to suffer from poor 
communication (Keller, 2001), low team cohesion (Tekleab et al., 2016) and increased job stress 
(Keller, 2001) which, we argue, could reduce the efficiency with which boundary spanning teams 
do their work. In light of the previous discussion, we expect the positive effect of team boundary 

12 
spanning on team potency to be greater in NPD teams with moderate levels of functional diversity 
than in NPD teams with low and high levels. Thus, we propose: 
H6. Team functional diversity has a curvilinear (inverted U-shaped) moderating effect on the 
relationship between team boundary spanning and team potency so that the positive effect of team 
boundary spanning on team potency will be stronger for medium levels of functional diversity.  
4. Methodology 
4.1. Sample and data collection 
The unit of analysis was a recently launched NPD project in which the NPD team in charge 
had partaken in boundary spanning activities. The sampling frame for the study were Spanish 
manufacturing firms in high- and medium-technology sectors listed in the Amadeus database. The 
food and beverages manufacturing sector, although classified as low-technology, was also 
included in the sampling frame because of its high values of R&D spending (INE, 2021). We 
randomly selected 25 percent of the firms in each of the industry groups, which resulted in 946 
manufacturing firms.  
To reduce the presence of common method bias, we collected the data in two stages (Podsakoff 
et al., 2003). During the first stage of the data collection, a questionnaire focused on team boundary 
spanning activities was sent to each of the companies in our database. The questionnaire was 
addressed to the person in the company responsible for NPD activities who was instructed to 
answer the survey questions in relation to a new product that their company had developed in the 
last three years and had been, at least, 6 months in the market, whose development he/she had led 
and participated in and in which the NPD team in charge had partaken in team boundary spanning 
activities. A total of 146 companies returned the completed questionnaires. Data on the remaining 
variables in the model (i.e., team potency, new product quality, new product creativity, moderator 

13 
variables and control variables) were collected using a second survey sent by post and email to the 
same individuals from the 146 companies that had returned the first survey. It is important to note 
that all respondents were reminded of the new product chosen to answer the first survey and asked 
to answer the survey having the same NPD project in mind. 140 of the 146 firms contacted, 
completed the second survey. Thus, the study’s sample consists of 140 NPD projects, each one 
from a different company. The time lag between the first and second surveys ranged between one 
to four months.  The response rate for this study is 14.8%.  While this response rate is not as high 
as one might wish, it is still comparable to that of recent studies in innovation (e.g., Pollok et al., 
2019; Sigurdsson and Candi, 2020) and provides sufficient statistical power for the testing of the 
study’s hypotheses. Power calculations were based on a medium effect size and Type I error values 
() of 0.05. In all instances, power values exceed Cohen’s (2013) recommended criterion of 0.80. 
In particular, the minimum power value was 0.89. Of the key informants responding to the survey, 
45.2% were R&D managers, 34.1% were technical managers, 13.3% were general managers and 
7.4% were managers of other departments. 
Table 1 shows the population and the sample for each industry group. To check for response 
bias by industry, we applied a two-proportion test to compare the proportions of firms in the sample 
and the population for each industry group. The results reveal significant differences for the 
industry group ‘computer, electronic and electrical manufacturing’. Specifically, firms within this 
group are over-represented in the sample, which is reasonable to expect given that the sectors these 
firms belong to are high-technology industries. Additionally, for the two rounds of surveys, non-
response bias was tested by comparing the responses of early (first third) and late (last third) 
respondents. No statistically significant differences were found in the mean scores of the constructs 
used in this study. 

14 
 (Insert Table 1 here) 
4.2. Measurement scales, reliability and validity 
To assess team boundary spanning, we follow Carbonell and Rodriguez-Escudero’s (2019) 
approach which operationalizes team boundary spanning as a second-order formative construct 
consisting of seven first-order reflective dimensions. These dimensions capture the three main 
activities of team boundary spanning (i.e., ambassador, task coordination and scouting), each of 
them taking place inside (i.e., intrafirm) as well as outside (i.e., extrafirm) the organization.   
The characterization of team boundary spanning as a second-order formative construct is in 
keeping with Jarvis et al.’s (2003) guidelines for the modelling of formative measures. Thus, each 
of the first-order dimensions of team boundary spanning (i.e., ambassador, task coordination and 
scouting) represents distinctive aspects of the team boundary spanning construct (Ancona and 
Caldwell, 1992a) thus, dropping one of these components is likely to change the conceptual 
domain of the second-order construct. Also, the first-order dimensions of team boundary spanning 
do not necessarily co-vary with each other. For example, high level of ambassador activities do 
not always signify high levels of task coordination or scouting activities (Ancona and Caldwell, 
1992a). Finally, the team boundary spanning’s first-order constructs do not have the same 
antecedents and consequences. Thus, Brion et al.’s (2012) study showed that while strength of ties 
enhanced ambassador and scouting activities, it did not have a significant effect on coordination 
activities.  
Table 2 lists the measurement items used for the seven dimensions of team boundary spanning 
along with factor loadings, average variance extracted (AVE) and composite reliability (CR) 
values. As shown, all of the items had factor loadings above 0.70 except for three items which had 
factor loadings between 0.64 and 0.68. With regard to items with factor loadings between 0.50 and 

15 
0.70, Hair et al. (2013) recommend calculating the values of the AVE and CR to examine the 
convergent validity of the constructs. If the AVE and CR values are respectively above their 
threshold values, it is then acceptable to retain the items in question. As shown in table 2, the AVE 
and CR values of all the team boundary spanning dimensions were respectively above the 
standards of 0.50 and 0.70, indicating good convergent validity. Hence, all 27 items were retained. 
Moreover, values of the Cronbach alphas also exceeded the standard of 0.70, providing evidence 
for the internal consistency of the items in each of the team boundary spanning dimensions.  
(Insert Table 2 here) 
To statistically validate the formative character of the team boundary spanning scale, we 
checked for multicollinearity among its dimensions using the variance-inflation factor (VIF). The 
VIF values of the dimensions were below the cut-off value of 5 (max. VIF: 2.198). Thus, there are 
no concerns about collinearity issues. Next, we examined the significance of the contribution of 
each dimension to the main construct. Fit of the formative measurement model was good as 
evidenced by the fact that the outer weights of all dimensions were significant at p<0.01 (see Table 
3). 
(Insert Table 3 here) 
Team potency was operationalized with six items taken from Guzzo et al.’s (1993) team 
potency scale. While team potency is a group-based construct, the current study measures team 
potency using data from team leaders. To validate the adequacy of this measure, additional data 
on team potency from members of the participating NPD teams were collected. Out of the 140 
NPD teams in the study, we received responses from 31 teams. On average, 1.8 additional 
members per team responded. The intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC), a widely used index to 
measure inter-rater agreement (McGraw and Wong, 1996; Bliese, 2000), was used to check the 

16 
interrater agreement for team potency based on both team leader and team members data available. 
ICC estimates and their 95% confidence intervals were calculated using SPSS statistical package 
version 24 based on a mean-rating, absolute-agreement and 2-way mixed-effects model. The 
results showed an ICC value of 0.75 (95% CI: 0.49-0.89; F=4.24 p<0.001) for the teams with 
available data from at least one team member, an ICC value of 0.67 (95% CI: 0.24-0.89; F=3.39 
p<0.01) for the teams with available data from at least two members and an ICC value of 0.80 
(95% CI: 0.35-0.97; F=5.34 p<0.01) for the teams with available data from at least three team 
members. These ICC values near or exceed the accepted cutoff point of 0.7 (LeBreton and Senter, 
2008; Shrout and Fleiss, 1979), suggesting good agreement between team leaders and team 
members for the measure of team potency. This offers support for using the team leaders as reliable 
key informant for team potency. Thus, all further analyses are conducted on the team leader 
responses for team potency. 
New product creativity was measured with a 5-item scale from Rindfleisch and Moorman 
(2001) and new product quality was measured using a 3-item scale from Sarin and Mahajan (2001). 
Team size refers to the number of full-time members in the team (Sethi et al., 2001). Functional 
diversity was operationalized as the number of functional areas represented on the team whose 
members were fully involved in the project rather than being ad hoc specialists or consultants who 
were engaged only for a limited time (Sethi et al., 2001).  
The study includes several control variables that are likely to influence team potency, new 
product creativity and new product quality including firm size, innovation orientation, knowledge 
specialization and team coordination. Firm size can be considered as a proxy variable of market 
power and financial resources; larger organizations typically have enough R&D, marketing and 
financial resources to successfully develop and commercialize new products and services (Ali et 

17 
al., 1995). Thus, we expect firm size to positively influence new product quality and new product 
creativity. Firm size is measured in terms number of employees in the company. Innovation 
orientation refers to the importance a company assigns to the value of new products for creating 
and retaining a competitive position (Zahra, 1993). According to Siguaw et al. (2006), firms that 
embrace an innovation orientation provide the resources, tools, and human resource talent needed 
to fully develop and sustain innovation within the organization. Accordingly, we expect innovation 
orientation to positively influence new product creativity, new product quality and team potency. 
Innovation orientation was measured with three items adapted from Zahra (1993). Knowledge 
specialization refers to team members’ distinct knowledge related to the task (Lewis 2003). Team 
knowledge specialization is expected to positively contribute to team potency (Guzzo et al., 1993; 
Gibson and Earley, 2007) and has also been related to greater new product creativity 
(Hirunyawipada and Paswan, 2013) and new product quality (Martin Cruz et al., 2007). 
Knowledge specialization was measured by 4 items adapted from Lewis (2003). Team 
coordination alludes to a team’s ability to coordinate knowledge (Lewis, 2003). Research on team 
potency has shown a positive effect of cooperative team processes on team potency (Lester et al., 
2002; Gibson and Early, 2007). Team coordination was measured using two items developed by 
Lewis (2003). The study also controls for the effects of the two moderating variables (i.e., team 
size and functional diversity) on team potency, new product creativity and new product quality. 
These effects are based on prior research that suggests a significant effect of these variables on 
team potency (Guzzo et al., 1993; de Jong et al., 2005; Lee et al., 2002), new product quality (Sethi, 
2000) and new product creativity (Dayan and Colak, 2008). Lastly, we expect team boundary 
spanning to have a positive and direct effect on new product quality and new product creativity. 
Connecting with people outside the team can provide access to a greater number of novel ideas, 

18 
different perspectives and more diverse information, which can spark the development of new 
ideas (Björk, 2012; Hemphälä and Magnusson, 2012; Somech and Khalaili, 2014) and leads to 
greater levels of new product creativity. Furthermore, team boundary spanning can provide NPD 
teams with access to useful input and feedback to improve new product quality (Menon et al., 
1997). 
Table 4 lists the measurement items used for the remaining constructs of the study along with 
factor loadings, AVE and CR values. As shown, while a few scale items had factor loadings 
between 0.40 and 0.70, the AVE and CR’s values of all the constructs exceeded the standard of 
0.50 and 0.70 respectively, indicating good validity and reliability. Therefore, to preserve content 
validity, all items were retained (Hair et al., 2013)  
(Insert Table 4 here) 
Discriminant validity was tested by examining the square root of the average variance extracted 
for each dimension. Discriminant validity is evidenced when the square root of the AVE for each 
construct exceeds the corresponding correlations between that construct and any other constructs 
(Fornell and Larcker, 1981). All possible pairs of constructs passed this test. The heterotrait-
monotrait (HTMT) ratio of correlations’ approach proposed by Henseler et al. (2015) also 
indicated discriminant validity, as all HTMT ratios were clearly below the conservative threshold 
of 0.85. Table 5 shows the square roots of AVE on the diagonal, the correlation values below the 
diagonal and the HTMT ratios above the diagonal. 
(Insert Table 5 here) 
5. Data analysis and results  
The proposed model was tested using Partial Least Squares Structural Equation Modeling 
(PLS-SEM) algorithm (Smart PLS 3.1.5). PLS-SEM is preferable to covariance-based SEM (CB-

19 
SEM) because their ability to handle reflective and formative measures in a single model (Hair et 
al., 2013). A bootstrap test (1,000 sub-samples) was used to generate the standard error and t-
values of the parameters. Option “no sign change” was employed for model estimation because it 
results in the most conservative outcome (Hair et al., 2013).   
Variables were introduced into the model hierarchically as blocks. First, we included the direct 
effects of team boundary spanning on team potency, team potency on new product quality and new 
product creativity and the effects of the control variables (Model 1). Then, we added the linear 
interaction between team size and team boundary spanning (Model 2) followed by the quadratic 
interaction (Model 3). Finally, we included the linear interaction effect between functional 
diversity and team boundary spanning (Model 4) and the quadratic effect (Model 5). We chose to 
incorporate the interaction terms of team size and functional diversity into separated models as 
previous research suggest that the simultaneous inclusion of multiple interaction terms in one 
model can mask the results, making it difficult to observe true moderating effects due to 
multicollinearity (Aiken and West, 1991; Neter et al., 1996). Table 6 contains the results for 
Models 1-5. The results indicate that the independent variables explain a significant amount of the 
variance of team potency (46%), new product quality (28%) and new product creativity (23%). 
Results for Model 1 show a significant and positive effect of team boundary spanning on team 
potency (β=0.14, p<.05), providing support for H1. In keeping with hypotheses H2 and H3, we 
found positive and significant relationships between team potency and new product quality 
(β=0.30, p<.01) and between team potency and NP creativity (β=0.24, p<.01). A bootstrapping 
procedure was applied to test for the mediating effect of team potency on the relationships between 
team boundary spanning and new product quality and team boundary spanning and new product 
creativity. Results from this procedure (1,000 sub-samples) revealed that the indirect effect of team 

20 
boundary spanning on new product quality via team potency was positive and significant (β=0.04, 
p<0.05). Team potency was also found to mediate the relationship between team boundary 
spanning and new product creativity (β=0.034, p=0.05). Together these results provide support for 
hypotheses H4a and H4b. 
 
The study’s results provide support for hypothesis H5. Thus, we found a significant and 
curvilinear moderating effect of team size on the relationship between team boundary spanning 
and team potency (β=-0.32, p<.05). Contrary to expectations, we did not find a significant 
curvilinear moderating effect of functional diversity on the relationship between team boundary 
spanning and team potency. Instead, functional diversity was found to have a linear and positive 
moderating effect on the relationship between team boundary spanning and team potency (β= 0.10, 
p<.05). Thus, hypothesis H6 is not supported.  
(Insert Table 6 here) 
 
To better interpret the moderating effects of team size and functional diversity on the 
relationship between team boundary spanning and team potency, we used standard interaction 
graphing techniques (Figure 2 and 3). Figure 2 depicts the effect of team boundary spanning on 
team potency at medium, high (+1 SD), and low (-1 SD) levels of team size. In keeping with our 
hypothesis, the graph shows that the positive effect of team boundary spanning on team potency 
is greater when team size is medium than when team size is low or high. Figure 3 presents the 
effect of team boundary spanning on team potency at high, medium and low levels of functional 
diversity. As shown, the positive effect of team boundary spanning on team potency is stronger 
when functional diversity is high than when it is medium and low. 
(Figures 2 and 3 here) 
6. Discussion  

21 
The purpose of this study is to advance understanding of how and when team boundary 
spanning activities affects new product performance. In keeping with our expectations, the results 
show that team boundary spanning activities can foster a higher perception of potency within NPD 
teams. Boundary spanning activities facilitate better coordination and synchronization of the NPD 
activities with other groups inside and outside the company, which helps the NPD team meet 
deadlines and keep work flowing (Ancona et al., 2002). Moreover, through their boundary 
spanning activities, NPD teams get access to resources, information and support relevant to the 
project, and are more likely to partake in both vicarious learning and feedback seeking, factors 
which, according to Guzzo et al. (1993), can contribute to the development of a team’s sense of 
confidence. A higher sense of team potency, in turn, can result in greater new product quality and 
new product creativity. Because of their strong conviction that they can deliver high quality work 
(Guzzo et al., 1993; Lee et al., 2002), NPD teams with high levels of potency are more likely to 
set high goals for new product quality and expend more time, energy and effort to ensure that they 
produce a high-quality product. Also, teams with a high sense of potency are more likely to engage 
in creative-conduce activities and be less deterred by the obstacles that come along the creative 
process (Tierney and Farmer, 2011), making it more likely to produce products with higher levels 
of creativity. 
Regarding the proposed moderating effects, findings from this study reveal that the effect of 
team boundary spanning on team potency is contingent on the size of the NPD team and its degree 
of functional diversity. With regard to team size, the study’s results point out an inverted U-shaped 
moderating effect of team size on the relationship between team boundary spanning and team 
potency. In particular, we found that the positive effect of team boundary spanning on team 
potency is greater for medium size teams than for teams of smaller and larger size. Due to their 

22 
low headcount, smaller teams are likely to experience work overload as a result of having to 
manage a myriad of internal activities (e.g., building trust among team members, defining goals, 
etc.) simultaneously or sequentially to their external activities (Marrone et al., 2007). In the case 
of larger teams, the communication and coordination problems frequently encountered by these 
teams (Cannon-Bowers and Bowers, 2011, Cohen et al., 1996; de Cremer and Leonardelli, 2003) 
can lead to losses in relation to the resources obtained through boundary spanning. As a result, 
smaller and larger teams will be less likely to derive confidence from their boundary spanning 
activities.  
In relation to functional diversity, the study’s findings did not show a curvilinear moderating 
effect of functional diversity on the relationship between team boundary spanning and team 
potency. Instead, we found that functional diversity positively moderates the relationship between 
boundary spanning and team potency, suggesting that for NPD boundary spanning teams, 
functional diversity is more of an asset than a liability. As noted earlier, functional diversity 
enables teams to tap into a larger and wider network of external contacts due to their members 
previously established relationships with individuals from their home units and their similarity in 
training, goals and perceptions (Ancona and Caldwell, 1992b; Keller, 2001; Scott, 1997). For 
boundary spanning teams, this advantage of functional diversity implies that team members may 
be able to readily obtain the resources, support and information sought through their boundary 
spanning work (Drach-Zahavy and Domech, 2002). This, in itself, may add enough substantive 
value to the team’s boundary work to outweigh any of potential negative effects (i.e., poor internal 
communication, low team cohesion, increased job stressed) associated with functional diversity. 
Finally, in addition to its indirect effect via team potency, the study’s results reveal a direct 
effect of team boundary spanning on new product creativity. This result is in keeping with research 

23 
in social networks suggesting that connecting with people outside the team allows team members 
to get access to a greater number of novel ideas, different perspectives and more diverse 
information, which can spark the development of new ideas and the adoption of new ways of doing 
things (Björk, 2012; Hemphälä and Magnusson, 2012; Somech and Khalaili, 2014), hence leading 
to new products with greater levels of creativity. Interestingly, the direct effect of boundary 
spanning on new product quality is not significant. A plausible explanation for this result might be 
that while team boundary spanning activities can provide NPD teams with access to useful input 
and feedback to improve new product quality (Menon et al., 1997), communication problems may 
arise between the NPD team and the external parties they interact with which may impede the 
effective transfer of such information (Homburg and Kuehnl, 2014). Without effective information 
transfer, the NPD team’s ability to develop a high-quality product can be compromised (Sivadas 
and Dwyer, 2000).  
7. Theoretical and managerial implications 
The findings of this study contribute to the literature in several ways. First, our study 
contributes to the literature in team boundary spanning. Since Ancona and Caldwell’s (1992a) 
seminal work on external team activities, there has been an increasing recognition that NPD teams 
do not function in a vacuum and that team boundary activities are important predictors of 
innovation and team performance. However, even though boundary spanning is a key activity for 
NPD teams, and the literature on boundary spanning has been in existence for some years, we do 
not still have a clear understanding of how and when team boundary spanning works (Birkinshaw 
et al., 2017). This article addresses part of this knowledge gap by examining one key mediator – 
team potency– and two important moderators – team size and functional diversity. The study’s 
results show that team boundary spanning influences new product quality and new product 

24 
creativity by means of fostering a sense of potency within the team. Also, the positive effect of 
team boundary spanning on team potency is more pronounced for teams of medium size and high 
functional diversity.  
Second, findings from this study consolidates the relevance of team potency for NPD teams. 
The notion of team potency is deemed particularly relevant to NPD teams which, given the highly 
uncertain and complex nature of NPD, often encounter daunting challenges and unexpected 
difficulties during the development of new products. However, while team potency has been 
extensively studied in other contexts (e.g., higher education, front-line employees) empirical 
evidence from NPD teams has been limited to only two studies, mainly Howell and Shea (2006) 
and Akgün et al. (2007). By revealing that team potency can lead to greater new product quality 
and new product creativity, findings from this study provide new insights into the benefits of team 
potency.  
Finally, by demonstrating that team boundary spanning positively impacts team potency, this 
study adds new insights into the determinants of team potency. While prior studies assert that team 
internal processes (e.g., goal and process clarity, communication, coordination and charismatic 
leadership), team design variables (e.g. team tenure, functional diversity, group norms and 
cohesion) and organizational context variables (e.g., support from management and other teams) 
can impact team potency (de Jong et al., 2005; Tröster et al., 2014; Hu and Liden, 2011), team 
external processes such as team boundary spanning activity has been left unexplored. As NPD 
teams increasingly rely on their ability to span functions and organizational boundaries to perform 
their work (Marrone, 2010), understanding how boundary spanning influences team potency is an 
important issue that benefits academics and practitioners alike. 
Our findings suggest a number of managerial implications. First, findings indicate that firms 

25 
should encourage NPD teams to engage in team boundary spanning activities based on the 
numerous benefits that these activities can offer. Thus, past research shows that boundary spanning 
activity of NPD teams can positively influence several new product outcomes including adherence 
to budgets and schedules, technical quality and new product competitive advantage (Ancona and 
Caldwell, 1992a; Carbonell and Rodriguez-Escudero, 2019; Howell and Shea, 2006). In addition 
to these benefits, findings from this study suggest that team boundary spanning can also help build 
team potency which, in turn, contributes to higher new product quality and new product creativity. 
Engaging in team boundary spanning entails that team members reach outside the team to key 
individuals inside and outside the organization who can lend support and help them accomplish 
various aspects of the NPD project. This, however, is easier said than done. As Marrone et al. 
(2007) noted, team boundary spanning is challenging, and time-consuming and team members 
need to feel confident that they can perform these activities successfully. In this respect, Marrone 
et al. (2007) recommend that companies take steps to develop team members’ efficacy for taking 
on boundary-spanning activities by providing them with encouragement. Training is another way 
by which companies can increase team members’ beliefs that they can possess the capabilities to 
perform team boundary activities. Thus Ancona et al. (2009) suggest that NPD managers provide 
coaching and tools to help team members focus on the key external activities of scouting, 
ambassadorship and task coordination.  
Secondly, the study’s results suggest that smaller and larger NPD teams are not likely to 
heighten their sense of potency as a result of engaging in team boundary spanning. However, 
medium-size NPD teams (i.e., teams with approximate nine members) can indeed benefit from the 
positive effect of team boundary spanning on team potency. As such, managers of medium-size 
NPD teams should devote sufficient resources to encouraging and supporting their teams’ 

26 
boundary spanning activities. Lastly, our results show that boundary spanning NPD teams which 
are heterogenous show higher levels of team potency than homogenous teams. A heterogenous 
team is more likely to have contacts of greater number and diversity outside the team, an asset that 
can promote the proficiency with which boundary spanning activities are executed (Choi, 2002), 
leading then to higher levels of potency within the team. Consequently, managers should staff 
NPD teams engaged in boundary spanning activities with employees from different functional 
backgrounds.  
8. Limitations and future research lines 
The current study has some limitations that should be acknowledged. First, the study results 
are based on retrospective data. However, as suggested by Dayan and Di Benedetto (2009), the 
use of retrospective data is acceptable if reported measures are reliable and valid. As discussed 
earlier, the measures used in our research showed reliability and validity and have also been drawn 
from existing scales that have been previously validated. Second, data for this study were provided 
by the team leaders in charge of the sampled NPD projects and thus what the data capture is the 
team leaders’ perception of how their teams are operating rather than the perceptions of the team 
members themselves. While one can expect team leaders to be familiar with the way projects 
progress (Hoegl and Gemuenden, 2001), their outlook in matters pertaining to team boundary 
spanning activities and team potency could diverge from that of team members. Thus, we suggest 
that future studies test the proposed research model using data from team members. Also, while 
potency is a team-based concept, data for this study come from a single team member, i.e., the 
team leader. We thus suggest that future studies test the proposed research model using data from 
multiple team members from each project. Last, this study was conducted in Spain where 
collectivism is higher than in other European (e.g., Germany) and North American (e.g., USA) 

27 
countries, which may imply that mean levels of team potency might be affected (Earley, 1993; 
Gibson, 1999). We thus suggest that replication of this study in other countries with an 
individualist culture could be undertaken to determine empirically the generalizability of our 
findings. 
This study points to some avenues for future research. First, the current study did not measure 
intervening variables responsible for the effect of boundary spanning on team potency and the 
effect of team potency on new product quality and new product creativity. These variables should 
be examined in future research so that the explanatory mechanisms implicated in our study can be 
tested more stringently. Second, future research could explore the moderating effect of other team 
characteristics on the relationship between team boundary spanning and team potency. In this 
regard, it might be interesting to examine the role of interpersonal interactions among team 
members (Cheng and Yang, 2014). Because team boundary spanning does not only involve 
reaching outside the team for information, knowledge and support but it also requires transmitting 
this information back into the team (Marrone, 2010), close and frequent interactions among team 
members can help in disseminating the knowledge obtained through team boundary spanning to 
ensure that it reaches to all members in the team as they work in the NPD project. Thus, close 
interactions among team members could well augment the positive effect of team boundary 
spanning on team potency. Also, variables that reflect the characteristics of leaders could be 
relevant moderators of the team boundary spanning-team potency relationship. For instance, past 
research has shown that a leader’s championing behaviors can have important implications for the 
team boundary spanning. The extent to which a team leader is able to make the NPD team more 
visible externally, identify important stakeholders and scout the organization for information may 
serve to enhance a NPD team’s boundary spanning activities (Druskat and Wheeler, 2003; Howell 

28 
and Shea, 2006; Joshi et al., 2009). Third, it is possible that NPD teams experience failure while 
performing boundary spanning activities. For example, a NPD team may diligently seek 
information from outsiders, but the information received may be inaccurate or incomplete causing 
disruptions in team performance. These negative experiences could damage a team’s sense of 
potency. Still, research on individual’s self-efficacy shows that whether substandard experiences 
affect perceived self-efficacy depends on how individuals construe their ability. In this respect, 
Wood and Bandura (1989) noted that: “when performances are viewed as skill acquisition in which 
one learns from mistakes, perceived self-efficacy is unlikely to be adversely affected by 
substandard performances” (p. 408). In contrast, when ability is construed as a stable entity 
whereby performance reflects the basic cognitive capabilities that people possess, frequent 
experience of substandard performance can take a heavy toll on perceived self-efficacy (Wood and 
Bandura, 1989). Drawing on this research, a fruitful future avenue of research could be to 
investigate how a NPD team’s conception of their boundary spanning capability moderates the 
relationship between NPD team boundary spanning and team potency. Furthermore, on Wood and 
Bandura’s (1989) premises, future researchers could also explore the moderating effect of 
psychological safety on the relationship between team boundary spanning and team potency. 
Psychological safety, which has been defined as the collective belief within a group that members 
can question existing practices and admit mistakes without suffering ridicule or punishment 
(Edmondson 1999), could be expected to positively moderate the relationship between team 
boundary spanning and team potency. Fourth, another fruitful avenue for future research includes 
examining the relationship between team boundary spanning self-efficacy and team potency. Team 
boundary spanning activities are challenging and complex and thus, team members will be more 
likely to partake in these activities when they feel confident in their ability to perform them 

29 
successfully (Marrone et al., 2007). Higher engagement in team boundary spanning activities may, 
in turn, result in stronger levels of team potency2. Lastly, future longitudinal research could 
examine the possibility of a cyclical relationship between team boundary spanning and team 
potency where team potency would serve as both outcome and input of team boundary spanning. 
This idea is in keeping with Marks et al. (2001) which introduced the notion of a recurring phase 
model of team processes. According to Marks et al. (2001), “teams perform in temporal cycles of 
goal-directed activity called episodes” (p. 359) where “outcomes from initial episodes often 
become inputs for the next cycle” (p. 360). Drawing on this perspective, there is value in examining 
whether team boundary spanning can drive and be driven by team potency3.  
References 
Akgün, A.E., Keskin, H., Byrne, J. & Imamoglu, S.Z., (2007). Antecedents and consequences of team 
potency in software development projects. Information & Management, 44(7), 646-656. 
Ali, A., R., Krapfel, & D. LaBahn, D. (1995). Product innovativeness and entry strategy, impact on cycle 
time and break‐even time. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 12(1), 54-69. 
Ancona, D., & Caldwell, D. F. (1988). Beyond task and maintenance, Defining external functions in groups. 
Group & Organization Studies, 13(4), 468-494. 
Ancona, D., & Caldwell, D.F. (1992a). Bridging the boundary, External activity and performance in 
organizational teams. Administrative Science Quarterly, 37, 634-665. 
Ancona, D., & Caldwell, D. F. (1992b). Demography and design: Predictors of new product team 
performance. Organization science, 3(3), 321-341. 
Ancona, D., Bresman, H & Caldwell, D.F. (2009). The X-Factor, Six Steps to Leading High-Performing 
X-Teams. Organizational Dynamics, 38(3), 217-224. 
Ancona, D., Bresman, H., & Kaeufer, K. (2002). The comparative advantage of X-teams. MIT Sloan 
                                                          
2 We would like to thank one of the reviewers for raising this relevant and pertinent issue. 
3 We would like to thank one of the reviewers for raising this relevant and pertinent issue. 

30 
Management Review, 43(3), 33-39. 
Benoliel, P. & Somech, A., (2015). The role of leader boundary activities in enhancing interdisciplinary 
team effectiveness. Small Group Research, 46(1), 83-124. 
Birkinshaw, J., Ambos, T.C. & Bouquet, C., (2017). Boundary spanning activities of corporate HQ 
executive insights from a longitudinal study. Journal of Management Studies, 54(4), 422-454. 
Björk, J. (2012). Knowledge domain spanners in ideation. Creativity and Innovation Management, 21(1), 
17-27. 
Bliese, P. D. (2000). Within-group agreement, non-independence, and reliability: Implications for data 
aggregation and analysis. In K. J. Klein & S. W. J. Kozlowski (Eds.), Multilevel theory, research, and 
methods in organizations: Foundations, extensions, and new directions (pp. 349–381). San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass.  
Bresman, H. (2010). External learning activities and team performance: A multimethod field study. 
Organization Science, 21(1), 81-96. 
Brion, S., Chauvet, V., Chollet, B. & Mothe, C., (2012). Project leaders as boundary spanners, Relational 
antecedents and performance outcomes. International Journal of Project Management, 30(6), 708-
722. 
Cannon-Bowers, J.A., & Bowers, C. (2011). Team development and functioning. In S. Zedeck (Ed.), APA 
Handbooks in Psychology. APA handbook of industrial and organizational psychology, Vol. 1. 
Building and developing the organization (pp. 597-650). Washington, DC, US, American 
Psychological Association. 
Carbonell, P., & Rodríguez Escudero, A. I. (2019). The dark side of team social cohesion in NPD team 
boundary spanning. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 36(2), 149-171. 
Carboni, I., Cross, R., & Edmondson, A. C. (2021). No Team is an Island: How Leaders Shape Networked 
Ecosystems for Team Success. California Management Review, 64(1), 5-28. 
Cheng, H.H. & Yang, H.L., (2014). The antecedents of collective creative efficacy for information system 
development teams. Journal of Engineering and Technology Management, 33,1-17. 

31 
Cho, E., & Hahn, M. (2004). Antecedents and consequences of the sociocultural differences between R&D 
and marketing in Korean high-tech firms. International Journal of Technology Management, 28(7-8), 
801-819. 
Choi, J.N. (2002). External activities and team effectiveness, Review and theoretical development. Small 
Group Research, 33(2), 181-208. 
Cohen, J. (2013). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences. Academic press. 
Cohen, J., Cohen, P., West, S.G. and Aiken, L.S. (2013). Applied multiple regression/correlation analysis 
for the behavioral sciences. Routledge. 
Cohen, S.G., Ledford Jr, G.E. & Spreitzer, G.M., (1996). A predictive model of self-managing work team 
effectiveness. Human Relations, 49(5), 643-676. 
Dayan, M., & Colak, M. (2008). The role of procedural justice in the new product development process. 
European Journal of Innovation Management, 11(2), 199-218. 
Dayan, M., & Di Benedetto, C. A. (2009) Antecedents and consequences of teamwork quality in new 
product development projects, an empirical investigation. European Journal of Innovation 
Management, 12(1), 129-155. 
De Cremer, D. & Leonardelli, G.J., (2003). Cooperation in social dilemmas and the need to belong, The 
moderating effect of group size. Group dynamics, Theory, research, and practice, 7(2), 168-174. 
De Jong, A., De Ruyter, K. & Wetzels, M., (2005). Antecedents and consequences of group potency, A 
study of self-managing service teams. Management Science, 51(11), 1610-1625. 
De Jong, A., De Ruyter, K. & Wetzels, M., (2006). Linking employee confidence to performance, A study 
of self-managing service teams. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 34(4), 576-587. 
Drach-Zahavy, A. & Somech, A., (2002). Team heterogeneity and its relationship with team support and 
team effectiveness. Journal of Educational Administration, 40(1), 44-66. 
Druskat, V.U. & Wheeler, J.V., (2003). Managing from the boundary. The effective leadership of self-
managing work teams. Academy of Management Journal, 46(4), 435-457. 
Earley, P.C. (1993). East meets West meets Mideast, Further explorations of collectivistic and 

32 
individualistic work groups. Academy of Management Journal, 362, 319-348. 
Edmondson, A. (1999). Psychological safety and learning behavior in work teams. Administrative Science 
Quarterly, 44(2), 350-383. 
Edmondson, A. C., & Harvey, J. F. (2018). Cross-boundary teaming for innovation: Integrating research 
on teams and knowledge in organizations. Human Resource Management Review, 28(4), 347-360. 
Fornell, C. & Larcker, D. (1981). Evaluating structural equation models with unobservable variables and 
measurement error. Journal of Marketing Research 18, 39-50. 
Frazier, P. A., Tix, A.P. & Barron, K.E. (2004). Testing moderator and mediator effects in counseling 
psychology research. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 51(1), 115. 
Gibson, C.B. & Earley, P.C., (2007). Collective cognition in action, Accumulation, interaction, 
examination, and accommodation in the development and operation of group efficacy beliefs in the 
workplace. Academy of Management Review, 32(2), 438-458. 
Gibson, C.B. (1999). Do they do what they believe they can? Group efficacy and group effectiveness across 
tasks and cultures. Academy of Management Journal, 42(2), 138-152. 
Gist, M.E. & Mitchell, T.R., (1992). Self-efficacy, A theoretical analysis of its determinants and 
malleability. Academy of Management Review, 17(2), 183-211. 
Gully, S.M., Incalcaterra, K.A., Joshi, A. & Beaubien, J.M., (2002). A meta-analysis of team-efficacy, 
potency, and performance, interdependence and level of analysis as moderators of observed 
relationships. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87(5), 819-832. 
Guzzo, R.A., Yost, P.R., Campbell, R.J. & Shea, G.P., (1993). Potency in groups, Articulating a construct. 
British Journal of Social Psychology, 32(1), 87-106. 
Hair, J.F., Hult, G.T., Ringle, C.M. & Sarstedt, M. (2013). A Primer on Partial Least Square Structural 
Equation Modeling (PLS SEM). Sage publications, United Kingdom.  
Hemphälä, J., & Magnusson, M. (2012). Networks for innovation–but what networks and what innovation? 
Creativity and Innovation Management, 21(1), 3-16. 
Henseler, J., Ringle, C.M. & Sarstedt, M. (2015). A new criterion for assessing discriminant validity in 

33 
variance-based structural equation modeling. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 43 (1), 
115-135.  
Hirunyawipada, T., & Paswan, A.K. (2013). Effects of team cognition and constraint on new product 
ideation. Journal of Business Research, 66(11), 2332-2337. 
Hoegl, M., & Gemuenden, H. G. (2001). Teamwork quality and the success of innovative projects, A 
theoretical concept and empirical evidence. Organization science, 12(4), 435-449. 
Hoegl, M., Parboteeah, K.P. & Munson, C.L., (2003). Team‐level antecedents of individuals' knowledge 
networks. Decision Sciences, 34(4), 741-770. 
Homburg, C., & Kuehnl, C. (2014). Is the more always better? A comparative study of internal and external 
integration practices in new product and new service development. Journal of Business Research, 
67(7), 1360-1367. 
Howell, J.M. & Shea, C.M., (2006). Effects of champion behavior, team potency, and external 
communication activities on predicting team performance. Group & Organization Management, 
31(2), 180-211. 
Hu, J. & Liden, R.C., (2011). Antecedents of team potency and team effectiveness, An examination of goal 
and process clarity and servant leadership. Journal of Applied Psychology, 96(4), 851-862. 
INE (2021). ‘Empresas con gasto en innovación por ramas de actividad, tipo de gasto y tamaño de la 
empresa’. Innovación tecnológica en las empresas. Año 2020. Instituto Nacional de Estadística. 
Jarvis, C. B., MacKenzie, S. B., & Podsakoff, P. M. (2003). A critical review of construct indicators and 
measurement model misspecification in marketing and consumer research. Journal of consumer 
research, 30(2), 199-218. 
Joshi, A., Pandey, N. & Han, G., (2009). Bracketing team boundary spanning, An examination of task‐
based, team‐level, and contextual antecedents. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 30(6), 731-759. 
Keller, R. T. (2001). Cross-functional project groups in research and new product development: Diversity, 
communications, job stress, and outcomes. Academy of Management Journal, 44(3), 547-555. 
Kim, N., Im, S., & Slater, S. F. (2013). Impact of knowledge type and strategic orientation on new product 

34 
creativity and advantage in high‐technology firms. Journal of product innovation management, 30(1), 
136-153.  
Koufteros, X., Vonderembse, M. & Jayaram, J., (2005). Internal and external integration for product 
development, the contingency effects of uncertainty, equivocality, and platform strategy. Decision 
Sciences, 36(1), 97-133. 
Kwon, J., Lee, M., & Kim, H. R. (2015). Does a creative designer necessarily translate into the creative 
design of a product? Exploring factors facilitating the creativity of a new product. Creativity and 
Innovation Management, 24(4), 675-692. 
Larson, C. E., & LaFasto, F. M. (1989). Teamwork: What must go right/what can go wrong (Vol. 10). Sage 
LeBreton, J. M., & Senter, J. L. (2008). Answers to 20 questions about interrater reliability and interrater 
agreement. Organizational research methods, 11(4), 815-852. 
Lee, C., Tinsley, C.H. & Bobko, P. (2002). An Investigation of the Antecedents and Consequences of 
Group‐Level Confidence. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 32(8), 1628-1652. 
Lester, S.W., Meglino, B.M. & Korsgaard, M.A. (2002). The antecedents and consequences of group 
potency. A longitudinal investigation of newly formed work groups. Academy of Management Journal, 
45(2), 352-368. 
Lewis, K. (2003). Measuring transactive memory systems in the field, scale development and validation. 
Journal of Applied Psychology, 88(4), 587. 
Marks, M. A., Mathieu, J. E., & Zaccaro, S. J. (2001). A temporally based framework and taxonomy of 
team processes. Academy of Management Review, 26(3), 356-376. 
Marrone, J.A., (2010). Team boundary spanning, A multilevel review of past research and proposals for 
the future. Journal of Management,36(4), 911-940. 
Marrone, J.A., Tesluk, P.E. & Carson, J.B., (2007). A multilevel investigation of antecedents and 
consequences of team member boundary-spanning behavior. Academy of Management Journal, 50(6), 
1423-1439. 
Martin Cruz, N., Martin Perez V., & Fernandez Ramos, Y. (2007). Transactive memory processes that lead 

35 
to better team results. Team Performance Management, An International Journal 13(7/8), 192-205. 
Mathieu, J., Maynard, M.T., Rapp, T. & Gilson, L., (2008). Team effectiveness 1997-2007, A review of 
recent advancements and a glimpse into the future. Journal of Management, 34(3), 410-476. 
McGraw, K. O., & Wong, S. P. (1996). Forming inferences about some intraclass correlation coefficients. 
Psychological Methods, 1(1), 30. 
McNally, R. C., Akdeniz, M. B., & Calantone, R. J. (2011). New product development processes and new 
product profitability: Exploring the mediating role of speed to market and product quality. Journal of 
Product Innovation Management, 28(s1), 63-77.  
Menon, A., Jaworski, B. J., & Kohl, A. K. (1997). New product quality: Impact of interdepartmental 
interactions. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 25(3), 187-200.  
Molina‐Castillo, F. J., Munuera‐Aleman, J. L., & Calantone, R. J. (2011). Product quality and new product 
performance: The role of network externalities and switching costs. Journal of Product Innovation 
Management, 28(6), 915-929.  
Moorman, C. & Miner, A.S., (1997). The impact of organizational memory on new product performance 
and creativity. Journal of Marketing Research, 34(1), 91-106. 
Nisula, A. M., & Kianto, A. (2016). The antecedents of individual innovative behaviour in temporary group 
innovation. Creativity and Innovation Management, 25(4), 431-444. 
Podsakoff, P.M., MacKenzie, S.B., Lee, J.Y. & Podsakoff, N.P. (2003). Common method biases in 
behavioral research. A critical review of the literature and recommended remedies. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 88(5), 879-903. 
Pollok, P., Lüttgens, D., & Piller, F. T. (2019). How firms develop capabilities for crowdsourcing to 
increase open innovation performance: The interplay between organizational roles and knowledge 
processes. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 36(4), 412-441. 
Rindfleisch, A. & Moorman, C., (2001). The acquisition and utilization of information in new product 
alliances. A strength-of-ties perspective. Journal of marketing, 65(2), 1-18. 
Sarin, S. & Mahajan, V., (2001). The effect of reward structures on the performance of cross-functional 

36 
product development teams. Journal of Marketing, 65(2), 35-53. 
Schoonhoven, C.B., (1981). Problems with contingency theory, testing assumptions hidden within the 
language of contingency theory. Administrative Science Quarterly, 26(3), 349-377. 
Scott, S. G. (1997). Social identification effects in product and process development teams. Journal of 
Engineering and Technology Management, 14(2), 97-127. 
Sethi, R. (2000). New new product quality and product development teams. Journal of Marketing, 64(2), 
1-14. 
Sethi, R., Smith, D.C. & Park, C.W., (2001). Cross-functional product development teams, creativity, and 
the innovativeness of new consumer products. Journal of Marketing Research, 38(1), 73-85. 
Shelton, P.M., Waite, A.M. & Makela, C.J., (2010). Highly effective teams. A relational analysis of group 
potency and perceived organizational support. Advances in Developing Human Resources, 12(1), 93-
114. 
Sheremata, W.A., (2000). Centrifugal & centripetal forces in radical new product development under time 
pressure. Academy of Management Review, 25(2), 389-408. 
Shin, S.J. & Zhou, J., (2007). When is educational specialization heterogeneity related to creativity in 
research and development teams? Transformational leadership as a moderator. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 92(6), 1709-1721. 
Shrout, P. E., & Fleiss, J. L. (1979). Intraclass correlations: Uses in assessing rater reliability. Psychological 
Bulletin, 86(2), 420. 
Siguaw, J.A., Simpson, P.M. & Enz, C.A., (2006). Conceptualizing innovation orientation, A framework 
for study and integration of innovation research. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 23(6), 
556-574. 
Sigurdsson, K., & Candi, M. (2020). Saying and doing: Social responsibility declared and applied. 
Creativity and Innovation Management, 29(1), 128-140. 
Sivadas, E., & Dwyer, F. R. (2000). An examination of organizational factors influencing new product 
success in internal and alliance-based processes. Journal of Marketing, 64(1), 31-49. 

37 
Somech, A. & Khalaili, A., (2014). Team boundary activity, Its mediating role in the relationship between 
structural conditions and team innovation. Group & Organization Management, 39(3), 274-299. 
Stajkovic, A.D., Lee, D. & Nyberg, A.J., (2009). Collective efficacy, group potency, and group 
performance, Meta-analyses of their relationships, and test of a mediation model. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 94(3), 814. 
Tekleab, A. G., Karaca, A., Quigley, N. R., & Tsang, E. W. (2016). Re-examining the functional diversity–
performance relationship: The roles of behavioral integration, team cohesion, and team learning. 
Journal of Business Research, 69(9), 3500-3507. 
Tierney, P. & Farmer, S.M., (2002). Creative self-efficacy, Its potential antecedents and relationship to 
creative performance. Academy of Management Journal, 45(6), 1137-1148.  
Tierney, P. & Farmer, S.M., (2011). Creative self-efficacy development and creative performance over 
time. Journal of Applied Psychology, 96(2), 277-293.  
Tröster, C., Mehra, A. & van Knippenberg, D., (2014). Structuring for team success, The interactive effects 
of network structure and cultural diversity on team potency and performance. Organizational Behavior 
and Human Decision Processes, 124(2), 245-255. 
Wood, R., & Bandura, A. (1989). Impact of conceptions of ability on self-regulatory mechanisms and 
complex decision making. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 56(3), 407-415. 
Zahra, S.A. (1993). Environment, corporate entrepreneurship, and financial performance, A taxonomic 
approach. Journal of Business Venturing, 8(4), 319-340. 
Zhang, Q. and Li, J. (2021). Can employee's boundary-spanning behavior exactly promote innovation 
performance? The roles of creative ideas generation and team task interdependence. International 
Journal of Manpower, 42(6), 1047-1063. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

38 
 
 
 
 
 
 

39 
Table 1 
Population and sample distribution by industry: Proportion test 
Industrial sector 
Amadeus 
directory 
Population 
Sample 
 
 
N 
% of 
total 
N 
% of 
total 
Food and beverages manufacturing 
813 
203 
21.5% 
23 
16.4% 
Chemical and plastics product manufacturing 
851 
213 
22.5% 
36 
25.7% 
Machinery manufacturing 
490 
122 
12.9% 
15 
10.7% 
Non-metallic mineral product, primary metal 
and fabricated metal product 
manufacturing 
781 
195 
20.6% 
21 
15.0% 
Computer, electronic, and electrical 
manufacturing 
434 
109 
11.5%* 
28 
20.0%* 
Transportation equipment manufacturing 
417 
104 
11.0% 
17 
12.1% 
TOTAL 
3786 
946 
100% 
140 
100% 
* Significant differences: p <0.05 

40 
Table 2 
Team boundary spanning dimensions 
  
 
Mean (S.D.) 
Factor 
loading 
Factor 1. Intra-firm ambassador (CR= 0.87; AVE=0.58) 
Project leader or team members talked up the NPD project to individuals or groups in the 
company. 
Persuaded them that the NPD project was important. 
Persuaded them to support the team’s activities and decisions. 
Kept them informed of the progress on the team’s activities to gain support for the project. 
Built relationship with these groups. 
 
5.59 (1.31) 
 
5.63 (1.24) 
5.30 (1.24) 
5.54 (1.17) 
5.21 (1.21) 
 
0.823 
 
0.808 
0.835 
0.640 
0.682 
Factor 2. Extra-firm ambassador (CR= 0.92; AVE=0.73) 
Project leader or team members talked up the NPD project to individuals or groups outside the 
company. 
Persuaded them that the NPD project was important. 
Persuaded them to support the team’s activities and decisions. 
Kept them informed of the progress on the team’s activities to gain support for the project. 
   Built relationship with these groups. 
 
5.01 (1.69) 
 
4.85 (1.76) 
4.34 (1.84) 
4.27 (1.62) 
4.99 (1.69) 
 
0.870 
 
0.881 
0.871 
0.813 
0.818 
Factor 3. Intra-firm scouting-1 (CR= 0.89; AVE=0.81) 
Found out whether individuals or groups inside the company supported the team’s activities  
Found out their expectations about the new product project 
 
4.97 (1.44) 
5.26 (1.29) 
 
0.903 
0.896 
Factor 4. Intra-firm scouting-2 (CR= 0.91; AVE=0.83) 
Inquired them about new or emergent marketing information and trends. 
Inquired them about new or emergent technical information and trends. 
Collected their perceptions about the team and project’s progress a 
Inquired them about information regarding the company’s strategy and climate that could 
impact the NPD project a 
 
4.85 (1.54) 
4.72 (1.70) 
 
0.929 
0.890 
Factor 5.  Extra-firm scouting (CR= 0.92; AVE=0.67) 
Found out whether individuals or groups outside the company supported the team’s activities. 
Found out their expectations about the new product project.  
Inquired them about new or emergent marketing information and trends. 
Inquired them about new or emergent technical information and trends. 
Collected their perceptions about the team and project’s progress.  
Inquired them about information regarding changes or early signs of trouble in the external 
environment 
 
4.35 (1.82) 
4.64 (1.87) 
4.69 (1.88) 
4.84 (1.71) 
4.24 (1.88) 
4.93 (1.79) 
 
0.809 
0.861 
0.826 
0.844 
0.756 
0.814 

41 
Factor 6.  Intra-firm task coordination (CR= 0.85; AVE=0.66) 
Negotiated resources (time, money, people) for the team with groups inside the company a 
Coordinated with them development and commercialization activities with other individuals or 
departments. 
Resolved with them technical and marketing problems that aroused during the development 
process. 
Reviewed with them product concepts, preliminary product designs and ideas for marketing 
plans. 
 
 
5.20 (1.48) 
 
5.76 (1.27) 
 
5.49 (1.48) 
 
 
0.827 
 
0.772 
 
0.835 
Factor 7. Extra-firm task coordination (CR= 0.89; AVE=0.68) 
Procured knowledge and skills relevant to the NPD project from groups outside the company. 
Coordinated with them development and commercialization activities with interested parties 
Resolved with them technical and marketing problems that aroused during the development. 
Reviewed with them product concepts, preliminary product designs and ideas for marketing 
plans 
 
3.89 (1.92) 
4.00 (1.75) 
4.47 (1.72) 
4.30 (1.85) 
 
 0.679 
0.838 
0.902 
0.864 
NOTE. Items were measured with 7-point scale where 1 is “totally disagree” and 7 “completely agree”. 
a Items eliminated after exploratory analysis. 
CR: Composite Reliability; AVE: Average Variance Extracted 
. 
 

42 
Table 3 
Quality criteria of formative measurement 
Formative second-order 
construct 
Dimensions 
Outer weights  
VIF1 
Team boundary spanning 
Intra-firm ambassador  
0.415** 
1.541 
Extra-firm ambassador  
0.793** 
1.935 
Intra-firm scouting-1  
0.177** 
1.520 
Intra-firm scouting-2  
0.219** 
1.396 
Extra-firm scouting  
0.807** 
2.198 
Intra-firm task coordination  
0.414** 
1.285 
Extra-firm task coordination  
0.761** 
1.860 
Bias-corrected bootstrap significance levels: ** p<.01, * p<.05 (one-tailed test). 
1VIF: Variance Inflation Factor. 
 
 
 

43 
Table 4 
Measurement scales for team potency, moderating variables, new product performance and control 
variables 
 
Mean (S.D.) 
Factor loadings 
Team potency (Guzzo et al., 1993) (AVE= 0.57, CR=0.89) 
The team had confidence in itself. 
The team believed it could be extremely good at producing high-quality work. 
The team felt it could solve any problem it encountered 
The team believed it could be very productive. 
The team believed that no job was too tough. 
The team expected to have a lot of influence around here. 
 
5.52 (0.99) 
5.87 (1.01) 
5.14 (1.14) 
5.27 (1.04) 
4.83 (1.30) 
4.82 (1.27) 
 
0.756 
0.796 
0.814 
0.847 
0.693 
0.613 
New product quality (Sarin and Mahajan, 2001) (AVE= 0.55, CR=0.78) 
The product is reliable. 
Quality of this product compares well with other products developed by our 
organization.  
Customers’ complaints have been received regarding the poor performance of 
this product. [R]. 
 
6.10 (0.84) 
5.79 (1.08) 
 
5.89 (1.31) 
 
0.892 
0.735 
 
0.540 
New product creativity (Rindfleisch and Moorman, 2001) (AVE= 0.70, CR=0.92) 
The product offers new ideas to the category. 
It is very creative. 
It is very interesting. 
It is capable of generating ideas for other products.  
It promotes fresh thinking. 
  
5.64 (1.18) 
5.01 (1.49) 
5.73 (1.10) 
5.56 (1.30) 
5.22 81.35) 
 
0.844 
0.856 
0.845 
0.829 
0.817 
Team size (Sethi et al., 2001) 
Number of people on the team who were fully involved in the project.  
 
7.49 (6.20) 
 
- 
Team functional diversity (Sethi et al., 2001) 
Functional diversity was operationalized as the number of functional areas 
represented on the team whose members were fully involved in the project 
 
3.45 (1.44) 
 
- 
Firm size  
Number of employees in the firm 
 
529.1 (1177.8) 
 
- 
Product innovation (AVE= 0.74, CR=0.89) 
We renew the product portfolio by continually launching new and improved 
products. 
We invest a significant amount of resources in new product development 
activities. 
A high percentage of the company’s revenues came from new products 
introduced during the last two years. 
 
5.26 (1.61) 
4.97 (1.66) 
4.51 (1.68) 
 
0.923 
0.886 
0.761 

44 
Team knowledge specialization (Lewis, 2003) (AVE=0.50; CR=0.77) 
Each team member has specialized knowledge of some aspect of our project. 
Each team member has knowledge about an aspect of the project that no other 
team member has. 
Different team members are responsible for expertise in different areas. 
The specialized knowledge of several different team members was needed to 
complete the project deliverables. 
 
5.56 (1.27) 
3.90 (1.68) 
 
4.87 (1.44) 
5.56 (1.35) 
 
 
0.578 
0.548 
 
0.678 
0.932 
Team coordination (Lewis, 2003) (AVE=0.80; CR=0.89) 
Our team worked together in a well-coordinated fashion. 
We accomplished the task smoothly and efficiently. 
 
5.57 (1.09) 
5.01 (1.16) 
 
0.873 
0.933 
NOTE. With the exception of team size and functional diversity, scale items were measured with 7-point scale where 1 is “totally 
disagree” and 7 “completely agree”. 
CR: Composite Reliability; AVE: Average Variance Extracted 
 

45 
Table 5  
Zero-order correlations and discriminant validity * 
 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
1. Team boundary spanning 
 n.a. 
 0.25 
0.26 
0.32 
0.14 
 0.15 
0.12 
0.18 
0.22 
0.17 
2. Team potency 
0.19* 
 0.76 
0.52 
0.38 
0.08 
 0.25 
0.08 
0.23 
0.30 
0.70 
3. New product quality 
0.07 
 0.42** 0.84 
0.37 
0.15 
 0.09 
0.09 
0.34 
0.32 
0.66 
4. New product creativity 
0.30** 
 0.34**  0.26**  0.74 
0.03 
 0.34 
0.08 
0.30 
0.18 
0.17 
5. Team size 
0.09 
-0.03 
-0.08 
 0.03  
 n.a. 
 0.34 
0.23 
0.42 
0.20 
0.02 
6. Team functional diversity 
0.11 
-0.06 
-0.11 
 0.10 
 0.34**   n.a. 
0.02 
0.15 
0.17 
0.18 
7. Firm size 
0.08 
 0.02 
 0.03 
 0.07 
 0.23** -0.02 
n.a. 
0.15 
0.17 
0.05 
8. Product innovation 
0.06 
 0.22**  0.22**  0.27**  0.39**  0.14 
0.15 
0.86 
0.27 
0.15 
9. Team knowledge specialization 
0.12 
 0.29**  0.25**  0.17* 
 0.16 
 0.15 
0.13 
0.25** 
0.68 
0.38 
10. Team coordination 
0.02 
 0.60** 0.47** 
0.15 
 -0.01 
-0.15 
0.01 
0.11 
0.27 
0.89 
(*) The italic values on the diagonal show the square root of AVE. Values below the diagonal are the correlations between 
constructs and the values above the diagonal are the HTMT ratios. 
Significance levels:  ** p<.01, * p<.05. 
 
 
 

46 
Table 6 
Standardized parameter estimates 
 
Model 1 
Model 2 
Model 3 
Model 4 
Model 5 
Hypothesized relationships 
Team boundary spanning → Team potency 
Team potency → New product quality 
Team potency → New product creativity 
Team boundary spanning * Team size → Team potency 
Team boundary spanning * Team size2 → Team potency 
Team boundary spanning * Team diversity→ Team potency 
Team boundary spanning * Team diversity2→ Team potency 
 
 0.14*  (H1) 
 0.30** (H2) 
 0.24** (H3) 
 
  
 
 0.14* 
 0.30** 
 0.24** 
 0.10 
 
 0.14* 
 0.30** 
 0.24** 
 0.22* 
-0.32* (H5) 
 
 
 0.14* 
 0.30** 
 0.24** 
 
 
 0.10*  
 
 0.14* 
 0.30** 
 0.24** 
 
 
 0.08  
-0.04 (H6) 
Control relationships 
Team boundary spanning→ New product quality 
Team boundary spanning→ New product creativity 
Firm size → New product quality 
Firm size → New product creativity 
Product innovation → Team potency 
Product innovation → New product quality 
Product innovation → New product creativity 
Team knowledge specialization → Team potency 
Team knowledge specialization → New product quality 
Team knowledge specialization → New product creativity 
Team coordination → Team potency 
Team size → Team potency 
Team size → New product quality 
Team size → New product creativity 
Team size2 → Team potency 
Team size2 → New product quality 
Team size2 → New product creativity 
Team functional diversity → Team potency 
Team functional diversity → New product quality 
Team functional diversity → New product creativity 
Team functional diversity2 → Team potency 
Team functional diversity2 → New product quality 
Team functional diversity2 → New product creativity 
  
 0.03 
 0.24** 
 0.09 
-0.02 
 0.15*  
 0.15 
 0.21* 
 0.09 
 0.12 
 0.01 
 0.54** 
-0.04 
 0.17 
 0.00 
-0.17 
-0.36* 
-0.14 
-0.07 
-0.23* 
 0.07 
 0.09 
 0.00 
-0.02 
  
 0.03 
 0.24** 
 0.09 
-0.02 
 0.15*  
 0.15 
 0.21* 
 0.10 
 0.12 
 0.01 
 0.52** 
-0.04 
 0.17 
 0.00 
-0.17 
-0.36* 
-0.10 
-0.06 
-0.23* 
 0.07 
 0.08 
 0.00 
-0.02 
  
 0.03 
 0.24** 
 0.09 
-0.02 
 0.15*  
 0.15 
 0.21* 
 0.10 
 0.12 
 0.01 
 0.52** 
-0.04 
 0.17 
 0.00 
-0.17 
-0.36* 
-0.10 
-0.08 
-0.23* 
 0.07 
 0.08 
 0.00 
-0.02 
  
 0.03 
 0.24** 
 0.09 
-0.02 
 0.15*  
 0.15 
 0.21* 
 0.09 
 0.12 
 0.01 
 0.53** 
-0.04 
 0.17 
 0.00 
-0.17 
-0.36* 
-0.14 
-0.07 
-0.23* 
 0.07 
 0.09 
 0.00 
-0.02 
  
 0.03 
 0.24** 
 0.09 
-0.02 
 0.15*  
 0.15 
 0.21* 
 0.09 
 0.12 
 0.01 
 0.54** 
-0.04 
 0.17 
 0.00 
-0.17 
-0.36* 
-0.14 
-0.06 
-0.23* 
 0.07 
 0.08 
 0.00 
-0.02 
R2 Team potency 
R2 New product quality 
R2 New product creativity 
 0.44 
 0.28 
 0.23 
0.44 
0.28 
0.23 
0.46 
0.28 
0.23 
 0.45 
 0.28 
 0.23 
0.45 
0.28 
0.23 
  Significance levels: * p<.05 (one-tailed test); ** p<.01 (one-tailed test). 
 
 

47 
Figure 1 
Theoretical framework  
 
 
 
 
 
Team potency 
New product 
quality 
New product 
creativity 
Control variables 
 Firm size 
 Product innovation 
 Knowledge specialization 
 Team coordination 
Team boundary 
spanning 
 
Team size 
Team functional 
diversity 
New product 
performance 
∩ 
∩ 
+ 
+ 
+ 

48 
 
Figure 2 
Moderating effect of team size on the relationship between boundary spanning and team 
potency 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-3
-2,5
-2
-1,5
-1
-0,5
0
0,5
1
Team potency
Team boundary spanning
Medium
High
Low

49 
Figure 3 
Moderating effect of functional diversity on the relationship between boundary spanning and 
team potency 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
0,2
0,4
0,6
0,8
1
1,2
1,4
1,6
1,8
Team potency
Team boundary spanning
Medium
High
Low
