Technological Forecasting & Social Change 185 (2022) 122100
Available online 20 October 2022
0040-1625/© 2022 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.An emergent taxonomy of boundary spanning in the smart city context – 
The case of smart Dublin 
Hadi Karimikiaa,*, Robert Bradshawb, Harminder Singhc, Adegboyega Ojod,e, 
Brian Donnellanf, Michael Guering 
aLero - the Irish Software Research Centre, University College Cork - National University of Ireland, Co. Cork, Ireland 
bScience Foundation Ireland (SFI) funded Post-Doctoral Researcher, Maynooth University, Co. Kildare, Ireland 
cBusiness Information Systems Department, AUT Business School, Auckland University of Technology, Auckland, New Zealand 
dSchool of Public Policy and Administration, Faculty of Public Affairs, Carleton University, ON, Canada 
eSchool of Business, Maynooth University, Co. Kildare, Ireland 
fSchool of Business & Innovation Value Institute, Maynooth University, Co. Kildare, Ireland 
gProgramme Manager of Dublin's smart city testbed – Smart Docklands, Co. Dublin, Ireland.   
ARTICLE INFO  
Keywords: 
Smart city 
Governance 
Boundary spanning 
Taxonomy ABSTRACT  
Smart cities emphasize the use of advanced technology to deliver better services to and improve the well-being of 
their residents. Since the administrative authorities that manage cities often lack the knowledge and skills needed 
to transform their operations in this way, smart city initiatives usually involve a complex set of actors, from local 
urban authorities and their technical departments to small and large IT firms, academics, and civic organizations, 
as well as individual citizens. Mediating organizations are often set up to coordinate and manage such in-
teractions. However, little is known about the roles and activities of such bodies. Using data from the Dublin 
smart city projects, this study draws on the concept of boundary spanning to develop a taxonomy of the work of 
such intermediaries. Divided into technical, political, social, and cultural domains, the study demonstrates the 
critical role of the work done by such bodies in enhancing collaboration among and the participation of a diverse 
group of citizens, IT and digital strategy departments of local authorities, universities and local/international IT 
companies (e.g., Google, Facebook or Airbnb), leading to a bottom-up governance style of leading smart city 
initiatives and projects.   
1.Introduction 
A relatively extensive literature has focused on the leading role 
played by both global IT firms (such as IBM, General Electric, Siemens, 
and Cisco) and governments in developing and deploying specific smart 
city technologies and initiatives in existing and new cities (Anthopoulos 
et al., 2016 ; Hollands, 2008 ; McNeill, 2015 ; Soderstr om et al., 2014 ; 
Paroutis et al., 2014 ; Yigitcanlar et al., 2018 ): for example, IBM's policy 
consultation role in Philadelphia, USA, and Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, and 
the role of the national and local governments in Songdo, Republic of 
Korea (Shwayri, 2013 ; Wiig, 2016 ). Their roles have received two 
important critiques. First, global IT companies are granted extraordi -
nary power and freedom to exploit city assets to produce marketable 
technologies (Kummitha and Crutzen, 2017 ). This means that a majority of systems and data gathering tools have surveillance issues and suffer 
from lack of transparency and privacy (Angelidou, 2014 ; Townsend, 
2013 ). Second, city governments' efforts reflect a restricted view of the 
social, technological, cultural, and political potential of their cities to 
accommodate technological innovations, so as to promote a coherent 
and integrated response to urban problems (Coletta et al., 2019 ; Yigit-
canlar et al., 2018 ). 
As smart city initiatives mature from a bottom-up governance 
perspective, city governments, instead of being the primary driver of 
these projects, need to coordinate the actions of a broad range of citizens 
and communities as well as national and/or international IT, corporate, 
governmental, and academic actors (Kitchin, 2015 ; Lin, 2018 ; Lin and 
Geertman, 2015 ). But despite abundant efforts, collaboration is prob-
lematic to shape through the innovation process and, in the face of 
*Corresponding author. 
E-mail addresses: hkarimikia@ucc.ie (H. Karimikia), robert.bradshaw@mu.ie (R. Bradshaw), harminder.singh@aut.ac.nz (H. Singh), adegboyega.ojo@carelton.ca 
(A. Ojo), brian.donnellan@mu.ie (B. Donnellan), michael@smartdocklands.ie (M. Guerin).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 
u{�~zkw! s{yo| kro>! ÐÐÐ1ow �o�to~1m{y2w {mk�o2�omsq{~o!
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2022.122100 
Received 3 February 2022; Received in revised form 11 August 2022; Accepted 9 October 2022   
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 185 (2022) 122100
2increasing complexity, is often abandoned (Mills et al., 2021 ; Zuzul, 
2019 ). This complexity is due to many factors (Carvalho, 2015 ; Carvalho 
and Campos, 2013 ). Firstly, from the perspective of municipal gover -
nance, a key issue is the tendency of local authorities (LAs) to have siloed 
internal structures and functions, which can be detrimental to the joint 
coordination of project initiatives within and between governmental 
entities (Emerson et al., 2012 ; Broccardo et al., 2019 ). This lack of cross- 
functional and cross-organizational integration is especially pertinent in 
the case of the IT departments of local authorities (Hojer and Wangel, 
2015 ; Maccani et al., 2020 ; Townsend, 2013 ). Secondly, even after re-
lationships have been built, ethical, legal, and regulatory issues may 
conspire to impede the flow of a project (Coletta et al., 2019 ; Van 
Geenhuizen, 2016 ). Moreover, collaborative activities are often 
compromised by conflicts resulting from differential knowledge, diver -
gent interests and motivations, and asymmetries in power relations 
(Guldemond and Van Geenhuizen, 2012 ; Ranga and Etzkowitz, 2013 ; 
Zuzul, 2019 ). Thirdly, most smart cities are governed “entrepreneur -
ially ”, whereby citizens are positioned as passive consumers, meaning 
that their potential as co-designers and co-producers of smart products 
and services is not fulfilled (Bjogvinsson et al., 2012 ; Cardullo and 
Kitchin, 2019 ; Le Dantec and DiSalvo, 2013 ; Perng, 2017 ). 
In response to these issues, some cities have begun to experiment 
with mediating governance structures which effectively act as “bound -
ary-spanning ” organizations. Examples of such organizations are Bar-
celona Urban Lab in Barcelona, Spain; Laboratorio para la Ciudad in 
Mexico City, Mexico; Smart Dubai in Dubai, UAE, and Seoul Institute in 
Seoul, Republic of Korea (Acuto et al., 2019 ; Anthopoulos, 2017 ; Mills 
et al., 2021 ). These mediating structures create information and inno-
vation ecosystems among all actors and citizens, and aim at deploying 
smart project prototypes, adapting smart technologies to unique local 
needs, and standardizing and spreading cross-fertilized innovations 
(Acuto et al., 2019 ; Ferraris et al., 2019 ; Townsend, 2013 ). However, the 
role that these organizations play in the cities where they informally 
govern city projects and infrastructures, especially through a citizen- 
centric approach, has been overlooked. Despite the increased use of 
such organizations (Coletta et al., 2019 ), the smart city literature has yet 
to provide any detailed empirical accounts of the strategies, processes, 
and behaviors used by mediating organizations to create collaborative 
ecosystems. Drawing on the boundary-spanning perspective, this study 
asks: How can a top-down governance approach transform to a bottom-up 
approach through activities a mediating organization carries out? The 
research question is investigated through a case study of Smart Dublin 
created by the city of Dublin in Ireland to develop multi-actor collabo -
ration and promote both technical and social innovation. 
Smart cities are still obsessed with technology-driven innovation 
(Mora et al., 2017 ; Mu et al., 2022 ). This obsession reflects traditional 
assumptions: merely neoliberal forms of urban development, top-down 
urban planning and decision-making, and policies focused only on ICT 
disciplines (Myeong et al., 2020 ; Yigitcanlar et al., 2018 ; Yigitcanlar and 
Lee, 2014 ). This research is important because it challenges these 
traditional assumptions to reexamine better ways to advocate for citi-
zens' rights and ideas and to work in concert with primary sectoral and 
governmental organizations in order to co-design, co-produce, and test 
ICT-enabled services and infrastructures. This study shows how 
boundary-spanning roles and activities are associated with the different 
ways Smart Dublin seeks to take the lead in facilitating actor collabo -
ration and citizen participation. Rather than contributing to the smart 
city concept, this study unpacks case studies and best governance 
practices in smart city innovations at a local level, examining actors' 
experimentation with an assortment of digital or ICT-driven solutions. 
The next section sets the stage for the paper by providing an over-
view of issues that hinder collaboration and components that constitute 
smart governance. Following that, we carry out a careful review of the 
literature on boundary spanning in varying contexts and settings. Next, 
we describe the characteristics of the research's case study as well as 
taxonomy-making processes. Finally, the findings are elaborated on, and the theoretical and practical contributions of this study are summarized 
and discussed. 
2.Literature review 
2.1. Smart city collaboration 
The term “smart city” has come to be regarded in the literature as 
something inherently positive. Its proponents claim that networked, 
data-driven technologies can operate both instrumentally and norma -
tively to deliver technical, social, and political improvements in urban 
administration (Janowski, 2015 ; Meijer and Thaens, 2018 ; Misuraca 
et al., 2012 ). Smart city collaboration portrays a bottom-up approach 
that involves citizens and multiple actors from sectors utilized by a city 
government to solve urban problems that have not been resolved 
through traditional hierarchical relationships or top-down approaches 
(Mills et al., 2021 ; Mora et al., 2019 ; Townsend, 2013 ). However, the 
literature has identified barriers that may restrict a smart city from 
delivering on its potential to support transparent and evidence-based 
decision-making and foster a citizen-centric model of development 
prioritizing social justice, participation, and democracy (Hollands, 
2008 ; Kitchin, 2016 ). 
First, city governments have limited capacity to understand and 
apply technical knowledge or to capture value through commercializa -
tion (Ferraris et al., 2019 ). This is often because IT functions are under- 
resourced, leading to a deficit of technical knowledge and digital skills 
(Sancino and Hudson, 2020 ). As a consequence, IT departments struggle 
to plan and govern new technical arrangements or evaluate new solu-
tions from external partners (Hojer and Wangel, 2015 ; Mills et al., 
2021 ); examples are the former internal IT departments of New York, 
Chicago and Amsterdam, which were incapable of reusing government 
data and reforming software projects to explore urban problems (Mills 
et al., 2021 ; Townsend, 2013 ). In turn, this has led to an increased 
reliance on universities and private sector entities – for example, tele-
communication companies, start-ups, and/or ICT companies (Cardullo 
and Kitchin, 2019 ; Coletta et al., 2019 ; Kitchin, 2014 ; Hojer and Wangel, 
2015 ). 
Second, unless they are tightly coordinated, collaborations between 
city governments and external IT stakeholders can result in infrastruc -
ture being assembled piecemeal, with new systems poorly integrated 
with legacy technologies, the built environment, and governance 
structures (Coletta et al., 2019 ; Shelton et al., 2015 ; Yigitcanlar et al., 
2018 ). Such infrastructure may also be resisted by internal departments, 
both technical (e.g., IT and digital strategy functions) and non-technical, 
which may have limited scope to incorporate new business and infor-
mation handling practices into business-as-usual activities (Kitchin and 
McArdle, 2016 ; Perng, 2017 ). Alawadhi et al. (2012) point out that 
interdepartmental collaboration and cooperation was essential in the 
success of smart city initiatives in four North American cities: Phila -
delphia and Seattle in the United States, Quebec City in Canada, and 
Mexico City in Mexico. However, Coletta et al. (2019) note that in a local 
authority context, structures are often characterized as uncooperative 
and non-interoperable and arise from weak governance and an absence 
of directed leadership. As a result, local authorities are frequently unable 
to share technical and non-technical knowledge, skills, and expertise 
internally, as well as with international/national IT companies (Broc-
cardo et al., 2019 ; Mu et al., 2022 ). Therefore, operational isolation may 
lead to local authorities iteratively developing their own innovation and 
procurement processes (Coletta et al., 2019 ). 
Third, once projects are initiated, the need to accommodate legal, 
regulatory, and ethical imperatives introduces additional layers of 
complexity to the innovation process (Carvalho and Campos, 2013 ; 
Yigitcanlar and Lee, 2014 ). For example, ensuring compliance with 
environmental protection directives, data protection rules such as GDPR 
(the European Union's General Data Protection Regulation), and pro-
curement requirements can make project development challenging, as H. Karimikia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 185 (2022) 122100
3can enrolling citizens in the decision-making process (Coletta et al., 
2019 ). The smart city literature has witnessed complex ecosystems in 
existing cities, where the implementation of a smart city strategy has 
been susceptible to a lack of political, moral, and ethical balance 
(Angelidou, 2014 ). For example, analysis of the city of Rio de Janeiro 
and its cooperation with IBM has shown a few failures related to the 
digital divide, transparency, privacy, and security. 
Fourth, effective collaboration means creating a mutual under -
standing between diverse actors who may have differing cognitive 
representations (Zuzul, 2019 ), divergent interests and motivations 
(Broccardo et al., 2019 ; Emerson et al., 2012 ; Meijer and Thaens, 2018 ), 
and differential access to decision makers (Broccardo et al., 2019 ; Van 
Geenhuizen, 2016 ). Zuzul (2019) found that contrasting knowledge 
domains and expertise shape different and often incompatible prefer -
ences about important choices when IT and non-IT actors are working 
together to develop smart projects. The dominance of a large actor may 
deter smaller actors from participating, resulting in a lack of represen -
tation or conflict during decision-making (Guldemond and Van Geen -
huizen, 2012 ). The case of the Cyberjaya city in Malaysia has shown how 
the power and control of political coalitions deform the direction of 
smart city projects, causing them to diverge from the smart city vision 
(Nordin, 2012 ; Yusof and Van Loon, 2012 ). These issues have raised 
concerns about the extent to which city management should be dele-
gated to national and/or international IT firms or government bodies 
involved in smart city planning and execution (Bunnell, 2015 ; Kummi -
tha and Crutzen, 2017 ). 
Finally, smart cities have tended to focus on promoting 
technologically-led entrepreneurship among businesses such as start-ups 
and SMEs (Cardullo and Kitchin, 2019 ). However, besides economic 
value, smart cities also need to realize social value from their in-
vestments, and doing so requires innovation processes in which citizens 
play a constructive and active role (Cardullo and Kitchin, 2019 ; 
Hollands, 2008 ; Wiig, 2015 ). Several smart cities, such as Songdo in the 
Republic of Korea and Cyberjaya in Malaysia, have received negative 
attention for having insufficient planning to foreground engagement 
with citizens (Brooker, 2008 ; Nordin, 2012 ; Shwayri, 2013 ; Yigitcanlar 
et al., 2018 ; Yusof and Van Loon, 2012 ). Moreover, recent research on 
smart citizenship reveals that innovation is frequently characterized by 
paternalism, stewardship, and the promotion of passive consumption, 
with technology production and design bearing the hallmark of top- 
down autocracy (Shelton and Clark, 2016 ; Malek et al., 2021 ). Car-
dullo and Kitchin (2019) note that citizen participation within the smart 
city paradigm typically ranges from non-existent to tokenistic, with in-
dividuals essentially positioned as “users ” and reduced to experiencing 
algorithmically-mediated services. As a result, citizens are typically 
relegated to providing feedback on smart initiatives through ICTs rather 
than co-creating innovative and sustainable solutions with other actors 
(Lin, 2018 ). In practice, their role is often limited to consumers or testers 
of online applications or software, or as sources of data which may 
contribute to new products or services (Batty et al., 2012 ; Myeong et al., 
2020 ; Nesti, 2020 ; Wang, 2018 ). There is a growing consensus that, in 
order to address these issues, smart cities need to improve their 
collaborative practices so that they are governed in an inclusive and 
responsible manner (Carvalho, 2015 ; Nam and Pardo, 2014 ). 
2.2. Smart governance 
The connection between collaboration and governance in the smart 
city context has received a substantial amount of attention from scholars 
(Lazaroiu and Roscia, 2012 ; Lin, 2018 ; Lombardi et al., 2012 ; Torfing 
et al., 2012 ). Governance is defined as a way to make decisions and 
administer public services through the engagement of various actors 
(Albino et al., 2015 ). Good administration, policies, and decision- 
making are based on effective collaboration, and these components 
are mutually constitutive (Meijer and Bolívar, 2016 ; Ruhlandt, 2018 ). 
Building on these conceptualizations of governance, this study postulates that effective collaboration influences and is influenced by 
administrative cultures, decision-making processes, and differentiated 
policies occurring across government departments (internal collabora -
tion), between various actors' organizations (external collaboration), 
and between government and citizens (Alhusban, 2015a, 2015b ; Mills 
et al., 2021 ; Nam and Pardo, 2011, 2014 ; Pereira et al., 2017 ). A 
comprehensive literature review on smart governance and its compo -
nents indicates that the transformation of a governance approach to-
wards smartness occurs when government considers smart public 
service design around citizen needs, when government promotes 
entrepreneurship and innovation by bringing various sectors and 
stakeholders together, and when government manages project activities 
around discourses of accountability and transparency (Anthopoulos 
et al., 2022 ; Meijer, 2016 ). Applying these perspectives highlights a 
need for a shift from traditional modes of municipal governance to a 
more proactive, consensus-building, and citizen-centric orientation. In 
response, several scholars have suggested forming new organizational 
bodies to promote smart city development with diverse roles and skills 
to face challenges on behalf of each actor (Lee et al., 2014 ). Hojer and 
Wangel (2015) also proposed that entities like this would have the po-
tential to negotiate challenges associated with knowledge sharing, 
project and program management, procurement, resource allocation, 
conflict resolution, and policy compliance (see also Van Geenhuizen, 
2016 ). 
2.3. Theoretical perspective of boundary spanning 
Boundary spanning is a function that disseminates information in-
side and between actors' organizations and helps them to integrate 
interrelated tasks and processes (Ancona and Caldwell, 1992 ; Faraj and 
Yan, 2009 ; Paraponaris et al., 2015 ). Boundary-spanning activities have 
been undertaken by individuals, teams, and organizations to implement 
processes, strategies, or behaviors in order to improve decision-making 
(Cummings, 2004 ), conflict resolution (Fleming and Waguespack, 
2007 ), learning (Akkerman and Bakker, 2011 ), and innovation (Howells 
et al., 2004 ). To date, a number of researchers have studied the occur -
rence of boundary spanning in a variety of settings (Marrone, 2010 ). 
Mitchell (2006) focused on inter-individual boundary spanning: for 
example, a CIO sharing new knowledge about technology and its impact 
and implementation with his/her IT professionals. Levina and Vaast 
(2008) presented inter-team boundary spanning, which focused on 
outsourced IT teams aligning project plans and costs with captive 
business teams through formal and informal communication channels or 
bespoke systems or websites. Birkinshaw et al. (2017) looked at inter-
organizational boundary spanning between software development 
headquarters and their spatially dispersed subsidiaries to increase the 
effectiveness of the internal and external networks. In addition to these 
settings, a disparate set of boundary-spanning activities has been iden-
tified, aimed at creating information and innovative environments in 
different contexts: for example, in marketing (Ancona and Caldwell, 
1992 ), information systems (IS) (Levina and Vaast, 2005 ; Pawlowski 
and Robey, 2004 ), open source software (Fleming and Waguespack, 
2007 ; O'Mahony and Bechky, 2008 ), a multinational corporation (MNC) 
(Birkinshaw et al., 2017 ), and service activity and service innovation 
(Howells et al., 2004 ). Overall, this body of research has shown that 
boundary-spanning activities facilitate building trust-based relation -
ships, sharing knowledge and expertise, regulating inflows and outflows 
of information, and reconciling contrasting interests to direct joined-up, 
collaborative activities between various actors (Birkinshaw et al., 2017 ; 
Fisk et al., 2010 ; Marrone, 2010 ; Marks et al., 2001 ; Sawyer et al., 2010 ). 
Integral to these boundary-spanning activities is the successful 
management of three primary boundary types, which have been iden-
tified through previous empirical research (Carlile, 2002, 2004 ). First, 
syntactic boundaries are primarily technical and are characterized by a 
mutually understood information processing orientation that is used to 
match incompatible codes, routines, or protocols (Henderson and Clark, H. Karimikia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 185 (2022) 122100
41990 ; Kellogg et al., 2006 ). In these circumstances, boundary-spanning 
functions enable knowledge transfer through the creation and use of a 
common lexicon or set of standard operating procedures (Carlile, 2004 ). 
The syntactic boundary is associated with low levels of novelty and 
complexity, in which boundary spanners share information through 
invoking information artifacts such as repositories, specifications, and 
standards (Adler, 1995 ; Hansen, 1999 ; Leonard-Barton, 1992 ; Nicolini 
et al., 2012 ; Nonaka, 1994 ; Teece, 1998 ). Second, semantic boundaries 
are culturally different and present cognitive and value divergences in 
meanings, assumptions, and contexts between actors that make coor-
dination difficult (Carlile, 2002, 2004 ; Kellogg et al., 2006 ). In order to 
resolve these incompatibilities, boundary-spanning functions negotiate 
these differences through knowledge translation using shared languages 
(Bechky, 2003 ; Roberts and Beamish, 2017 ), common artifacts (Akker -
man and Bakker, 2011 ; Ferraris et al., 2019 ; Gopal and Gosain, 2010 ), 
collective stories, or communities of practice (Boland and Tenkasi, 1995 ; 
Schotter and Beamish, 2011 ). Finally, pragmatic boundaries are regar -
ded as highly political and contingent on the composition of actors in 
terms of power, status, and opaque decision-making structures (Carlile, 
2002, 2004 ; Kellogg et al., 2006 ). The political perspective emphasizes 
differences in interests and actions in a specific context in which 
boundary-spanning functions engage in a process of knowledge trans -
formation, resulting in the creation of new knowledge and practices 
(Tippmann et al., 2017 ). 
Recently, the concept of boundary spanning has received attention 
from researchers in the smart city context (Acuto et al., 2019 ; Ferraris 
et al., 2019 ). Given that a smart city is a multidisciplinary ecosystem 
that encompasses a broad spectrum of actors and a range of beneficiaries 
of smart technologies, a multiplicity of boundaries has emerged that 
makes the coordination of smart project activities challenging. 
2.3.1. Boundary spanning in the smart city 
To facilitate the flow of information, knowledge, and practice 
necessary for smart project implementation, scholars have recom -
mended different types of activities. Broccardo et al. (2019) , for 
instance, suggested a set of political activities and defined it as the rules 
and assignments of specific roles played by certain actors in order to 
align interests with practice. They also identified the importance of 
cultural activities that involve constructing networks with organizations 
and creating a shared motivation and understanding of what has to be 
done, resulting in changes in organizational norms and the development 
of collaborative dynamics between multiple actors. Bergvall-Kåreborn 
et al. (2009) noted the significance of technical activities and the need 
for skilled actors who can contribute to high quality products and system 
acceptance. As previously noted, the smart city literature has also begun 
to highlight the need for interventions that encourage cooperation be-
tween key actors throughout their activities, and, more importantly, that 
promote coherent and integrated engagement with citizens (Harvey 
et al., 2014 ; Hojer and Wangel, 2015 ; Mørk et al., 2012 ). 
From the macro-scale perspective of boundary spanning, some re-
searchers have examined a host in the form of a university or hospital 
with cross-disciplinary composition, whose members legitimize collab -
orations between academic researchers, government organizations, and 
industry and practitioner groups in order to implement projects for 
citizens (Harvey et al., 2014 ; Mørk et al., 2012 ). Some other researchers 
have suggested a need for the establishment of a separate boundary- 
spanning organization to build a collaborative environment for the 
development and implementation of a new technology or service (Van 
Geenhuizen, 2016 ). Acuto et al. (2019) , for example, found that 
boundary-spanning organizations facilitate knowledge exchanges be-
tween local authorities within a city and between cities, which provides 
an information ecosystem underlying policy-making in cities. The 
literature has captured anecdotal, rather than systematically structured 
evidence about these organizational structures to interrogate boundary 
spanning mechanisms. More explicit elaboration is needed to explore 
how collaboration can be made more citizen-centric, less vulnerable to divergent actors' expectations, and more balanced in terms of equality 
and flexibility between actors. The value of enhanced understandings of 
boundary spanning is in identifying how citizens' new ideas can be 
solicited and supported in early visualizations of solutions and projects. 
What should also be considered is how actors interact so that proof of 
concept of these ideas is demonstrated. This also represents a notable 
omission in our understanding of boundary-spanning organizations' 
roles in the formation of new actors' coalitions, conflict resolution, and 
decision-making within and between governmental settings and 
external actors. Further exploration of these roles will also be invaluable 
when testing fine-tuned solutions and experimenting with different 
projects to scale up. An important feature of our study is that we oper-
ationalize boundary spanning at an activity level, based on specific ac-
tivities undertaken by a boundary-spanning organization, to provide 
granular details of how boundary spanning works to build collaboration 
in the smart city context. We drew on Carlile's (2002, 2004) distinctions 
between transferring, translating, and transforming knowledge and the 
definitions of political, cultural, and technical activities in the smart city 
literature to show the roles of a boundary-spanning organization in 
creating collaboration in the smart city context. 
3.Methodology 
City authorities are highly complex settings, and a holistic view of 
organizational, institutional, social, cultural, technical, and political 
entanglements is indispensable to governing smart cities (Meijer and 
Bolívar, 2016 ; Sadowski and Bendor, 2019 ; Yigitcanlar et al., 2019 ). In 
order to elaborate the role of a boundary-spanning organization in 
conceiving a multidimensional view, we have adopted a holistic single 
case study methodology (Hafiz, 2008 ; Yin, 2003 ). A single-case design 
for this study offers a unique opportunity to produce concrete, context- 
dependent knowledge in depth and in its particular type of setting (e.g., 
process, mechanism, or practice) (Flyvbjerg, 2006 ; Small, 2009 ; Yin, 
2013 ). Although case studies are seen to be less rigorous than quanti -
tative, hypothetico-deductive methods, they are of outstanding merit in 
revealing and ruling out alternative explanations that cannot be attained 
by statistical procedures or other means of quantification (Towne and 
Shavelson, 2002 ; Strauss and Corbin, 1990 ). The key advantage of using 
a case study is to “close in” on real-life situations and test views directly 
in relation to phenomena as they unfold in practice (Campbell, 1975 ; 
Flyvbjerg, 2006 ). Doing interviews, making direct observations and 
talking with informants unearth more discoveries and ostensibly allow 
more room for the researchers' subjective and arbitrary judgment than 
statistics applied to large groups (Flyvbjerg, 2006 ). Indeed, the levels of 
freedom and flexibility case studies or other qualitative methods provide 
for researchers give them a great opportunity to cast off preconceived 
notions and theories in order to confirm or challenge a theory, develop 
new concepts, elaborate existing concepts, provide insights into issues 
and clarify complexity (Peshkin, 1993 ; Yin, 1994 ). The next subsections 
elaborate on a research site of this research, including information on 
Dublin's city authorities, the case study of Smart Dublin, case study se-
lection, and data collection, data analysis, and study validity. 
3.1. Research site 
The population of Dublin is 1.43 million inhabitants in 2021, ac-
counting for 28.5 % of the total population of Ireland, and set to be 1.8 
million by 2036. While Dublin is considered a very large city in Europe 
(F1,000,000) (Kylili and Fokaides, 2015 ), falling in the same category 
with 41 European cities (Stratigea et al., 2017 ), it is a medium-sized city 
globally (F1,000,000 and D5,000,000) (Berrone and Ricart, 2020 ). 
Dublin city's governing area is administered by four LAs, covering an 
area of 920.66 km2 (Central Statistics Office (CSO), 2016 ). These four 
LAs are made up of Dublin City Council, n.d. (DCC) at the center, Dún 
Laoghaire-Rathdown County Council and South Dublin County Council, 
to the south and west, and Fingal County Council to the north (see H. Karimikia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 185 (2022) 122100
5Fig. 1). Each LA has its own executive function alongside their corporate 
functions: corporate services, digital strategy, IT, and other technical 
departments such as traffic management. Dublin's economic activity 
accounts for 50 % of Ireland's gross value added and the city is ranked as 
Europe's third most attractive city for foreign direct investment of smart 
city enterprises, hosting the world's top technology companies (Dublin 
Chamber of Commerce, n.d.). Anthopoulos (2017) stated that cities can 
be classified for the types of services they offer in addition to their 
population and density, their impact (local and global cities), and their 
development stage (new and existing cities). Dublin, as a local and 
existing city, was ranked as 33rd smartest city among 174 cities in the 
world in 2019, where London and New York ranked in first and second 
positions respectively. Dublin performed well in offering services in the 
area of the economy, ranking 16th, whereas it failed in the areas of 
human capital and urban planning, ranking 103rd and 106th (Berrone 
and Ricart, 2020 ) (see Fig. 1). 
In terms of generalizability, it is worth noting that like the US model, 
Irish cities follow the council-manager form. The CEO of the council is a 
professional manager, with permanent staff, responsible for imple -
menting policy. Unlike the US model, an Irish CEO is not appointed by 
the council; he or she is appointed by the central government (Maccani 
et al., 2020 ). Dublin in Ireland is an historically, politically, economi -
cally, and culturally contingent place and as such, the services and 
products it produces with other actors are created in more fragmented 
and piecemeal ways due to critical barriers, as discussed earlier (Car-
dullo and Kitchin, 2019 ). Dublin has been experiencing some critical 
issues that have impeded collaboration in its smart city project (see 
Table 1) (Cardullo and Kitchin, 2019 ; Coletta et al., 2019 ; Kitchin, 2015 ). 
Before the establishment of a mediating organization called Smart 
Dublin in 2016, each local authority's technical departments worked 
independently of each other, which made it very unlikely that infor-
mation, knowledge, and technical expertise would be shared across local 
authority boundaries. This was the case not only across local authorities, 
but also within them. Best practices within a local authority were often 
effectively siloed, meaning that very little knowledge sharing could 
occur between internal technical functions. As a result of the fragmented 
internal structures and weak leadership, discrete smart city initiatives 
developed in a piecemeal fashion and could not meet project goals 
(Cardullo and Kitchin, 2019 ; Mu et al., 2022 ). In addition, the LAs had 
separately invested in, procured, and operated a large number of smart 
city technologies, such as open data portals and systems, through part-
nerships with various SMEs, IT companies, and start-ups. Once these 
relationships began to develop, LAs focused on cultivating external ac-
tors with disparate approaches, often leading to disjointed and ineffi -
cient models (Coletta et al., 2019 ). As a result of this tendency, citizens 
were less empowered to participate in opportunities to express their 
preferences regarding smart city policies, initiatives, and infrastructure 
components and services (Kitchin, 2016 ). 
To resolve these issues, Smart Dublin was initiated by the four LAs as 
a mechanism through which new and experimental forms of collabo -
ration could be developed. The intervention was intended to create new 
technical and social capacities whereby the city could provide better 
services, promote innovative solutions, and improve economic activity. 
As such, Smart Dublin intended to play a more proactive role as a de-
cision maker for the city in providing a better degree of alignment be-
tween technology development and social needs. Smart Dublin's efforts 
were aimed at acquiring external expertise and aligning it with the city 
administration and policies, so as to identify urban problems and 
effectively trial new technologies and projects. 
3.1.1. Smart Dublin 
Smart Dublin, the organization for the management and develop -
ment of the city's smart initiatives, markets its activities under the 
banner “Open, Engaged, and Connected ”, which valorizes collaborative 
frameworks, open innovation, and transparent governance (DCC, n.d.). 
Smart Dublin has a hybrid structure that links the four LAs with external 
actors and various stakeholders. Its goals are to promote economic 
development through open data, open government, and open innova -
tion, which require connected networks, infrastructure, and city-related 
Population Governing area Fig. 1.Geographical boundaries of LAs and rankings of Dublin, London, and New York based on nine dimensions.  
Table 1 
Dublin's smart city critical issues.  
A piecemeal approach to innovation and a lack of shared agenda and master plans 
associated with mission and goals. 
An absence of joined-up thinking within and between local authority technical 
activities. 
The passive role of the IT departments of local authorities in implementing ICT 
infrastructure and initiatives. 
Weak governance structures and an absence of directed leadership. 
An entrepreneurial focus in governance approaches, which prioritizes business 
innovation and deprioritizes citizen-centric initiatives. 
A staid cultural mindset with respect to procurement, experimentation, and 
operations. 
Political and regulatory barriers for project implementation.  H. Karimikia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 185 (2022) 122100
6initiatives. Smart Dublin embodies these objectives by engaging with 
entrepreneurs, multinationals, indigenous startups, and citizens to 
collectively trial new technologies and projects (Coletta et al., 2019). Its 
organizational structure consists of four chief executives (one from each 
local authority), a regional steering committee, an advisory network, the 
Smart Dublin regional group, and local working groups. The steering 
committee includes two members of staff from each LA, one with a 
technical background and the other being service- or enterprise-focused, 
and a representative of Maynooth University. The steering committee is 
chaired by one of the LA CEOs. The advisory network comprises 40 
stakeholders from industry, government, civil society, and academia. 
Smart Dublin has run various programs that provide innovative solu-
tions to urban challenges such as mobility, environment, energy, waste, 
and emergency management. Table B1 in Appendix B provides a sum-
mary of some projects and programs Smart Dublin is leading with the 
LAs. 
3.1.2. Case study selection 
The choice of the Smart Dublin case is consistent with Stake's (2013) 
selection criterion: relevance (to the phenomenon of interest), diversity 
(in context), and accessibility (to the researchers). First, these issues may 
not be Dublin-specific, but in reality, may be relevant to all smart cities, 
since other cities are similarly characterized by complex systems of ac-
tors and stakeholders, technologies, and institutions through which new 
knowledge, innovation, and policies are created (Angelidou, 2014; 
Townsend, 2013; Yigitcanlar et al., 2019). These issues reflect genuine 
tensions in urban governance, as cities seek to transform themselves to 
benefit from the features of digital technology. Second, the primary 
criterion for selecting Smart Dublin as a case study is its potential to 
provide a rich and contextualized foundation for understanding the 
boundary-spanning activities deployed by an organization, which, as we 
shall see, achieved at least partial success in transforming the practice 
and culture of governance in the city. Also, the case supports a theo-
retically relevant organizational context for studying collective actions 
and behaviors that reveal the roles of a boundary-spanning organization 
in a multidisciplinary and multisectoral context. Third, access to the case 
data and organizations is made easier by a long-term relationship be-
tween Smart Dublin and the authors, stemming from collaboration on 
earlier research projects. 
3.2. Data collection 
Semi-structured interviews were identified as the primary data 
collection method for this study and twenty-five interviews were con-
ducted. Alongside the interviews, secondary data, such as reports, in-
ternal documents, presentations, and websites, were also collected. 
Thirteen of the twenty-five interviewees worked in Smart Dublin and 
their perspectives were solicited several times to maximize the richness 
and complexity of the data. Respondents were asked to describe a va-
riety of everyday activities, including how they communicated and 
shared information with other actors. They were also asked about their engagement in various projects, the challenges encountered, and any 
remediating strategies they deployed to negotiate these challenges. To 
facilitate this process, a list of topics from the smart city and boundary- 
spanning literature was created and used to gather the participants' 
perspectives (see Appendix A). Data collection stopped when theoretical 
saturation was reached. Two authors of this paper interacted with a 
number of key Smart Dublin employees (technical and non-technical 
professionals) for over a year between March 2019 and October 2020, 
which meant the research was kept up to date on their roles in new 
projects. We also interviewed their peers working in the space who were 
aware of project-related activities and challenges that involved Smart 
Dublin. They included six digital strategy managers or IT managers from 
the LAs, four CEOs or managers from IT companies, and two professors 
from research institutes and universities. Table 2 provides a summary of 
the participants by job title, type of organization, and average of inter-
view duration. 
3.3. Data analysis 
Understanding the roles and activities undertaken by a boundary- 
spanning organization to secure collaboration requires the develop -
ment of a taxonomy to organize them. We followed the taxonomy 
development method of Nickerson et al. (2013), describing the use of the 
iterative process that proceeds from the examination of empirical data 
towards the development of theoretical interpretations. As we had a 
significant amount of data from twenty-five transcribed interviews 
alongside specific knowledge of the boundary spanning domain, an 
empirical-to-conceptual approach was suggested following several steps 
for analyzing the data through established coding techniques. First, to 
avoid the situation of naïve empiricism (Aldenderfer and Blashfield, 
1984), we identified a meta-characteristic based on the purpose of the 
taxonomy by looking into the perspectives of various participants 
working in and with Smart Dublin. At the same time, we identified a set 
of dimensions (cultural, political, and technical boundaries) that we 
wished to classify through the review of the literature. Drawing on the 
relevant body of boundary spanning theory together with prior findings 
discussed across both boundary spanning and smart city literatures as a 
resource, this approach provides a deep insight into the emergence of 
the results. Next, we acknowledged the common characteristics of sub-
dimensions to ensure the internal consistency of the meta-characteristic. 
This led to a set of subdimensions from various activities undertaken by 
Smart Dublin and the different experiences of those with whom the 
organization interacted. 
Once the set of characteristics of subdimensions had been identified, 
we grouped them into initial dimensions of the taxonomy so that each 
dimension included characteristics that were mutually exclusive and 
collectively exhaustive (Nickerson et al., 2013). According to Bailey 
(1984), p.32) this grouping involves creating “conceptual labels”; the 
results of our taxonomy development process led to the identification of 
ten first- and second-order categories that were aggregated across four 
overarching dimensions, representing in total our conceptual framework 
Table 2 
Participants by job title, expertise, experience, type of organization, and average of interview duration.  
Job title Expertise Experience Type of organization Average of 
interview 
duration 
13 Technical and non- 
Technical Professionals Information Systems, Program & Project Management, Software Development, 
Computing, Citizen & Community Engagement, Innovation, Communication. From 2 to 12 
years Smart Dublin 80 min 
6 Digital Strategy 
Managers or IT 
Managers Information Systems, Information Technology, Statistics, Digital Program/ 
Strategy Development, Information Services Research & Development, 
Electronic Engineering. From 5 to 24 
years DCC, Dún Laoghaire and 
Fingal County Councils 70 min 
4 CEOs or IT Managers of 
IT Companies ICT Design & Implementation, Software Development Above 20 
years IT companies 60 min 
2 Professors Planning & Environmental Policy, Electronic Engineering. Above 10 
years Research Institutes and 
Universities 60 min  H. Karimikia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 185 (2022) 122100
7(see Fig. C1 in Appendix C). Finally, we iteratively used both subjective 
and objective ending conditions as markers to ensure uniqueness and 
avoid redundancy among characteristics of subdimensions. This itera-
tive process was carried out by the first and second co-authors and then 
results were jointly discussed and revised. 
3.4. Validity of THE study 
To ensure the case study's trustworthiness, considerations must be 
given to construct validity, internal validity, and external validity 
(Tellis, 1997 ; Yin, 2013 ). Construct and internal validity are improved 
through data and investigator triangulation (Golafshani, 2003 ; Johnson, 
1997 ; Yin, 2009 ). This study availed of a range of data sources in order 
to identify correct operational measures for organizational boundary 
spanning (see Section 3.2). Moreover, validation efforts were conducted 
with the involvement of several investigators (e.g., the chair and pro-
gram manager of Smart Dublin) as well as peer researchers' interpreta -
tion of the data at different times and locations. The concern over 
internal validity extends to the broader problem of researcher inferences 
in determining cause-and-effect relationships (Yin, 2013 ). Even though 
we made use of the heterogeneous perspective of several IT and aca-
demic participants (see Table 2), we maintained the premise that the 
procedure and outcomes are not the product of a heteronomous 
approach but the considered “best try” of a situated, autonomous team 
(Blair, 2015 ). External validity relates to the generalizability of the 
outcomes from an individual case in which more discoveries stem from 
intense observations than statistics applied to large groups (Eisenhardt, 
1989 ; Miles and Huberman, 1984 ; Yin, 1994 ). From Tsang and Williams' 
(2012) standpoint of generalizability (cross-population, temporal, 
contextual), concerns about limited external validity were traded off 
against the opportunity to gain deep insight into a poorly documented 
phenomenon about a mediating organization (see Sections 3.1.1 and 
3.2) during various smart project implementation stages (see Appendix 
B) in the specificities of the Irish context (see Section 3.1). 
4.Findings 
A conceptual framework (see Fig. 2) representing a taxonomy of the 
four activities of boundary-spanning organizations – social, technical, 
cultural, and political work – was developed from the iterative data 
analysis processes. The framework shows the differences in the actors 
that were involved in each activity. The political roles of boundary 
spanning involve aligning the interests of various actors, including in-
ternal non-technical and technical departments, IT companies, univer -
sities, and citizens, to decide how their goals can be jointly attained 
within and across their organizations. The cultural roles include the integration of interpretations and cognitions of some actors, namely the 
technical departments, IT companies, and universities. The technical 
role of boundary spanning can be observed when boundary-spanning 
organizations familiarize themselves with an emerging technology and 
its implementation, employing a variety of artifacts to promote knowl -
edge flow throughout the entire network. The social role of boundary 
spanning indicates the different methods of engaging with citizens and 
communities. 
As the level of familiarity and understanding across actors varies, the 
boundary-spanning organization synthesizes the fluctuating manifesta -
tions of transferring, translating, and transforming processes. In the 
following subsections, we elaborate on the four roles that inductively 
emerged from the activities carried out by Smart Dublin. It is worth 
noting here that each of the following categories have interdependent 
overlaps, and work carried out by Smart Dublin in these categories may 
occur at the same time and in the same space. These categories are not 
fixed, separate entities that contribute to boundary-spanning activity 
but rather are reciprocal activities that each feed into and act upon the 
other. The distinction made through this categorization is done so to 
facilitate understanding and track movement across the categories only. 
4.1. Political work 
A boundary-spanning organization's political role encompasses 
integrating the knowledge of local authorities with new policies and 
standards and adopting confrontational behaviors to synchronize 
divergent interests between all kinds of actors. The data analysis un-
covered two specific political work activities: challenging/interpreting 
regulations and reconfiguring the balance control (see Fig. C1 in Ap-
pendix C). 
4.1.1. Challenging/interpreting regulations 
This activity involved raising local authorities' awareness about 
regulatory requirements and the importance of updating policies and 
procedures to facilitate the development of smart projects. For example, 
the digital strategy departments of the local authorities and IT com-
panies had encountered several challenges with regard to their Electric 
Vehicle (EV) charging project and their 5G project (see Table B1 in 
Appendix B). These included how electric cars should be priced and 
licensed and how powering and metering issues should be addressed in 
relation to smart devices installed on city infrastructure. 
“In bye-laws, we found Local Authorities did not distinguish between 
electric cars or internal combustion engines, firstly. Secondly, there is no 
transparency in terms of the pricing and the licensing, which I think is 
really bad…”. 
(Smart Dublin) 
In such cases, Smart Dublin negotiated issues with local authorities 
and informed them of the need to replace legacy policies and practices to 
ensure compliance with EU and national regulatory obligations and best 
practice guidelines. Examples of changes made include ensuring that IT 
companies have appropriate and fair access to city infrastructure and 
data, and ensuring that environmental sustainability and regulatory 
standards are emphasized in project initiation plans to avoid increased 
costs related to retroactive implementation. As part of this process, 
Smart Dublin attended multiple meetings with IT companies to focus 
their attention on legal issues (e.g., data protection liability, due dili-
gence practices, and intellectual ownership of data and city assets) and 
human rights principles enshrined in legislation (e.g., privacy and se-
curity of citizens). For example, Smart Dublin stated: 
“…So that conversation needs to happen, hopefully we will work it out… 
through the strategic policy committee, the environmental committee, and 
the local councilors … there is always a memorandum of understanding 
(MOU) with details of the project and a project scoping document and 
then the Data Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA) ”. 
Fig. 2.Taxonomy of the activities carried out by a boundary-spanning orga-
nization. 
Note: the text in italics in the boxes above refers to the entities involved in 
each activity. H. Karimikia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 185 (2022) 122100
8(Smart Dublin) 
4.1.2. Reconfiguring the balance control 
The most important activity undertaken by Smart Dublin was less-
ening the dominance of the local authorities through confrontational 
behaviors as a directive strategy approach. Their role included balancing 
everyday decisions and directing project activities in a way that did not 
explicitly or implicitly favor the local authorities, while facilitating 
meaningful citizen participation. For example, when the internal tech-
nical departments of a local authority became insistent on persisting 
with the application of their formal policy parameters, Smart Dublin 
itself initiated a project with a university to install Internet of Things 
(IoT) sensors and collect practical data for further measures. 
“The guys (citizens) expressed a concern on air quality, they expressed a 
concern to DCC…The councilors can't until they have real data to prove 
there remains or isn't a concern. So, we are using the Horizon 2020 
project with UCD to install new sensors and to validate the concerns, 
which we do in a lot of cases”. 
(Smart Dublin) 
Similar behaviors took place to restrain the narrative dominance of 
national and/or international IT companies. Smart Dublin over-
whelmingly participated in most of these types of actions, for example to 
increase the likelihood that LAs would gain added value from services by 
designing compatible business models that reflected their priorities and 
goals. 
“The local authority essentially holds the balance of control in where 
these assets can go; they have to determine, we need to explain to them (IT 
companies) that small cells are deployed and evenly distributed across the 
city so that we don't enhance the digital divides…”. 
(Smart Dublin) 
At a conceptual level, these two activities are acknowledged in 
different contexts, such as software development or IS contexts (Bir-
kinshaw et al., 2017; O'Mahony and Bechky, 2008; Pawlowski and 
Robey, 2004). We could not find prior studies in the smart city literature 
that comprehensively elaborated on such activities. There are, of course, 
some debates about the role of living labs in managing the decision- 
making power of large actors (Guldemond and Van Geenhuizen, 2012; 
Van Geenhuizen, 2016) or facilitating the production of knowledge for 
policy (Acuto et al., 2019), for example, around data assemblages 
(Kitchin, 2014). Using Carlile's (2002, 2004) point of view, reconfigur -
ing the balance control emphasizes balancing different interests be-
tween political entities, including technical and non-technical 
departments, and IT firms, through establishing new practices embark -
ing on priorities, such as the influence of citizens, environmental issues, 
or social inclusion and equality. It is also followed by translating 
knowledge to engender a shared language among stakeholders, so as to 
negotiate and challenge obsolete routines and prior false assumptions. 
4.2. Cultural work 
The cultural role of the boundary-spanning organization involved 
creating an agile environment for actors to become acquainted with 
each other's knowledge and expertise and consequently elaborate jointly 
on new proposals and development of smart city projects. In such cases, 
we observed that Smart Dublin proactively engaged with the internal 
technical departments of some LAs to exchange information and develop 
relationships of reciprocity. Smart Dublin developed a conflict-solving 
capacity to guide actors, including the four local authorities, IT com-
panies, and universities, towards a common understanding of each 
party's concerns and priorities. Based on our analysis, we identified 
three activities in the cultural sphere: ecosystem creation, expectation 
alignment, and business process innovation (see Fig. C1 in Appendix C). 4.2.1. Ecosystem creation 
Smart Dublin added value by making new relationships, maintaining 
existing connections, and evaluating external actors based on their 
cognitive and historical performances in specific fields. Smart Dublin 
built an interactive ecosystem promoting communication between the 
internal technical functions of different LAs and connected them to 
external worldviews and vice versa. 
“…We asked them to connect us with internal stakeholders within the city 
councils so there are planners, architects, and engineers 25 years working 
in the city council who are going to be able to use this platform to 
streamline their effort”. 
(IT Company Manager) 
The data showed that different strategies were applied to create such 
linkages. Smart Dublin organized physical events where all the central 
actors (LAs, IT companies, and universities) were assembled. They also 
adopted a stimulative approach by, for example, expending social media 
branding resources on specific projects to promote the benefits gained 
by IT companies that were already involved so as to motivate other IT 
companies to become part of the network. 
“Look what we can do through Smart Dublin, we organize networking 
events, hackathons, pitch days, we bring the companies together, when 
there are international events …One of the developers got involved, then 
the others saw that logo up there and said ‘why are they up there?’”. 
(Smart Dublin) 
Besides organizing such events, Smart Dublin also acted as a catalyst 
by conducting market soundings to attract national/international IT 
service providers and local start-ups. For example, they conducted an 
evaluation process to systematically select external organizations, veri-
fying the compatibility between the actors' composition and the con-
tributions they claimed to have the capacity to make. 
“I have the questions in here that I am pretty sure that I asked them (IT 
companies). Would you like to be part of it? What would you like to get 
out of it? Could you commit time or money etc.?”. 
(Smart Dublin) 
Smart Dublin also maintained connections through regular meetings 
with universities, well-known and multinational IT companies, such as 
Facebook, Google, and Airbnb, and small to medium IT enterprises. 
These activities allowed them to expand the broader network to those 
that had funds and resources, so that these assets could be leveraged 
when brokering relationships with those that had innovative ideas and 
solutions. Efforts to connect actors have led to fruitful projects and data 
analytics platforms, resulting in changes in the development of city ar-
chitectures, the implementation of new infrastructure, new perspectives 
on tourism patterns, and the exploration of innovative opportunities 
with citizens on planning proposals and designing aspects (for example, 
see the 3D Docklands Planning Model in Appendix B). 
“Because I work in that kind of general space, the guys in Hibernia came 
to me and asked me, did I know anybody who does this kind of scooter 
parking? Which I do know because I do work in this space. So, I act as 
‘you guys should have a chat because you have the scooter parking so-
lution and you guys need it’…”. 
(Smart Dublin) 
4.2.2. Expectation alignment 
The second aspect of cultural work is Smart Dublin's effort to mini-
mize asymmetric knowledge, fostering mutual understanding among 
technical departments of local authorities and IT companies. On multi -
ple occasions, since actors had varying mindsets and goals for smart 
projects, Smart Dublin spent considerable time and effort identifying 
potential sources of conflict and playing a persuasive role in reconciling 
differences through translating across boundaries. This role was one of H. Karimikia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 185 (2022) 122100
9Smart Dublin's main activities, individually meeting IT companies on 
behalf of LAs' technical departments or meeting business owners/man -
agers to resolve their misinterpretations of how a new technology would 
operate in their context and how technology use would benefit their 
everyday business functions. For example, Smart Dublin held several 
informal and formal meetings about adopting 5G between a building 
manager and an IT manager to stimulate conversations about using the 
building as a testbed for trialing 5G connectivity and data sharing ac-
tivities. In this incident, the business manager was incorrectly persuaded 
by the insistence of the IT professionals that certain functionalities 
existed within 5G. To confront the issue, Smart Dublin envisioned the 
possible benefits for both groups and created a convergent outcome. 
They emphasized benefits for the business such as enhancing its repu-
tation as the first smart building in Dublin equipped with 5G, and for IT 
companies, the opportunity to conduct a free trial culminating in the 
collection of empirical evidence on how 5G could travel through certain 
blackspots. In the same project, the role of Smart Dublin was to interpret 
some technological concepts such as connectivity, while also sell the 
benefits of open innovation to internal technical departments (e.g., the 
traffic department). 
“We realized what an IT firm were saying was false promises and false 
expectations. It is because their head is very technical, so they just think ‘I 
want to get this into this building’, so they make promises based on that… 
So, if I wasn't there, what the IT guys would be also saying to the traffic 
department would bamboozle them”. 
(Smart Dublin) 
The lack of coordination and limited expertise within the four local 
authorities resulted in a fluctuating pace of understanding of each 
other's functions, operations, and strategies. It was noticeable that Smart 
Dublin tended to situate the task of developing smart projects and digital 
strategies among the digital strategy departments of the local 
authorities. 
“When you are all doing it, can we all sit down at the table and talk about 
a coordinated approach? How do we go with tendering it? What goes into 
a tender? Instead of having four different systems in place…”. 
(Smart Dublin) 
4.2.3. Business process innovation 
The third activity was the creation of an innovative approach to 
project valuation and portfolio management. This work involved Smart 
Dublin playing an entrepreneurial role in fully engaging with the in-
ternal technical functions of DCC, aligning them with citizens' key issues 
and ideas, as well as with ongoing projects, and encouraging them to 
express innovative ideas and solutions. Such efforts also sought to 
involve internal technical departments in developing solutions with 
external partners in the commercial phases. Indeed, Smart Dublin 
encouraged employees and managers to adapt to changing requirements 
and actively take part in the feasibility process of solutions, making 
DCC's functions and operations more efficient, accessible, and respon -
sive. These efforts required a certain amount of translation of informa -
tion through internal publications, workshops, or social media channels. 
“Recently we organized an internal engagement event to demonstrate 
what we are doing to develop some projects that smart city teams are 
working on for DCC, but also giving staff an opportunity to develop their 
ideas, so these staff ideas that we got through staff engagement even…”. 
(Smart Dublin) 
At a conceptual level, these three activities involve translating 
knowledge across different boundaries by a mediating organization and 
some transformation when shifting mindsets towards innovation (Car-
lile, 2002, 2004). This is a primary role played by mediating organiza -
tions to build relationships with external actors and settle conflicts 
among them (Acuto et al., 2019; Aldrich and Herker, 1977; Levina and Vaast, 2005, 2008; Paraponaris et al., 2015; Ranga and Etzkowitz, 2013; 
Tushman, 1977). Examples are technology transfer centers acting as 
intermediaries to enable industry-university links (Comacchio et al., 
2012) or knowledge brokers in conflict resolution between open-source 
members (Fleming and Waguespack, 2007). Regarding business process 
innovation, the literature reflects innovation intermediaries, e.g., 
knowledge intensive service firms (KIBS) (Howells et al., 2004), 
engaging in cognitive activities to bring, for example, citizens and the 
university into closer alignment (Harvey et al., 2014). 
4.3. Technical work 
The technical role of a boundary-spanning organization could be 
seen in activities that required multiple technical specialties and skills in 
the various phases of developing smart projects and provided appro -
priate communication channels to facilitate information and knowledge 
flows within local authorities' organizations and across external actors. 
Based on our analysis, two roles emerged out of the technical work: 
acquiring technical expertise and information management (see Fig. C1 
in Appendix C). 
4.3.1. Acquiring technical expertise 
This involved a technical scout from Smart Dublin explaining a given 
technology and its implementation in order to coordinate the work of 
technologists and non-technical actors. Surprisingly, we noted that 
employees working for Smart Dublin had a sophisticated level of insight 
into IoT installation, deployment network models (e.g., neutral hosting 
for 5G adoption), new business models, operations of city smart assets 
(metering & billing), data analysis, system design, and so on. They ac-
quired these complementary technological competencies through close 
relationships with universities and actively participated in interna -
tional/national networks such as conferences, seminars, and workshops. 
“I was required to develop a level of technical expertise that allowed me to 
have conversations with the technologists…”. 
(Smart Dublin) 
4.3.2. Information management 
This is a supplementary role to ensure the accomplishment of social, 
cultural, and political activities. Smart Dublin established the architec -
ture to coordinate information and knowledge within and between ac-
tors' organizations. These activities were split across a variety of 
boundary objects,1 informal/formal meetings, and technical workshops 
to harmonize knowledge. The boundary objects included presentations, 
knowledge management systems, shared Google Drive folders, social 
media (e.g., Facebook), Intranet pages, use cases, newsletters, and 
emails. The different actors were partially or fully engaged in preparing 
the material and content, such as reports, technical specifications, or 
market evaluation documents. They had regular meetings to exchange 
information with different internal technical departments, IoT teams, 
research institutes, and large/medium/small-sized IT companies (such 
as Google). 
“Intranet (Dubnet), we just post like announcements there for the internal 
management…We have internal newsletters and we are publishing articles 
there…I have a meeting at the Docklands IoT network, they are all fairly 
important people”. 
1 Boundary objects refer to a broad range of artifacts that are socially 
recognized and legible templates, established by boundary spanners to 
construct shared meanings across diverse communities in order to facilitate 
cross-boundary coordination practices (Kellogg et al., 2006). For example, 
boundary spanners employ technological artifacts (e.g., websites) (Levina and 
Vaast, 2005), physical objects (e.g., manuals or guides) (Roberts and Beamish, 
2017), or shared systems (Ferraris et al., 2019) to enable the distribution and 
application of domain-specific knowledge among actors. H. Karimikia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 185 (2022) 122100
10(Smart Dublin) 
For example, an internal knowledge management system was 
developed, and Google Drive was used to keep everyone abreast of 
project developments and also to control accessibility for internal/ 
external actors. 
“Now, it is Trello as project and portfolio management system. So, you 
will see that Dún Laoghaire have projects, Fingal have projects, our cal-
endar which cuts across all the boards, all the SBIRs, these are South 
Dublin…”. 
(Smart Dublin) 
To integrate the use of these objects into the activity of transferring 
and translating knowledge (Carlile, 2002, 2004), Smart Dublin used 
discretionary behaviors that varied based on their experience with the 
actors, as well as the actors' expertise. 
4.4. Social work 
The social role involved interacting with citizens and communities to 
facilitate their participation with central actors and include them in the 
smart city ecosystem underpinning policy-making for the city. Using a 
range of pre-existing networks as well as novel stakeholder engagement 
approaches, a broad cohort of citizens was canvassed for their opinions 
and ideas for project development. Based on our analysis, Smart Dublin 
undertook social roles in three areas: social inclusion, mutual learning, 
and engagement methodology (see Fig. C1 in Appendix C). 
4.4.1. Social inclusion 
This activity involved Smart Dublin facilitating and ensuring the 
participation of citizens in developing digital strategies and innovation 
processes. These participants varied in terms of their age, educational 
attainment, technical knowledge, and physical health profiles. Various 
community groups, including non-profit organizations, schools, local 
history groups, and shopping and leisure center users were also 
approached to identify city problems and solutions. 
“In Fingal, we knew who to go to, and we did the workshop design and all 
that kind of stuff. We got an older action group, we got an environmental 
group, we got the elected members, we got the chamber, we got a youth 
group… We did the people with disabilities…”. 
(Smart Dublin) 
4.4.2. Mutual learning 
The second activity of social work was Smart Dublin's efforts to in-
crease the awareness of citizens about potential smart projects and their 
impact on the quality of their lives. In this sphere, citizens were invited 
to participate and share their points of view and solutions for improving 
current and future city services. Citizens were educated about a given 
technology and its utilization and familiarized with city policies and 
services rolled out by their local authorities. For example, Smart Dublin 
taught elderly people what data meant in a specific field and how sys-
tems and applications were fed with data. Consequently, they qualita -
tively and quantitatively integrated citizens' ideas and solutions into 
meaningful information and knowledge to be shared with central actors. 
“It was really nice to be able to reach out to people and community centers 
and just get the feedback and then kind of inform them about what smart 
city is about, and then because of that project we were able to link up with 
councilors …We really show that the technology and the new solutions 
can improve the life of people or improve communities…”. 
(Smart Dublin) 4.4.3. Engagement methodology 
The last activity was Smart Dublin's most important role in building 
trust and authentically cultivating citizen participation. Smart Dublin 
actualized the implementation of the social inclusion and mutual 
learning roles through several engagement methodology activities: 
children's competitions, a simulation of how the city might operate 
within the Smart framework, critical thinking and voting workshops, 
outdoor arts-based activities, and surveys. First, they approached citi-
zens through their personal contacts or the LAs' public participation 
networks (PPNs). In addition, Smart Dublin had face-to-face communi -
cation and virtual contact with citizens and communities through social 
media such as Facebook and Twitter. Second, citizens were assigned to 
hypothetical roles as technologists or decision makers to provide their 
feedback on the technical, political, and economic feasibility of various 
projects (e.g., design features of applications or allocation of project 
budgets). Third, Smart Dublin focused people's minds on smart city 
operations and services using different types of technologies (e.g., 
augmented reality/virtual reality applications or iPads). 
“We had a coloring competition for children where they could draw 
Fingal in the year 2100 and we were surveying parents while the kids were 
drawing…We are trying to use digital strategies such as augmented re-
ality/virtual reality applications that help citizens understand the impact 
of developments in real time and using just their phones or iPads…”. 
(Smart Dublin) 
At a conceptual level, using Carlile's (2002, 2004) language, these 
three activities involve translating and transformation knowledge across 
different groups of citizens (Carlile, 2002, 2004). We found a limited 
number of studies that particularly explore the role of mediating struc-
tures in involving and selecting user-groups in collaborative learning or 
co-creation activities for implementing ICT infrastructure (Van Geen -
huizen, 2016; Bergvall-Kåreborn et al., 2009). 
4.5. Integrating social, technical, cultural, and political work 
Our findings indicate that a combination of Smart Dublin's political, 
cultural, and technical activities established smart collaborative mech -
anisms, including internal and external collaboration and citizen 
participation (see Fig. C2 in Appendix C). Building on the boundary- 
spanning taxonomy, we elaborate upon the applicability of these ac-
tivities that can be used in tandem and also sequentially to resolve the 
city's critical issues (see Section 3.1), as well as issues related to smart 
collaboration (see Section 2.1). 
4.5.1. Internal collaboration 
Internal collaboration cannot be effective if the internal technical 
departments of municipal governments have no common motivation 
and understanding of each other's priorities. This can negatively impact 
the development of new initiatives (Alawadhi et al., 2012; Alhusban, 
2015a, 2015b; Mills et al., 2021). Smart Dublin's provision of resources, 
such as manpower and expertise, demonstrated the cultural aspect of 
their functionality to achieve synergy between the technical de-
partments of the four LAs. For digital strategy development, the inclu -
sion of all digital strategy departments was sought, and these contacts 
were kept abreast of best practices taking place in other LAs. Smart 
Dublin also acted in a quasi-technological advisory and functional role 
to compensate for the lack of IT skills and expertise within internal IT 
departments in order to facilitate the process of project implementation. 
“What we are starting to see now is, where it makes sense, the four local 
authorities are coming together to jointly work on a project… It is that H. Karimikia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 185 (2022) 122100
11kind of raising awareness and knowledge transfer across the four local 
authorities”. 
(IT Manager of a LA) 
Through the political work of Smart Dublin, corporate functions and 
higher-level IT managers of the LAs were apprised of updated institu -
tional regulations, legacy policies were integrated with emerging EU and 
national standards, and data protection and open data principles were 
embedded in the early stages of project planning. 
“To be honest, Smart Dublin has been very proactive to change the whole 
narrative at government level and it has changed the whole narrative at 
policy level…”. 
(Digital Manager of a LA) 
It appears that Smart Dublin's entrepreneurial role could improve 
coordination among internal IT professionals to locate a bottom-up 
governance approach. Researchers' critiques of top-down city planning 
show how cities failed to understand “close-grained diversity” – all the 
little plans from citizens and local technical staff within a city that alone 
can generate the diversity necessary for successful bottom-up city 
planning (Barrutia et al., 2022; Myeong et al., 2020; Townsend, 2013). 
In such cases, the IT departments of the LAs became aware of ongoing 
projects and their implementation processes, and they were engaged in 
innovation processes, creating solutions in an attempt to include citi-
zens' ideas. 
“They do consultations with our internal staff to make contact with the 
community, and they share citizens' key issues and then ask how come 
you line up with companies that come to us in terms of developing pro-
jects? …”. 
(IT Manager of a LA) 
The level of internal collaboration varied from one LA to another, 
and the Smart Dublin mechanism did not seem to create an equilibrium 
between all LAs in terms of frequency of communication and sharing 
knowledge and resources. With DCC employees working in Smart 
Dublin, the relationship between Smart Dublin and DCC is more intense 
and deeper than between Smart Dublin and other LAs. This has meant 
that the DCC has contributed more towards developing projects and city 
services. 
“…So, this collaboration could be really a lot better served if we had a 
Smart Dublin team in there… we would maybe see, and it is probably just 
for the close proximity with Smart Dublin and DCC, that they get a lot 
from the collaboration because they are sitting in the same room…”. 
(Digital Strategy Manager of a LA) 
4.5.2. External collaboration 
Researchers have revealed that collaborative capacity to manage 
information exchange and communication, legislation and policies, and 
misinterpretations across jurisdictional, organizational, and academic 
boundaries is key to the achievement of smart city objectives (Alhusban, 
2015a, 2015b; Barrutia et al., 2022; Ruhlandt, 2018; Pardo et al., 2010). 
Smart Dublin is currently assembling a broad spectrum of subject matter 
experts to overcome regulatory, ethical, and legal issues. Smart Dublin 
faces challenges associated with the heterogeneous ideologies and in-
terests of actors in real-world smart city implementations. As a neutral 
and trusted party in the negotiations whose brief was to resolve conflicts 
caused by the misinterpretations of the lead actors, the cultural work of 
Smart Dublin achieved resolution where previously intransigent parties 
might not have continued the dialogue. The political work of Smart 
Dublin involved being the driver of activities for navigating and managing the cohesion of diverse agendas into desired outcomes in the 
public interest. The political work foregrounded regulatory, best prac-
tice ethical standards and the governance principles of transparency and 
accountability (e.g., data protection and environmental laws) during 
project planning and implementation with IT companies. 
“… They (Smart Dublin) will definitely be in the design, what are we 
trying to achieve, what is the value map amongst those stakeholders? 
What is the data and how will it flow? Then something gets created to 
operationalize that…Smart Dublin is doing the impact assessment for the 
data too”. 
(IT Manager of a LA) 
Like most cities at an early stage of the smart city implementation, 
where technological endowment can be seen as a resource for the 
development of a smart city (Angelidou, 2014; Anthopoulos, 2017; 
Browne, 2020; Myeong et al., 2020), Dublin had adopted hard infra-
structure oriented strategies. Furthermore, Dublin has a history with 
global IT firms where “Dublinked”, an open data repository, was the 
outcome of having attracted IBM's global smart city research team to 
Dublin in exchange for access to city data (Coletta et al., 2019). Cities 
require an effective governance approach that allows local knowledge to 
become visible from stakeholders in relation to specific political, insti-
tutional, societal, economic, and cultural conditions (Meijer, 2016; 
Ruhlandt, 2018). Appendix B demonstrates several pilot projects that 
Smart Dublin is undertaking, designed to explore the challenges and 
opportunities associated with city infrastructure and smart assets. 
Beyond its great experience working with multisectoral actors, Smart 
Dublin encouraged local technical capacity by allowing local IT com-
panies, rather than global IT firms, to have an equal chance, bringing 
proposals from the bottom up into the political arena. 
“…We are trying to achieve world class connectivity, we don't want our 
roads to be dug up, and we don't want to put shit on our assets. And we 
want to have amazing services and opportunities with our local IT com-
panies and start-ups…”. 
(IT Manager of a LA) 
While research institutes and universities found a forum for the 
practical application and testing of their theoretical expertise, fulfilling 
their community engagement remit, external collaboration, however, 
does not seem to have been able to set up a formal communication 
mechanism with some respondents from that sector. 
“I do not know what is happening in Smart Dublin, I have no way of 
finding out if I don't ask what is happening in Smart Dublin. There are no 
formal monthly meetings that I am aware of that are open, or minutes, 
there is no annual conference, and there is no platform…”. 
(Professor) 
4.5.3. Citizen participation 
Our findings indicate that some progress has been made in the area of 
citizen participation at the design stage, in contrast with the previous 
use of citizen input to rubber stamp preordained choice in terms of 
technology design. In the context of e-government, city governments 
involve citizens through transparency websites, open data platforms or 
e-participation platforms (Bolivar, 2018), or social media (Falco and 
Kleinhans, 2018). Previously, Dublin city adopted an online tool for 
citizens to report the location of issues (e.g., potholes, graffiti, broken 
streetlights, illegal dumping) to be included in the next city work pro-
grams (Cardullo and Kitchin, 2019). To make tight links with citizens, 
Smart Dublin relied on existing social fabric – the casual face-to-face H. Karimikia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 185 (2022) 122100
12encounters with various communities or through PPN members – to cast 
off the restrictions of oversight decision-making including only ICT 
users. For example, when WiFi4EU (see Appendix B) was in the earliest 
stage of development, Smart Dublin was conducting a public consulta -
tion process to select appropriate targets and to identify where this 
infrastructure might be usefully located. 
“Now it has been all face to face and social media so this is face-to-face 
engagement. They link up with public participation network for like 
WiFi4EU ”. 
(Digital Strategy Manager of a LA) 
Unheard Voices is a Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) 
project (see Appendix B) being led by Fingal County Council and Smart 
Dublin, and the purpose of the Unheard Voices SBIR is to explore the 
potential of digital technologies in improving citizen engagement and 
enrolling local citizens and communities in the decision-making activ-
ities of local government. In particular, the project is concerned with 
identifying and engaging “the voices of those who had traditionally been 
silent ”, encouraging the participation of these under-represented groups 
and, in the process, addressing issues of inclusivity and inequality. The 
social work of Smart Dublin achieved synergy between a local authority 
and citizens that could be seen, for example, in the participatory-focused 
funding application for an SBIR project and in the development of the 
overall digital strategies. 
“The planning and design phase included a representative sample of the 
communities that would be in the solution …The data that people are 
inputting through to the phase two application called Unheard Voices is 
completely owned by the council ”. 
(IT and Digital Strategy Manager of a LA) 
Some researchers consolidate the various features of enabling citizen 
participation in efficient, transparent, and accountable smart projects 
and city services (Albino et al., 2015 ; Dimelli, 2016 ; Meijer, 2016 ), 
whereas some others describe a stronger citizen-centric focus as key 
ambitions of smart governance (Bolivar and Meijer, 2016 ; Engelbert 
et al., 2019 ) by collaborating across internal technical and non-technical 
departments and with communities to make services truly citizen- 
centric (Barrutia et al., 2022 ; B˚at˚agan, 2011 ). The social inclusion, 
mutual learning, and engagement methodology of Smart Dublin repre -
sent a new systematic way of involving citizens with smart city initia -
tives. Smart Dublin used community development activities, in which 
information collected from citizens is utilized as input to build capacity 
at all stages of project initiation and implementation. 
“Citizens are part of the design of the project, …of every aspect of the 
projects that they have a voice in and that is not shaped from a technical 
executive perspective ”. 
(IT and Digital Strategy Manager of a LA) 
5.Discussion 
The findings of this study explain how boundary spanning takes 
place within a multi-organization structure and specifically helps to 
build collaborative mechanisms in a smart city context. Drawing on the 
findings and their contributions to the existing literature of boundary 
spanning and the real-world barriers to an effective inter-organizational 
collaborative governance approach and joined-up working with citizens, 
the next subsections summarize the theoretical and practical implica -
tions for both researchers and practitioners. 5.1. Theoretical implications 
The theoretical contributions of this research provide empirical ev-
idence through the boundary spanning lens to understand boundaries, 
the multiple roles and activities of a boundary-spanning organization, 
and the consequences of such roles in building an effective collaboration 
and governance approach. 
First, the emerging taxonomy of boundary-spanning activities (see 
Table D1 in Appendix D) presented in this research is the one of few 
empirical studies focusing on a boundary-spanning organizational 
setting in a multi-actor environment (Acuto et al., 2019 ; Marrone, 
2010 ). Our findings offer a supportive architecture of a boundary- 
spanning organization and the mechanisms adopted by them to illus-
trate boundary-spanning activities occurring not only within an orga-
nization but also between a set of diverse actors' organizations (Buick 
et al., 2019 ). Therefore, the case of Smart Dublin identifies generative 
boundaries to span multiple levels of government entities, IT companies, 
universities, and citizens, that are characterized by different cultures, 
knowledge bases, disciplines, or perspectives (Buick et al., 2019 ). 
Second, our findings delineate how a boundary-spanning organiza -
tion traverses different boundaries to transfer, translate, and transform 
knowledge through the performance of political, cultural, technical, and 
social roles. The major objective of boundary spanners is to create cross- 
boundary practices where all actors can utilize, learn from, and syn-
thesize knowledge when their work routines are identified and repre -
sented to others (Carlile, 2004 ; Carlile and Rebentisch, 2003 ; Schein, 
2017 ). Carlile (2002, 2004) and Kellogg et al. (2006) suggest that 
boundary spanners manage the flow of information by engaging in 
cross-boundary coordination practices. Tippmann et al. (2017) explicate 
that the consequences of these activities are the creation of new 
knowledge and practices such as the replacement of work processes, the 
creation of innovative products and services, and the rejuvenation of 
management and business practices. In doing this, Smart Dublin creates 
a new milieu of boundary-spanning work among local authorities and IT 
companies, where the technical and cultural work activities transfer 
existing information to each other and both groups develop a common 
understanding of each other's existing knowledge to resolve issues and 
conflicts. Also, the technical and political work activities help modify 
the body of knowledge, expertise, and technical skills of these actors so 
that they can reframe existing knowledge and generate new knowledge. 
Beyond these changes, the combination of social, technical, cultural, and 
political roles of the boundary-spanning organization includes efforts 
that have made a significant shift from traditional autocratic manage -
ment and business practices into a more citizen-centric form of 
governance. 
Third, the internal/external and citizen collaborative mechanisms 
conceptualized in this study contribute to building bottom-up gover -
nance components, including administrative cultures, policies, and 
decision-making processes (Meijer and Bolívar, 2016 ). These mecha -
nisms initiate the garnering of “raw” contributions from citizens (social 
role), feed LAs' internal technical staff with citizens' priorities for smart 
city development (cultural role), and endeavor to send signals to the LAs 
about their legacy regulations and the processes inherent in smart city 
operations (political role). These roles create capacity for the enhance -
ment of internal and external collaboration and integration through 
increasing the efficiency of formal regulations, policies, and protocols, 
and establishing innovate effective management styles for executing 
project activities. Alongside the improvements in hard skills and busi-
ness processes brought about by the use of a boundary-spanning orga-
nization, the LAs also experienced a cultural shift in terms of their H. Karimikia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 185 (2022) 122100
13capacity and models for interacting with citizens. This new knowledge 
can be used to enhance and center the ethical and human-rights-based 
dimensions inherent in any smart city project; instead of being the 
default afterthought of project design, engagement with the public be-
comes a palpable opportunity to mainstream effective participatory 
governance practices within business models. IT companies also 
benefited from this process by using stakeholder input to move closer to 
the goal of achieving universal design of services and products that will 
appeal to a broader market, even after the substantive project is finished. 
5.2. Practical implications 
Smart Dublin's roles can offer practical solutions to resolve universal 
barriers (discussed earlier in the Literature) through internal and 
external collaboration and citizen participation (Coletta et al., 2019; 
Broccardo et al., 2019; Emerson et al., 2012; Nam and Pardo, 2014). 
Smart Dublin has overseen some flattening of the hierarchical structure 
of collaborative governance after its inception (Coletta et al., 2019; 
Kitchin and McArdle, 2016; Perng, 2017). This has been achieved by 
emphasizing the use of various internal, external, and citizen partici -
pation activities as communication channels between the various actors 
and by refining knowledge exchange practices. Internal and external 
collaboration, for example, provides a basis for understanding legal, 
regulatory, and ethical imperatives, resolving conflicts, balancing power 
relations, and acquiring the IT skills necessary for project implementa -
tion. However, internal and external collaboration do not seem to be 
firmly established between the actors in Dublin's smart city. This may be 
because of the lack of a formalized communication approach between 
Smart Dublin and some of the local authorities and universities. This 
result is consistent with previous findings that formal features are 
necessary for collaboration (Coletta et al., 2019; Broccardo et al., 2019; 
Ruhlandt, 2018) and highlights where collaboration should expand to 
involve more of these actors in the future. 
Previously, researchers have argued for a top-down version of citizen 
participation, in that citizens should be consulted for feedback using 
social media or online tools after a project's detailed objectives have 
been decided (Cardullo and Kitchin, 2019) and key planning and 
decision-making processes have concluded (De Waal, 2014; Seltzer and 
Mahmoudi, 2013). Therefore, abundant efforts have been expended to 
engage with citizens through new technologies, such as the use of open 
data sources, citizen sensors, and serious games, to enhance collabora -
tion between the city's government and citizens (Batty et al., 2012; 
Federici et al., 2015; Pereira et al., 2017). However, researchers have 
noted that citizens do not become the main co-creators or dominant 
decision makers in smart cities' initiatives, and co-creation primarily 
occurs in the form of short-term hackathons or living lab projects, mostly 
restricted to an unbalanced selection of citizen targets (Engelbert et al., 
2019; Martin et al., 2018). According to Arnstein's (1969) ladder of 
citizen participation, demonstrating citizen power on the top rung en-
tails delegating decision-making authority to citizens and giving them 
opportunities to engage meaningfully at each stage of innovation and 
project implementation. In relation to Dublin's smart city initiatives, 
Cardullo and Kitchin (2019) claimed that an example of citizen partic -
ipation where co-creation was present was difficult to identify, but this 
was not the case in the Smart Dublin arena, as ownership and creation 
are actively induced by the social, technical, cultural, and political 
boundary-spanning activities. Beyond these citizen engagement efforts, 
the collaborative framework introduced in this study offers solutions for 
intensity and quality of collaboration, contributing to public value cre-
ation (Barrutia et al., 2022). We hold that the social inclusion, mutual learning, and engagement methodology roles of Smart Dublin enhance 
the frequency and fluidity of relationships with citizens, thereby 
enabling citizen participation in innovative decision-making processes 
for smart projects and city services. Furthermore, these roles substan -
tially realize the participatory formats with citizens envisaged by Eu-
ropean Commission in order to implement citizen-led initiatives 
(Engelbert et al., 2019; Mora et al., 2019). In parallel with this process, 
cultural, political, and technical-based activities improve the function -
alities of internal IT and non-IT departments and give rise to new public 
services administration based on citizen-led impetus. 
From social capital- and human capital-based approaches in building 
smart cities (Kummitha and Crutzen, 2017; Tan and Taeihagh, 2020; 
Myeong et al., 2020), these developments in city governance mecha -
nisms are an example of how a visible democratic governance approach 
thrives on intangible, skills-based developmental efforts among citizens 
and government staff. Given that investments in human and social 
capital fuel the success of smart city projects and services through a 
more citizen-centric governance approach in medium- or large-sized 
cities (Caragliu and Del Bo, 2019; Caragliu et al., 2011; Myeong et al., 
2020; Ruhlandt, 2018), the results of this study shed a light on essential 
governance practices for those cities with a similar set of city-level 
specificities and characteristics to Dublin. 
The practical contributions of this study provide an insight into the 
significance of the establishment of boundary-spanning organizations. 
The study contributes to the understanding of technical actors' percep -
tions of the value of boundary-spanning activities: the majority of re-
spondents spoke of their interaction with Smart Dublin in positive terms 
and were open to further engagement in this type of work. City gov-
ernments must improve the performance of these organizations by 
investing them with more executive power and hiring more employees 
with IS/IT backgrounds with a longer vocational employment. However, 
the influencing and trust-building practices carried out by Smart Dublin 
remain somewhat nebulous due to the lack of records of process flows 
and evaluative systems. Relying on individuals' characteristics and re-
lationships rather than on recording strategies represents a risk to 
longer-term sustainability, in that staff turnover could lead to the loss of 
expertise and local knowledge that has contributed to Smart Dublin's 
successes. 
6.Conclusions, limitations, and future research 
This study examined the experiences of a boundary-spanning orga-
nization set up as part of a city's drive to offer smart services to its res-
idents. Mediating bodies of this kind are often used in establishing smart 
cities because these projects involve a range of actors, but previous 
research in this domain has not examined their specific practices and 
impact. Using rich qualitative data, this study has developed a taxonomy 
of such practices and explained how the different types of activities – 
technical, social, cultural, and political – have provided the web of 
connections needed to develop the smart city. As more cities begin to use 
advanced IT to achieve their goals more effectively, this study's findings 
will be useful to those involved in such initiatives, whether at organi -
zational, individual, or task level. More importantly, the integration of 
boundary-spanning activities demonstrates how the governance style of 
Dublin's smart city initiatives has transformed to be more bottom-up and 
citizen-centric. 
As with any research study, this one has several limitations and offers 
multiple potential avenues for future research. As a cross-sectional 
design, there may be a lower level of robustness in our conclusions, 
compared to a longitudinal design that is better able to demonstrate the H. Karimikia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 185 (2022) 122100
14consequences of the boundary-spanning organization in the smart city 
context. Another limitation is that boundary-spanning activities devel -
oped in this research were found in an existing city with soft 
infrastructure-oriented strategy. We encourage others to pick up on our 
findings in other smart cities with either technology- or human-driven 
approaches. 
As this study focused on the boundary-spanning organization in a 
multidisciplinary context, the demonstration of the four roles and the 
collaborative framework these roles build should be employed in 
assessing and evaluating the success of smart project implementation. In 
the IS context, several researchers have investigated intra- and inter- 
group activities within an organization and social interactions with 
external actors during IS project development and implementation 
(Sawyer et al., 2010 ; Fisk et al., 2010 ). Future research could incorpo -
rate the suggested boundary spanning-enabled collaborative mecha -
nisms outlined in this study to explain the impact of the strategies, 
behaviors, and processes undertaken by a boundary-spanning organi -
zation on the effectiveness of smart services and projects. Also, since 
collaboration can elicit the transformation of organizational norms 
(Birkinshaw et al., 2017 ; Schotter et al., 2017 ), perhaps the occurrence 
of boundary spanning roles in organizational settings could be used to 
evaluate the performance of other actors' organizations. Several IS re-
searchers have investigated the importance of IT governance imple -
mentation, consisting of structure, process, and relational mechanisms 
within an organization that enable both IT and business functions to 
execute their responsibility in support of IT-business alignment (De Haes 
and Van Grembergen, 2005, 2009 ; Boonstra et al., 2018 ). Maccani et al. 
(2020) have identified IT governance structural mechanisms through 
which triadic alignment can be shaped between IT, smart city, and non- 
technical functions in city authorities' organizations. We encourage future researchers to focus on the effectiveness of IT governance be-
tween IT functions and other departments within local authorities' or-
ganizations in the light of the flattening governance structure described 
in our research. Specifically, future research should focus on how the 
alignment between IT, smart city, and business functions can be 
improved through the boundary-spanning organization's roles that can 
enable internal and external collaborative mechanisms between the IT 
companies and internal technical functions of local authorities. 
Another future research stream could arise from the levels of exec-
utive power of boundary-spanning organizations (Acuto et al., 2019 ; 
Coletta et al., 2019 ). A future research question is whether a lack of 
enforcement powers facilitates the success of a boundary-spanning or-
ganization in terms of its negotiating and influencing activities within 
the soft power sphere; perhaps the siloed nature of the types of orga-
nizations and industries targeted by boundary spanners mean that they 
are more easily permeated through the informal strategies and 
networking activities in which boundary spanners currently engage? 
Data availability 
The data that has been used is confidential. 
Acknowledgments 
This work was supported, in part, by Science Foundation Ireland 
grant 13/RC/2094 and co-funded under the European Regional Devel -
opment Fund through the Southern & Eastern Regional Operational 
Programme to Lero. This project has received funding from the Euro-
pean Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under 
the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No 754489.  
Appendix A 
The impact of boundary-spanning activities on smart collaboration 
Provisional interview questions2:  
1- Can you describe your organization and its role within a smart city context?  
2- What is your role within your organization?  
3- What activities does your organization specifically carry out to develop, plan, and deliver smart projects?  
4- How do you measure smart project success?  
5- Can you describe the range of stakeholders you collaborate with?  
6- Can you describe the types of information and knowledge that you receive and/or share with these stakeholders? What kinds of processes 
support such sharing, i.e., face-to-face, digital, documents, steering groups, meetings, and so on?  
7- To what extent is the knowledge and information acquired understandable and interpretable?  
8- What strategies do you use to ensure a common understanding between stakeholders? E.g., how information is edited, summarized, reworded, 
reformatted, and so on.  
9- Are the relationships created by Smart Dublin temporary or are some sustainable in the long term? If so, please describe.  
10- In your experience, how has the role of smart Dublin improved the levels of collaboration in Dublin?  
11- What more could be done to improve smart collaboration and what are the particular challenges and opportunities to such improvement? For 
example:  
≡How might collaboration be more sustainable and produce more sustainable solutions?  
≡How might internal technical expertise play a more meaningful role in collaborative process?  
≡In your experience to what degree does organizational culture and/or politics impact collaboration?  
12- What impact if any has regulatory frameworks such as GDPR had on the capacity of stakeholders to collaborate? 
2 Note: The interview guide provided an outline of the topics and open-ended questions to be covered in the interviews via email, including examples of boundary 
spanning and its applicability in different contexts. The above questions were designed based on previous studies (Ancona and Caldwell, 1992 ; Pawlowski and Robey, 
2004 ; Sawyer et al., 2010 ) to elicit rich descriptions from the informants about their experiences and work practices related to boundary spanning in a smart city 
context. H. Karimikia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 185 (2022) 122100
15Appendix B  
Table B1 
Projects and programs led by Smart Dublin and the LAs.  
Projects Lead authorities Description Impact 
Small Business 
Innovation 
Research (SBIR) Dublin City Council, Fingal County 
Council, Dun Laoghaire-Rathdown 
County Council – all supported by 
Smart Dublin Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program, in 
partnership with Science Foundation Ireland (SFI). SBIR 
programs operate in the pre-commercial procurement 
space, allowing public bodies to stimulate innovation in 
the small business sector within formal procurement 
parameters. The SBIR programs operate by addressing 
challenges identified by local government that impact 
citizens which will, in turn, lead to reduced congestion, 
cleaner air, lower noise pollution, and safer roads. It has 
been proposed that these solutions will enhance the 
capacity of citizens to connect with the city and, 
therefore, play a more active role in improving advocacy 
mechanisms and collaborative decision-making. To date, 
this project has enabled 42 SMEs to leverage funding 
support totaling €1.5 million. In 2018, Fingal County 
Council launched the “Unheard Voices” challenge, under 
Enterprise Ireland's SBIR program. The challenge aimed 
to engage young people, migrant groups and others with 
new technological solutions. It includes two phases: 
Phase 1: a series of participatory workshops were held 
with community members across Fingal to understand 
the local context and identify the design needs of the 
end-users. 
Phase 2: a beta version of an app was made available, 
and users could submit feedback and suggestions as the 
app was further developed. The Fingal Voices app was 
officially launched in May 2020. Citizens can vote, rate, 
and comment on specific consultations and 
questionnaires, submit ideas and suggest improvements, 
and access local and community news and events 
information. This project has removed the gap between 
communities and decision makers. The implemented 
app empowers citizens to engage in joined-up 
decision-making with Fingal County Council and 
encourages citizens to share their views and opinions 
about the future of their city. Unheard Voices Fingal County Council, in partnership 
with Enterprise Ireland and Smart 
Dublin. 
Local Authority EV 
Charging Strategy 
for the Dublin 
Region Dublin City Council, Fingal County 
Council, Dun Laoghaire-Rathdown 
County Council – supported by Smart 
Dublin and CARO This project is intended to facilitate Dublin's four local 
authorities in exploring the challenges and opportunities 
associated with the provision of electric vehicle (EV) 
charging infrastructure. It is the intention of the local 
authorities to implement a network of public charging 
stations in residential areas which will compliment 
services currently being supplied by the ESB (Electricity 
Supply Board) and by private operators. The strategy 
will be published in June 2022. This project helps policy-makers who strive to 
achieve a just transition, where citizens from across 
society have opportunities to avail of the benefits of 
low-carbon life. 
WiFi4EU Dublin City Council, Fingal County 
Council and Smart Dublin WiFi4EU is an initiative of the European Union which 
promotes free access to Wi-Fi connectivity for citizens in 
public spaces such as parks, squares, public buildings, 
libraries, health centers, museums, and community and 
Council facilities. Fingal installed 47 Wi-Fi access points 
in 18 different locations whilst Dublin City installed 145 
access points in 33 different locations in the city. The project aims at giving communities better 
internet access, improving digital literacy, and 
complementing other public services provided in the 
locations selected, such as parks, libraries, 
community centers, and youth services. 
5G Network Smart Dublin The project is designed to trial Dense Air's neutral-host, 
small-cell 5G network in the Docklands area of Dublin. 
As mobile data consumption increases, Mobile Network 
Operators (MNOs) are faced with the prospect of 
increasing the densification of their infrastructure in 
preparation for the transition to 5G standards. This trial 
led to the below developments providing guidance to 
guide Local Authorities on the rollout of 5G.   
1) The emergence of the Neutral Host model as an 
attractive future deployment model for local 
authorities across Ireland.  
2) Developing streamlined interpretation and issuing of 
section 254 licenses for delivery of new mobile sites 
or equipment installs such as small cells. The first phase is completed, and small cell units have 
been installed across the Docklands area, which 
provide connectivity both indoors and outdoors. The 
success of this project was recognized in 2019 with a 
win at the World Small Cell Awards. Dense Air are 
now replicating this work in some cities in Portugal, 
Belgium, Australia and elsewhere. The extension of 
this project will improve Dublin's economy, lower 
mobile network costs for both providers and 
consumers, and provide more equitable access to the 
internet. 
(continued on next page) H. Karimikia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 185 (2022) 122100
16Table B1 (continued ) 
Projects Lead authorities Description Impact  
3) Establishing a centralized point of contact for 
connectivity requests in each local authority.  
4) Investing pivots to small cells and a new revenue 
opportunity emerges for local authorities.  
5) Ensuring that the interests of citizens and 
communities are put at the center of the 
implementation process by minimizing digital divide 
and social exclusion risks.  
6) Open access to local authority assets on equal terms 
to all operators where appropriate to support 
densification plans. 
MaaS (Mobility as a 
Service) Smart Dublin This project is a collaboration between Smart Dublin and 
Urban Foresight, funded by the Department of Public 
Expenditure and Reform through its Public Sector 
Innovation Fund. The Maas project is considered 
customer-centric services that integrate all travel modes 
(public & private) and facilitate journey planning plus 
payment facilities. A public-led MaaS model has been 
proposed to better reflect societal goals and protect 
citizens' data. This model will be implemented without a 
trial. Once this project is implemented, it will provide users 
tailored, accurate, seamless, and timely information 
to inform their mobility choice. 
Bigbelly Bins Smart Dublin This project is a two-year feasibility study being 
undertaken by Smart Dublin in order to explore the 
potential of Bigbelly smart bins delivering service and 
environmental benefits for the city and the project was 
designed to investigate the following three categories: 
service optimization, developing an advertising-based 
revenue stream, and Smart City functionality. Bigbelly 
bins have been deployed in Dublin's Docklands through 
a novel innovative service model contract (compared to 
Bigbelly bins deployed in other parts of the city) to 
investigate five main work streams: Optimizing waste 
management; local advertising; Deployment of Internet 
of Things (IoT) & WiFi solutions; supporting telecoms 
and 5G; as well as further R&D as identified. To date, 
around 110 smart bins have been installed across the 
Dublin Docklands area over a 30-month period. The project outcomes show an 85 % reduction in 
collection frequencies in the Docklands and in the 
overall cost of the bins through revenue received 
from local advertising on the bins. Each bin is 
equipped with one WiFi connection (powered by a 
solar panel) and new sensors to capture information 
on air quality, noise, and footfall in the area. Also, 
there is the potential to use the bins in order to 
investigate an approach that could host small cells 
and support 5G to help deliver better connectivity in 
mobile coverage “black spots”. 
Flooding Sensor DCC and Smart Dublin The purpose of the project is to support technical 
innovation by testing the potential of a network of low- 
cost, low-powered rainfall and water level sensors to 
operate effectively on Pervasive Nation's IoT testbed, 
using the LoRa-flavored LPWAN (low-power wide area 
network). So far, 25 rainfall sensors using LoRaWAN 
connectivity, 10 river level Sensors using Sigfox 
connectivity, and 56 sensors (river, rainfall, weather 
stations, etc.) using cellular connectivity, have been 
added. This project is able to determine rainfall and river 
levels, which can help determine flood risk to homes, 
businesses, schools, and all other affected properties 
and persons around the vicinity. 
3D Docklands 
Planning Model DCC and Smart Dublin This project, which sought to produce a detailed 3D 
model of the Docklands area of Dublin, is a collaboration 
between DCC (Dublin City Council) and the computer 
aided drafting company, D3D. The intention of the 
project was to explore the potential of such a model in 
assisting planners and developers in answering questions 
relating to structural and infrastructural issues. This led 
to changes in the design which should improve the real- 
life experience for citizens of and visitors to Dublin. The model has already provided great value to the 
city in the planning process. It supported the initial 
design phase for the proposed Blood Stoney Bridge. 
LA planners were able to virtually walk along the 
bridge and experience what it would be like. The 
model was also used to bring the designs of a 
proposed White Water Rafting facility to life. The 
model received over 160,000 views, demonstrating 
the potential of using 3D modeling to communicate 
proposals and engage the public.   
Appendix C H. Karimikia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 185 (2022) 122100
17
Categories of Ac/g415vi/g415es Overarching Concepts Representa/g415ve Quota/g415ons
Challenging / Interpre/g415ng 
Regula/g415ons
Reconﬁguring Balance 
ControlPoli/g415cal Work“In bye-laws, we found Local Authori/g415es did not dis/g415nguish between electric cars or internal combus/g415on 
engines, ﬁrstly. Secondly there is no transparency in terms of the pricing and th e licensing which I think 
is really bad…It is a bit like 5G h as got us thinking two years ahead of  regula/g415ons and policies and power 
and access to assets and breaking down silos and how we package our assets out to the market to make 
it easier for telecom companies to build networks etc”. (Smart Dublin)
“My understanding of the current arrangement with  Electricity Supply Board (ESB) is that the local 
authority says that we will consume electricity from the grid for str eet ligh/g415ng purposes only. What this 
is now doing is pu/g427ng other ac/g415vi/g415es onto that sam e energy consump/g415on. And the conversa/g415on has to 
be with the ESB to say is this,  okay? We have got the same situa/g415on  with pu/g427ng 5G small cells onto a 
street pole, it is downstream solu/g415ons or infrastruc ture that is going to c onsume power. So that 
conversa/g415on needs to happen, hopefully we will work it out…through the strategic policy commi/g425ee, the 
environmental commi/g425ee and the lo cal councilors…then they said they  would address it …You have to 
get permission oﬀ the building ow ner here if you want to put an ything on the building, there is a 
memorandum of understanding (MOU) with details of  the project and a proj ect scoping document and 
then the Data Protec/g415on Impact As sessment (DPIA)”. (Smart Dublin) 
“The guys (ci/g415zens) expressed a concern  on air quality, they expressed a c oncern to DCC. They then looked 
at the ﬁgures from the EPA sensors and said there wasn't much of an evidence base there to do any further 
inves/g415ga/g415ons. The councilors can't un/g415l they have real data to prove there remain s or isn't a concern. So, 
we are using the Horizon 2020 projec t with UCD to install new sensors an d to validate the concerns which 
we do in a lot of cases”.  (Smart Dublin)
“The local authority essen/g415ally holds the balance of control in where th ese assets can go, they have to 
determine, we need to explain to them (IT companies) that small cells are deployed and evenly distributed 
across the city so that we don't en hance the digital divides…So, our anal ysis, on behalf of the four local 
authori/g415es, has to be, well… where are the private operators opera/g415ng? And therefore, what is the sweet 
spot for the local authori/g415es? Poten/g415al for new reve nue? Who would own the assets, how cost eﬀec/g415ve 
it is?” (Smart Dublin)
Cultural WorkEcosystem Crea/g415ng“Smart Dublin would have been important in brokering rela /g415onships with external par/g415es . We asked them  to connect 
us with internal stakeholders within the city councils so there are planners, architects, and engineers 25 years working 
in the city council who are going to be able to use this pla/g414orm to streamline their eﬀ ort”. (IT Company Manager)
“Look what we can do through Smart Du blin, we organize networking events, hackathons, pitch days, we bring the 
companies together, when there are in terna/g415onal events …One of the develop ers got involved, then the others saw 
that logo up there and said why are  they up there?”. (Smart Dublin)
“I have the ques/g415ons in here that I am  pre/g425y sure that I asked them (IT compan ies). Would you like to be part of it? 
What would you like to get out of  it? Could you commit /g415me or  money etc.?” (Smart Dublin)
“Because I work in that kind of general  space, the guys in Hibernia came to  me and asked me, did I know anybody 
who does this kind of scooter parking? Wh ich I do know because I do work in th is space. So, I act as ‘you guys should 
have a chat because you have the scooter parking so lu/g415on and you guys need it…’”.  (Smart Dublin)
Expecta/g415on Aligning“We realized what an IT ﬁrm were saying was false promises and false expecta/g415ons. It is because their head is very 
technical, so they just think ‘I want to get this into this buildin g’, so they make promises based on that. The building 
owner’s problem was he can't make calls  on his Vodafone phone in his oﬃce. So , this IT Company will only ever be 
data sharing… I spend a lot of my /g415me saying let's be hones t with you...what they were saying didn't mean much to 
them…The IT guys (IT company) have a lot of knowledge about connec/g415vity and deploying things on street assets.  
But if we then take the head of for exa mple traﬃc in DCC, he has an understa nding of deploying things on poles etc., 
but he is not a connec/g415vity expert…So, if I wasn't th ere what the IT guys would be  also saying to the traﬃc 
department would bamboozl e them”. (Smart Dublin)
“When you are all doing it, can we all sit down at the ta ble and talk about a coordin ated approach? How do we go 
with tendering it? What goes into a tender? Instead of having four diﬀerent systems in plac e. So that is another way 
in which they kind of co ordinated diﬀerent smart city projects into making  it easier…Every /g415me we are going to do a 
SBIR and we do it collec/g415vely each year,  we say we are going to go on our next SBIR and here are the things that are 
of interest that we have iden/g415ﬁed within  a local authority. Then we share them wi th all four and we say, okay do any 
other local authori/g415es have an interest in wo rking with us on these?”. (Smart Dublin)Fig. C1.Data structure.  H. Karimikia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 185 (2022) 122100
18
Business Process 
Innova/g415on“Recently we organized an internal engagement event to demo nstrate what we are doing to develop some projects that 
smart city teams are working on for DCC, but also giving staﬀ  an opportunity to develop their ideas so these staﬀ ideas 
that we got through staﬀ engagement even. Then staﬀ were coming  to say why cannot we do th is type of thing? Or why 
are our traﬃc maps so bad it should be lik e this or should be like...we have got the internal engagement with city council 
staﬀ. We are now working on the built environmental project,  for example the planners, c ity architects, and engineers 
will be involved…So, we hope to have  a workshop and panel discu ssion for people in local authori/g415es on kind of 
innova/g415ve procurement and innova/g415ve thinki ng. We try to create a ch ampions’ network or cham pions of chains” (Smart 
Dublin). 
“I was required to develop a level of tec hnical exper/g415se that allowed me to have 
conversa/g415ons with the technologists…I supp ose is to be able to work with the 
academics within Research Ins/g415tutes and universi/g415es mainly around connec/g415vity 
exper/g415se. There is a lot of talk around 5G …If you take the 5G project for example, 
the level of technical depth that I go to in  terms of the ESB and the power aspect is 
much, much deeper”. (Smart Dublin)Acquiring Technical Exper/g415se
Technical Work
Informa/g415on Management“Intranet (Dubnet) we just post like  announcements there for the internal 
management…what we have ended up with  is wri/g415ng a discussion paper on the 
deployment of small cells around Irelan d…We have internal newsle/g425ers and we 
are publishing ar/g415cles there…We have  a monthly steering commi/g425ee with 
diﬀerent local authori/g415es but also I am on email to these guys every day to say 
this project has popped up…I have a me e/g415ng at the Docklands IoT network, they 
are all fairly important people” (Smart Dublin).
“Now, it is Trello as project and por/g414ol io management system. So, you will see 
that Dún Laoghaire have projects, Fingal ha ve projects, our calendar which cuts 
across all the boards, all the SBIRs, these are South Dublin….So, for example if 
you go into the DCC documents projects, it  can be set up as a theme. We have 
projects underneath this th eme, connec/g415vity, which is  not a theme but so many 
projects going on under...(Connec/g415vity, economy, energy stuﬀ, environmental 
stuﬀ, mobility)”. (Smart Dublin)
Mutual LearningSocial Inclusion
Engagement MethodologySocial Work“In Fingal, we knew who to go to, and we  did the workshop de sign and all that kind 
of stuﬀ. We got an older ac/g415on group, we got an envi ronmental group, we got the 
elected members, we got th e chamber, we got a youth group (with the kids they 
were phenomenal, they were like 15, 16, and 17  years old) they were fantas/g415c. We 
did the people with disabili/g415es…It ca n be community centers, non-proﬁt 
organiza/g415ons, councils, schools, leisure cent ers. It could be public park which is 
managed by DCC”. (Smart Dublin)
“It was really nice to be able to reach ou t to people and community centers and just 
get the feedback and  then kind of info rm them about what smart city is about and 
then because of that project we were ab le to link up with councilors…We really 
show that the technolo gy and the new solu/g415ons can im prove the life of people or 
improve communi/g415es…We are going to look  at data literacy elements with the 
older people so there is a really clear understanding on everything…What we try 
and do with all of my worksh ops is I do a bit of blue s ky thinking at the beginning” 
(Smart Dublin)
“We had a coloring compe/g415/g415on for childr en where they could draw Fingal in the 
year 2100 and we were surveying parent s while the kids were drawing…We are 
trying to use digital strategies such as au gmented reality/virtual reality applica/g415ons 
that help ci/g415zens understand th e impact of developments in real /g415me and using just 
their phones or iPads…Mobility is a big issue for people ge/g427ng in and out and 
everybody was talking about mob ility but actually, we asked people to vote as well 
so we could priori/g415ze” (Smart Dublin).Fig. C1. (continued ).  H. Karimikia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 185 (2022) 122100
19
“To be honest, Smart Dublin has been very proac/g415ve to change the whole narra/g415ve at government level and it has changed the whol e narra/g415ve 
at policy level. And I think we have had some very good champions  in there…all local authori/g415es must give fair and equitable ac cess to 
telecommunica/g415ons providers, fair and equitable access to their ass ets and make sure ci/g415zens data is protected in systems, here  now Smart Dublin 
should talk to the department of communica/g415ons and all the telco and there is the new EU direc/g415ve called the Electronic Communi ca/g415ons Code 
which will be wri/g425en into law here earl y next year…”. (Digital Manager of a LA)
“…So, this collabora/g415on could be really a lot be/g425er served if we had a Smart Dublin team in there…we would maybe see, and it is  probably just for 
the close proximity with Smart Dublin and DCC, that they get a lot from the collabora/g415on because they are si/g427ng in the same roo m…So, they get 
a lot more Smart City projects done, they have a lot more resource s from Smart Dublin…Now in terms of the smart city agenda or t he Smart Dublin 
agenda within each of the local authori/g415es , Dublin City are way ahead of the rest of us …”  (Digital Strategy Manager of a LA)“They do consulta/g415ons with our internal staﬀ to make contact with the community, and they share ci/g415z ens’ key issues and then as k how come
you line up with companies that come to us in terms of developing projects?…”. (IT Manager of a LA)
“I think that is the kind of grassroots bo/g425om up type of philosoph y that we want in the DCC…we have an opportunity to engage wi th the whole 
community through Smart Dublin…here are two things about diﬃcul/g415es arou nd the staﬀ engagement, ﬁrst ac/g415ng as a conduit to feed what’s 
happening in that ecosystem back into internal departments in the DCC, to change it culturally, and second helping the DCC to be  responsive to 
required ini/g415a/g415ves…requirements of co mmuni/g415es”. (IT Manager of a LA)
“I do not know what is happening in Smart Dublin, I have no wa y of ﬁnding out if I don't ask what is happening in Smart Dublin. There are no formal 
monthly mee/g415ngs that I am aware of that are open, or minutes, there is no annual confe rence, and there is no pla/g414orm…”. (Profes sor)“…We are trying to achieve world class connec/g415vity, we don't want  our roads to be dug up, and we don't want to put shit on our assets. And we 
want to have amazing services and opportuni/g415es with our local IT companies and start-ups. So how do we achieve that? We need to  understand 
what is required. We need to understand what role we play th rough Smart Dublin…This is all about networking and having the righ t conversa/g415ons 
with the right people and being able to inﬂuence and make hopefully the right decisions”. (IT Manager of a LA)
“We are going through the processes of developing the knowledge with the  IT companies and universi/g415es through Smart Dublin to u nderstand 
emerging technologies or technologies we are about to do. So trad i/g415onally the city council had a problem to access those skills  or the knowledge. 
So we work with these companies to create service provisions...”. (IT Manager of a LA)“What we are star/g415ng to see now is where it makes sense, the four local authori/g415es are coming together to jointly work on a pro ject…It is that 
kind of raising awareness and knowledge transfer across the four local authori/g415es”. (IT Manager of a LA)
“It’s just to look at taking ideas from staﬀ and try to channel  them into more kinds of solu/g415ons. ..Trying to improve the ﬂow of  the experience 
and knowledge prac/g415ces within the organiza/g415on , within DCC, one area of DCC to another. They are working in DCC to encourage the wider 
collabora/g415on on IT solu/g415ons and pr ojects”. (IT Manager of a LA)
“So in the produc/g415on of our digital strategy for example we have got assistance from the Smart Dublin team…”. (Digital Strategy  Manager of a 
LA)
“I think that is a fair comment, I think a member of Smart Dublin has developed technical proﬁciency which he didn't have previ ously and that is 
actually a very fair comment, he does have that now”. (IT Manager of a LA)Internal Collabora/g415on 
“…They (Smart Dublin) will deﬁnitely be in the  design, what are we trying to achieve, what is the value map amongst those stake holders? What is 
the data and how will it ﬂow? Then something gets created to oper a/g415onalize that…Smart Dublin is doing the impact assessment for  the data too”. 
(IT Manager of a LA)
“Well ini/g415ally the rela/g415onship with the Electricity Supply Board ( ESB) and Mobile Network Operators (MNOs) was brokered almost e xclusively 
through Smart Dublin…they (Smart Dublin) were bringing people together , you are solving problems, kicking things oﬀ”. (IT Compa ny Manager)External Collabora/g415on 
“The planning and design phase included a representa/g415ve sample of the communi/g415es that would be in the solu/g415on…The data that peo ple are 
inpu/g427ng through to the phase two applica/g415on called Unheard Voices  is completely owned by the council”. (IT and Digital Strategy  Manager of a LA)Ci/g415zen Par/g415cipa/g415on
“Now it has been all face to face and social media so this is face-to-face engagement. They link up with public par/g415cipa/g415on net work for like WiFi4EU. 
They talked to XXX…who put them in touch with various communi/g415es…There  were other groups like the XXX social inclusion groups, so again loads 
of diﬀerent community groups in Fingal coming together to meet an d discuss the technology and develop solu/g415ons”. (Digital Strat egy Manager of a 
LA)
“Ci/g415zens are part of the design of the proj ect,...of every aspect of the projects that they have a voice in and that is not sha ped from a technical 
execu/g415ve perspec/g415ve”. (IT and Digital Strategy Manager of a LA)Fig. C2.The Quotations of Internal/External Collaboration and Citizen Participation.  H. Karimikia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 185 (2022) 122100
20Appendix D  
Table D1 
Boundary spanning roles and activities.  
Boundary spanning 
roles Activities 
Political  ≡Negotiating regulatory requirements and the importance of updating policies and procedures with local authorities.  
≡Negotiating appropriate and fair access to city infrastructure and data for IT companies.  
≡Ensuring environmental sustainability and regulatory standards in different stages of project implementation.  
≡Negotiating legal issues (e.g., data protection liability, due diligence practices, and intellectual ownership of data and city assets) and human rights 
principles enshrined in legislation (e.g., privacy and security of citizens) with IT companies and other stakeholders.  
≡Lessening the dominance of the local authorities as well as IT companies through confrontational behaviors. 
Cultural  ≡Using different approaches to make new relationships and maintain existing connections between internal IT functions, IT companies, and universities.  
≡Evaluating external actors (e.g., IT companies) based on their cognitive and historical performances in specific fields.  
≡Minimizing asymmetric knowledge and fostering mutual understanding among technical departments of local authorities and IT companies.  
≡Identifying potential sources of conflict and playing a persuasive role in reconciling differences through some translating across boundaries.  
≡Playing an entrepreneurial role to engage with the internal technical functions of local authorities in order to develop innovative ideas and solutions. 
Technical  ≡Acquiring multiple technical specialties and skills in the various phases of developing smart projects.  
≡Coordinating information and knowledge within and between actors' organizations through using boundary objects. 
Social  ≡Ensuring the participation of citizens in developing digital strategies and innovation processes.  
≡Increasing the awareness of citizens about potential smart projects and their impact on the quality of their lives.  
≡Educating citizens about technologies and their utilizations, and familiarizing them with city policies and services.  
≡Playing an entrepreneurial role to gather citizens' ideas and solutions, integrate findings into meaningful information and knowledge, and develop smart 
projects and digital strategies based on information gathered.  
≡Building trust and authentically cultivating citizen participation.  
≡Actualizing the implementation of the social inclusion and mutual learning roles through several engagement methodology activities.  
References 
Acuto, M., Steenmans, K., Iwaszuk, E., Ortega-Garza, L., 2019. Informing urban 
governance? Boundary-spanning organizations and the ecosystem of urban data. 
Area 51 (1), 94–103. 
Adler, P.S., 1995. Interdepartmental interdependence and coordination: the case of the 
design/manufacturing interface. Organ. Sci. 6 (2), 147–167. 
Akkerman, S.F., Bakker, A., 2011. Boundary crossing and boundary objects. Rev. Educ. 
Res. 81 (2), 132–169. 
Alawadhi, S., Aldama-Nalda, A., Chourabi, H., Gil-Garcia, J.R., Leung, S., Mellouli, S., 
Nam, T., Pardo, T.A., Scholl, H.J., Walker, S., 2012. Building understanding of smart 
city initiatives. In: Scholl, H.J., Janssen, M., Wimmer, M.A., Moe, C.E., Flak, L. 
Skiftenes (Eds.), Proceedings of the International Conference on Electronic 
Government, Delft, The Netherlands, 3-6 September 2012. Springer, Berlin/ 
Heidelberg, pp. 40–53. 
Albino, V., Berardi, U., Dangelico, R.M., 2015. Smart cities: definitions, dimensions, 
performance, and initiatives. J. Urban Technol. 22 (1), 3–21. 
Aldenderfer, M.S., Blashfield, R.K., 1984. In: A Review of Clustering Methods. Cluster 
Analysis, pp. 33–61. 
Aldrich, H., Herker, D., 1977. Boundary spanning roles and organization structure. Acad. 
Manag. Rev. 2 (2), 217–230. 
Alhusban, M., 2015. The practicality of public service integration. Electron. J. e-Gov. 13 
(2), 94. 
Alhusban, M., 2015. The practicality of public service integration. Electron. J. e-Gov. 13 
(2), 94–109. 
Ancona, D.G., Caldwell, D.F., 1992. Bridging the boundary: external activity and 
performance in organizational teams. Adm. Sci. Q. 634–665. 
Angelidou, M., 2014. Smart city policies: a spatial approach. Cities 41, S3–S11. 
Anthopoulos, L.G., 2017. Understanding Smart Cities: A Tool for Smart Government or 
an Industrial Trick? Springer International Publishing, Cham .  
Anthopoulos, L., Reddick, C.G., Giannakidou, I., Mavridis, N., 2016. Why e-government 
projects fail? An analysis of the healthcare. Gov website. Gov. Inf. Q. 33 (1), 
161–173. 
Anthopoulos, L., Sirakoulis, K., Reddick, C.G., 2022. Conceptualizing smart government: 
interrelations and reciprocities with Smart City. Digit. Gov. Res. Pract. 2 (4), 1–28. 
Arnstein, S.R., 1969. A ladder of citizen participation. J. Am. Inst. Plann. 35 (4), 
216–224. 
Bailey, K.D., 1984. A three-level measurement model. Qual. Quant. 18 (3), 225–245. 
Barrutia, J.M., Echebarria, C., Aguado-Moralejo, I., Apaolaza-Ib ˘a~nez, V., Hartmann, P., 
2022. Leading smart city projects: government dynamic capabilities and public value 
creation. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 179, 121679 . 
B˚at˚agan, L., 2011. Smart cities and sustainability models. Rev. Inf. Econ. 15 (3), 80–87. 
Batty, M., Axhausen, K.W., Giannotti, F., Pozdnoukhov, A., Bazzani, A., Wachowicz, M., 
Ouzonis, G., Portugali, Y., 2012. Smart cities of the future. Eur. Phys. J. Spec. Top. 
214 (1), 481–518. 
Bechky, B.A., 2003. Sharing meaning across occupational communities: the 
transformation of understanding on a production floor. Organ. Sci. 14 (3), 312–330. 
Bergvall-Kåreborn, B., Eriksson, C.I., Ståhlbr ost, A., Svensson, J., 2009. A milieu for 
innovation: defining living labs. In: Huizingh, K.R.E. (Ed.), Proceedings of the 2nd 
Innovation Symposium: Simulating Recovery – The Role of Innovation Management, 
New York, USA, 6-9 December 2009. ISPIM, New York, pp. 6–9. Berrone, P., Ricart, J.E., 2020. IESE cities in Motion Index 2020. IESE Business School 
University of Navarra, Barcelona, Spain .  
Birkinshaw, J., Ambos, T.C., Bouquet, C., 2017. Boundary spanning activities of 
corporate HQ executives insights from a longitudinal study. J. Manag. Stud. 54 (4), 
422–454. 
Bjogvinsson, E., Ehn, P., Hillgren, P.A., 2012. Design things and design thinking: 
contemporary participatory design challenges. Des. Issues 28 (3), 101–116. 
Blair, E., 2015. A reflexive exploration of two qualitative data coding techniques. 
J. Methods Meas. Soc. Sci. 6 (1), 14–29. 
Boland Jr., R.J., Tenkasi, R.V., 1995. Perspective making and perspective taking in 
communities of knowing. Organ. Sci. 6 (4), 350–372. 
Bolivar, M.P.R., 2018. Creative citizenship: the new wave for collaborative environments 
in smart cities. Acad. Rev. Latinoam. Administraci ˘on 31 (1), 277–302. 
Bolivar, M.P.R., Meijer, A.J., 2016. Smart governance: using a literature review and the 
case of spanish cities. J. Urban Technol. 23 (3), 43–67. 
Boonstra, A., Yeliz Eseryel, U., Van Offenbeek, M.A., 2018. Stakeholders ’ enactment of 
competing logics in IT governance: polarization, compromise or synthesis? Eur. J. 
Inf. Syst. 27 (4), 415–433. 
Broccardo, L., Culasso, F., Mauro, S.G., 2019. Smart city governance: exploring the 
institutional work of multiple actors towards collaboration. Int. J. Public Sect. 
Manag. 32 (4), 367–387. 
Brooker, D.M., 2008. Intelligent Cities? Disentangling the Symbolic and Material Effects 
of Technopole Planning Practices in Cyberjaya, Malaysia. Durham University . 
Browne, N.J.W., 2020. Regarding smart cities in China, the north and emerging 
economics – one size does not fit all. Smart Cities 3 (2), 186–201. 
Buick, F., O’Flynn, J., Malbon, E., 2019. Boundary challenges and the work of boundary 
spanners. In: Dickinson, H., Needham, C., Mangan, C., Sullivan, H. (Eds.), 
Reimagining the Future Public Service Workforce. Springer, Singapore, pp. 21–38. 
Bunnell, T., 2015. Smart city returns. Dialogues Hum. Geogr. 5 (1), 45–48. 
Campbell, D.T., 1975. Degrees of freedom and the case study. Comp. Pol. Stud. 8 (1), 
178–191. 
Caragliu, A., Del Bo, C.F., 2019. Smart innovative cities: the impact of Smart City policies 
on urban innovation. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 142, 373–383. 
Caragliu, A., Del Bo, C., Nijkamp, P., 2011. Smart cities in Europe. J. Urban Technol. 18 
(2), 65–82. 
Cardullo, P., Kitchin, R., 2019. Being a ‘citizen ’ in the smart city: up and down the 
scaffold of smart citizen participation in Dublin, Ireland. GeoJournal 84 (1), 1–13. 
Carlile, P.R., 2002. A pragmatic view of knowledge and boundaries: boundary objects in 
new product development. Organ. Sci. 13 (4), 442–455. 
Carlile, P.R., 2004. Transferring, translating, and transforming: an integrative framework 
for managing knowledge across boundaries. Organ. Sci. 15 (5), 555–568. 
Carlile, P.R., Rebentisch, E.S., 2003. Into the black box: the knowledge transformation 
cycle. Manag. Sci. 49 (9), 1180 –1195 . 
Carvalho, L., 2015. Smart cities from scratch? A socio-technical perspective. Camb. J. 
Reg. Econ. Soc. 8 (1), 43–60. 
Carvalho, L., Campos, J.B., 2013. Developing the plan IT valley: a view on the 
governance and societal embedding of u-eco city pilots. Int. J. Knowl. Based Dev. 4 
(2), 109–125. 
Central Statistics Office (CSO), 2016. Census 2016. Central Statistics Office, Cork.  
Coletta, C., Heaphy, L., Kitchin, R., 2019. From the accidental to articulated smart city: 
the creation and work of ‘Smart Dublin ’. Eur. Urban Reg. Stud. 26 (4), 349–364. H. Karimikia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 185 (2022) 122100
21Comacchio, A., Bonesso, S., Pizzi, C., 2012. Boundary spanning between industry and 
university: the role of technology transfer centres. J. Technol. Transf. 37 (6), 
943–966. 
Cummings, J.N., 2004. Work groups, structural diversity, and knowledge sharing in a 
global organization. Manag. Sci. 50 (3), 352–364. 
Dantec, C.A.L., DiSalvo, C., 2013. Infrastructuring and the formation of publics in 
participatory design. Soc. Stud. Sci. 43 (2), 241–264. 
De Haes, S., Van Grembergen, W., 2005. IT governance structures, processes and 
relational mechanisms: achieving IT/business alignment in a major Belgian financial 
group. In: Proceedings of the 38th Annual Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences, Big Island, Hawaii, USA, 3-6 January 2005. IEEE, Washington, D.C.  
De Haes, S., Van Grembergen, W., 2009. An exploratory study into IT governance 
implementations and its impact on business/IT alignment. Inf. Syst. Manag. 26 (2), 
123–137. 
De Waal, M., 2014. The City as Interface. How New Media are Changing the City. 
Naio10publishers, Amsterdam .  
Dimelli, D., 2016. Can Greek cities be smart? J. Reg. Socio-Econ. Issues 3 (2), 8–22. 
Dublin Chamber of Commerce, n.d., Dublin Chamber of Commerce (n. d.). Economic 
profile of Dublin. Dublin Chamber of Commerce. Available at https://www. 
dublinchamber.ie/About-Us/Economic-Profile-of-Dublin. 
Dublin City Council, n.d., Dublin City Council (n.d.). Smart Dublin. Dublin City Council. 
Available at https://www.dublincity.ie/business/economic-development-and- 
enterprise/smart-cities/smart-dublin. 
Eisenhardt, K.M., 1989. Building theories from case study research. Acad. Manag. Rev. 
14 (4), 532–550. 
Emerson, K., Nabatchi, T., Balogh, S., 2012. An integrative framework for collaborative 
governance. J. Public Adm. Res. Theory 22 (1), 1–29. 
Engelbert, J., Van Zoonen, L., Hirzalla, F., 2019. Excluding citizens from the european 
smart city: the discourse practices of pursuing and granting smartness. Technol. 
Forecast. Soc. Chang. 142, 347–353. 
Falco, E., Kleinhans, R., 2018. Beyond information-sharing. A typology of government 
challenges and requirements for two-way social media communication with citizens. 
Electron. J. e-Gov. 16 (1), 32–45. 
Faraj, S., Yan, A., 2009. Boundary work in knowledge teams. J. Appl. Psychol. 94 (3), 
604. 
Federici, T., Braccini, A.M., Sæbø, Ø., 2015. ‘Gentlemen, all aboard! ’ ICT and party 
politics: reflections from a mass-eParticipation experience.  Gov. Inf. Q. 32 (3), 
287–298. 
Ferraris, A., Erhardt, N., Bresciani, S., 2019. Ambidextrous work in smart city project 
alliances: unpacking the role of human resource management systems. Int. J. Hum. 
Resour. Manag. 30 (4), 680–701. 
Fisk, A., Berente, N., Lyytinen, K., 2010. Boundary spanning competencies and 
information system development project success. In: Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Information Systems, (ICIS 2010), Saint Louis, MO, USA, 12-15 
December 2010 . 
Fleming, L., Waguespack, D.M., 2007. Brokerage, boundary spanning, and leadership in 
open innovation communities. Organ. Sci. 18 (2), 165–180. 
Flyvbjerg, B., 2006. Five misunderstandings about case-study research. Qual. Inq. 12 (2), 
219–245. 
Golafshani, N., 2003. Understanding reliability and validity in qualitative research. Qual. 
Rep. 8 (4), 597–607. 
Gopal, A., Gosain, S., 2010. Research note – the role of organizational controls and 
boundary spanning in software development outsourcing: implications for project 
performance. Inf. Syst. Res. 21 (4), 960–982. 
Guldemond, N.A., Van Geenhuizen, M.S., 2012. Critical factors in ‘livings labs’ for new 
health concepts and medical technology. In: CESUN 2012: 3rd International 
Engineering Systems Symposium, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands, 
18-20 June 2012 . 
Hafiz, K., 2008. Case study example. Qual. Rep. 13 (4), 544–559. 
Hansen, M.T., 1999. The search-transfer problem: the role of weak ties in sharing 
knowledge across organization subunits. Adm. Sci. Q. 44 (1), 82–111. 
Harvey, S., Peterson, R.S., Anand, N., 2014. The process of team boundary spanning in 
multi-organizational contexts. Small Group Res. 45 (5), 506–538. 
Henderson, R.M., Clark, K.B., 1990. Architectural innovation: the reconfiguration of 
existing product technologies and the failure of established firms. Adm. Sci. Q. 35 
(1), 9–30. 
Hojer, M., Wangel, J., 2015. Smart sustainable cities: definition and challenges. In: 
Hilty, L.M., Aebischer, B. (Eds.), ICT Innovations for Sustainability. Springer, Cham, 
pp. 333–349. 
Hollands, R.G., 2008. Will the real smart city please stand up? Intelligent, progressive or 
entrepreneurial? City 12 (3), 303–320. 
Howells, J., Tether, B., Gallouj, F., Djellal, F., Gallouj, C., Blind, K., Edler, J., Hipp, C., 
Montobbio, F., Corrocher, N., Macpherson, A., Banach, D., 2004. Innovation in 
Services: Issues at Stake and Trends. Commission of the European Communities, 
Brussels .  
Janowski, T., 2015. Digital government evolution: from transformation to 
contextualization. Gov. Inf. Q. 32 (3), 221–236. 
Johnson, R.B., 1997. Examining the validity structure of qualitative research. Education 
118 (2), 282–292. 
Kellogg, K.C., Orlikowski, W.J., Yates, J., 2006. Life in the trading zone: structuring 
coordination across boundaries in postbureaucratic organizations. Organ. Sci. 17 (1), 
22–44. 
Kitchin, R., 2014. The real-time city? Big data and smart urbanism. GeoJournal 79 (1), 
1–14. 
Kitchin, R., 2015. Making sense of smart cities: addressing present shortcomings. Camb. 
J. Reg. Econ. Soc. 8 (1), 131–136. Kitchin, R., 2016. The ethics of smart cities and urban science. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A 
Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 374 (2083), 20160115 . 
Kitchin, R., McArdle, G., 2016. What makes big data, big data? Exploring the ontological 
characteristics of 26 datasets. Big Data Soc. 3 (1). 
Kummitha, R.K.R., Crutzen, N., 2017. How do we understand smart cities? An 
evolutionary perspective. Cities 67, 43–52. 
Kylili, A., Fokaides, P.A., 2015. European smart cities: the role of zero energy buildings. 
Sustain. Cities Soc. 15, 86–95. 
Lazaroiu, G.C., Roscia, M., 2012. Definition methodology for the smart cities model. 
Energy 47 (1), 326–332. 
Lee, J.H., Hancock, M.G., Hu, M.C., 2014. Towards an effective framework for building 
smart cities: lessons from Seoul and San Francisco. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 
89, 80–99. 
Leonard-Barton, D., 1992. Core capabilities and core rigidities: a paradox in managing 
new product development. Strateg. Manag. J. 13 (S1), 111–125. 
Levina, N., Vaast, E., 2005. The emergence of boundary spanning competence in 
practice: implications for implementation and use of information systems. MIS Q. 29 
(2), 335–363. 
Levina, N., Vaast, E., 2008. Innovating or doing as told? Status differences and 
overlapping boundaries in offshore collaboration. MIS Q. 32 (2), 307–332. 
Lin, Y., 2018. A comparison of selected Western and Chinese smart governance: the 
application of ICT in governmental management, participation and collaboration. 
Telecommun. Policy 42 (10), 800–809. 
Lin, Y., Geertman, S., 2015. Smart governance, collaborative planning and planning 
support systems: a fruitful triangle? In: Geertman, S., Feirrera Jr., J., Goodspeed, R., 
Stillwell, J. (Eds.), Planning Support Systems and Smart Cities. Springer, Cham, 
pp. 261–277. 
Lombardi, P., Giordano, S., Farouh, H., Yousef, W., 2012. Modelling the smart city 
performance. Innovation 25 (2), 137–149. 
Maccani, G., Connolly, N., McLoughlin, Sh., Puvvala, A., Karimikia, H., Donnellan, B., 
2020. An emerging typology of IT governance structural mechanisms in smart cities. 
Gov. Inf. Q. 37 (4). 
Malek, J.A., Lim, S.B., Yigitcanlar, T., 2021. Social inclusion indicators for building 
citizen-centric smart cities: a systematic literature review. Sustainability 13 (1). 
Marks, M.A., Mathieu, J.E., Zaccaro, S.J., 2001. A temporally based framework and 
taxonomy of team processes. Acad. Manag. Rev. 26 (3), 356–376. 
Marrone, J.A., 2010. Team boundary spanning: a multilevel review of past research and 
proposals for the future. J. Manag. 36 (4), 911–940. 
Martin, C.J., Evans, J., Karvonen, A., 2018. Smart and sustainable? Five tensions in the 
visions and practices of the smart-sustainable city in Europe and North America. 
Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 133, 269–278. 
McNeill, D., 2015. Global firms and smart technologies: IBM and the reduction of cities. 
Trans. Inst. Br. Geogr. 40 (4), 562–574. 
Meijer, A., 2016. Smart city governance: a local emergent perspective. In: Gil-Garcia, J. 
R., Pardo, T.A., Nam, T. (Eds.), Smarter as the New Urban Agenda: A Comprehensive 
View of the 21st Century City. Springer, Cham, pp. 73–85. 
Meijer, A., Bolívar, M.P.R., 2016. Governing the smart city: a review of the literature on 
smart urban governance. Int. Rev. Adm. Sci. 82 (2), 392–408. 
Meijer, A., Thaens, M., 2018. Urban technological innovation: developing and testing a 
sociotechnical framework for studying smart city projects. Urban Aff. Rev. 54 (2), 
363–387. 
Miles, M.B., Huberman, A.M., 1984. Drawing valid meaning from qualitative data: 
towards a shared craft. Educ. Res. 13, 20–30. 
Mills, D.E., Izadgoshasb, I., Pudney, S.G., 2021. Smart City collaboration: a review and 
an agenda for establishing sustainable collaboration. Sustainability 13 (16), 9189 . 
Misuraca, G., Broster, D., Centeno, C., 2012. Digital Europe 2030: designing scenarios for 
ICT in future governance and policy making. Gov. Inf. Q. 29, S121 –S131 . 
Mitchell, V.L., 2006. Knowledge integration and information technology project 
performance. MIS Q. 30 (4), 919–939. 
Mora, L., Bolici, R., Deakin, M., 2017. The first two decades of smart-city research: a 
bibliometric analysis. J. Urban Technol. 24 (1), 3–27. 
Mora, L., Deakin, M., Reid, A., 2019. Strategic principles for smart city development: a 
multiple case study analysis of european best practices. Technol. Forecast. Soc. 
Chang. 142, 70–97. 
Mørk, B.E., Hoholm, T., Maaninen-Olsson, E., Aanestad, M., 2012. Changing practice 
through boundary organizing: a case from medical R&D. Hum. Relat. 65 (2), 
263–288. 
Mu, R., Haershan, M., Wu, P., 2022. What organizational conditions, in combination, 
drive technology enactment in government-led smart city projects? Technol. 
Forecast. Soc. Chang. 174, 121220 . 
Myeong, S., Kim, Y., Ahn, M.J., 2020. Smart city strategies – technology push or culture 
pull? A case study exploration of gimpo and namyangju, South Korea. Smart Cities 4 
(1), 41–53. 
Nam, T., Pardo, T.A., 2011. Smart city as urban innovation: focusing on management, 
policy, and context. In: Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Theory 
and Practice of Electronic Governance, Tallinn, Estonia, 26-28 September 2011, 
pp. 185–194. 
Nam, T., Pardo, T.A., 2014. The changing face of a city government: a case study of 
Philly311. Gov. Inf. Q. 31, S1–S9. 
Nesti, G., 2020. Defining and assessing the transformational nature of smart city 
governance: insights from four European cases. Int. Rev. Adm. Sci. 86 (1), 20–37. 
Nickerson, R.C., Varshney, U., Muntermann, J., 2013. A method for taxonomy 
development and its application in information systems. Eur. J. Inf. Syst. 22 (3), 
336–359. 
Nicolini, D., Mengis, J., Swan, J., 2012. Understanding the role of objects in cross- 
disciplinary collaboration. Organ. Sci. 23 (3), 612–629. H. Karimikia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
Technological Forecasting & Social Change 185 (2022) 122100
22Nonaka, I., 1994. A dynamic theory of organizational knowledge creation. Organ. Sci. 5 
(1), 14–37. 
Nordin, R., 2012. Creating Knowledge – Based Clusters Through Urban Development: A 
Study of Cyberjaya, MSC Malaysia. Rheinischen Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universit at. 
Doctoral Thesis .  
O'Mahony, S., Bechky, B.A., 2008. Boundary organizations: enabling collaboration 
among unexpected allies. Adm. Sci. Q. 53 (3), 422–459. 
Paraponaris, C., Sigal, M., Haas, A., 2015. Crowding at the frontier: boundary spanners, 
gatekeepers and knowledge brokers. J. Knowl. Manag. 19 (5), 1029 –1047 . 
Pardo, T.A., Gil-Garcia, J.R., Luna-Reyes, L.F., 2010. Collaborative governance and cross- 
boundary information sharing: envisioning a networked and IT-enabled public 
administration. In: O’Leary, R., Van Slyke, D.M., Kim, S. (Eds.), The Future of Public 
Administration Around the World: The Minnowbrook Perspective. Georgetown 
University Press, Washington, D.C., pp. 129–139 
Paroutis, S., Bennett, M., Heracleous, L., 2014. A strategic view on smart city technology: 
the case of IBM Smarter Cities during a recession. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 89, 
262–272. 
Pawlowski, S.D., Robey, D., 2004. Bridging user organizations: Knowledge brokering and 
the work of information technology professionals. MIS Q. 28 (4), 645–672. 
Pereira, G.V., Cunha, M.A., Lampoltshammer, T.J., Parycek, P., Testa, M.G., 2017. 
Increasing collaboration and participation in smart city governance: a cross-case 
analysis of smart city initiatives. Inf. Technol. Dev. 23 (3), 526–553. 
Perng, S.Y., 2017. Practices and politics of collaborative urban infrastructuring: Traffic 
Light Box Artworks in Dublin Streets. In: The Programmable City Working Paper, 
p. 33. 
Peshkin, A., 1993. The goodness of qualitative research. Educ. Res. 22 (2), 23–29. 
Ranga, M., Etzkowitz, H., 2013. Triple Helix systems: an analytical framework for 
innovation policy and practice in the Knowledge Society. Ind. High. Educ. 27 (4), 
237–262. 
Roberts, M.J., Beamish, P.W., 2017. The scaffolding activities of international returnee 
executives: a learning based perspective of global boundary spanning. J. Manag. 
Stud. 54 (4), 511–539. 
Ruhlandt, R.W.S., 2018. The governance of smart cities: a systematic literature review. 
Cities 81, 1–23. 
Sadowski, J., Bendor, R., 2019. Selling smartness: corporate narratives and the smart city 
as a sociotechnical imaginary. Sci. Technol. Hum. Values 44 (3), 540–563. 
Sancino, A., Hudson, L., 2020. Leadership in, of, and for smart cities – case studies from 
Europe, America, and Australia. Public Manag. Rev. 22 (5), 701–725. 
Sawyer, S., Guinan, P.J., Cooprider, J., 2010. Social interactions of information systems 
development teams: a performance perspective. Inf. Syst. J. 20 (1), 81–107. 
Schein, E.H., 2017. Organizational Culture and Leadership, 4th ed. Jossey-Bass, San 
Francisco .  
Schotter, A.P.J., Mudambi, R., Doz, Y.L., Gaur, A., 2017. Boundary spanning in global 
organizations. Journal of International Management 54 (4), 403–421. https://doi. 
org/10.1111/joms.12256 . 
Schotter, A., Beamish, P.W., 2011. Performance effects of MNC headquarters – subsidiary 
conflict and the role of boundary spanners: the case of headquarter initiative 
rejection. J. Int. Manag. 17 (3), 243–259. 
Seltzer, E., Mahmoudi, D., 2013. Citizen participation, open innovation, and 
crowdsourcing: challenges and opportunities for planning. J. Plan. Lit. 28 (1), 3–18. 
Shelton, T., Clark, J., 2016. Technocratic values and uneven development in the “Smart 
City”. Obtenido de sitio Web de Metropolitics. Available at. http://www.metropol 
itiques.eu/Technocratic-Values-and-Uneven.html . 
Shelton, T., Zook, M., Wiig, A., 2015. The ‘actually existing smart city’. Camb. J. Reg. 
Econ. Soc. 8 (1), 13–25. 
Shwayri, S.T., 2013. A model Korean ubiquitous eco-city? The politics of making Songdo. 
J. Urban Technol. 20 (1), 39–55. 
Small, M.L., 2009. How many cases do I need? On science and the logic of case selection 
in field-based research. Ethnography 10 (1), 5–38. 
Soderstr om, O., Paasche, T., Klauser, F., 2014. Smart cities as corporate storytelling. City 
18 (3), 307–320. 
Stake, R.E., 2013. Multiple Case Study Analysis. Guilford Press, New York.  
Stratigea, A., Kyriakides, E., Nicolaides, C., 2017. Smart Cities in the Mediterranean: 
Coping With Sustainability Objectives in Small and Medium-sized Cities and Island 
Communities. Springer, Cham .  
Strauss, A., Corbin, J., 1990. Basics of Qualitative Research. Sage publications . 
Tan, S.Y., Taeihagh, A., 2020. Smart city governance in developing countries: a 
systematic literature review. Sustainability 12 (3), 899. 
Teece, D.J., 1998. Capturing value from knowledge assets: the new economy, markets for 
know-how, and intangible assets. Calif. Manag. Rev. 40 (3), 55–79. 
Tellis, W., 1997. Application of a case study methodology. Qual. Rep. 3 (3), 1–19. 
Tippmann, E., Sharkey Scott, P., Parker, A., 2017. Boundary capabilities in MNCs: 
knowledge transformation for creative solution development. J. Manag. Stud. 54 (4), 
455–482. 
Torfing, J., Peters, B.G., Pierre, J., Sørensen, E., 2012. Interactive Governance: 
Advancing the Paradigm. Oxford University Press, Oxford .  
Towne, L., Shavelson, R.J., 2002. Scientific Research in Education. National Academy 
Press Publications Sales Office . 
Townsend, A.M., 2013. Smart Cities: Big Data, Civic Hackers, and the Quest for a New 
Utopia. W. W. Norton & Company, New York.  
Tsang, E.W., Williams, J.N., 2012. Generalization and induction: misconceptions, 
clarifications, and a classification of induction. MIS Q. 36 (3), 729–748. Tushman, M.L., 1977. Special boundary roles in the innovation process. Adm. Sci. Q. 22, 
587–605. 
Van Geenhuizen, M., 2016. Living Labs as boundary-spanners between Triple Helix 
actors. J. Contemp. East. Asia 15 (1), 78–97. 
Wang, P., 2018. Smart urban planning and public participation. In: Lin, Y.L., Wang, S.F., 
Geertman, S., Deng, Z.H. (Eds.), Smart Governance and New Forms of Collaborative 
Planning. The Commercial Press, Beijing .  
Wiig, A., 2015. IBM’s smart city as techno-utopian policy mobility. City 19 (2–3), 
258–273. 
Wiig, A., 2016. The empty rhetoric of the smart city: from digital inclusion to economic 
promotion in Philadelphia. Urban Geogr. 37 (4), 535–553. 
Yigitcanlar, T., Lee, S.H., 2014. Korean ubiquitous-eco-city: a smart-sustainable urban 
form or a branding hoax? Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 89, 100–114. 
Yigitcanlar, T., Kamruzzaman, M., Buys, L., Ioppolo, G., Sabatini-Marques, J., da 
Costa, E.M., Yun, J.J., 2018. Understanding ‘smart cities ’: intertwining development 
drivers with desired outcomes in a multidimensional framework. Cities 81, 145–160. 
Yigitcanlar, T., Kamruzzaman, M., Foth, M., Sabatini-Marques, J., da Costa, E., 
Ioppolo, G., 2019. Can cities become smart without being sustainable? A systematic 
review of the literature. Sustain. Cities Soc. 45, 348–365. 
Yin, R., 1994. Case Study Research: Design and Methods, 2nd ed. Sage Publishing, 
Thousand Oaks, CA.  
Yin, R.K., 2003. Designing case studies. Qual. Res. Methods 5 (14), 359–386. 
Yin, R.K., 2009. Case Study Research: Design and Methods, Vol. 5. Sage Publishing, 
Thousand Oaks, CA.  
Yin, R.K., 2013. Validity and generalization in future case study evaluations. Evaluation 
19 (3), 321–332. 
Yusof, N., Van Loon, J., 2012. Engineering a global city: the case of cyberjaya. Space 
Cult. 15 (4), 298–316. 
Zuzul, T.W., 2019. “Matter battles ”: cognitive representations, boundary objects, and the 
failure of collaboration in two smart cities. Acad. Manag. J. 62 (3), 739–764. 
Dr. Hadi Karimikia is an Assistant Professor in the Business Information Systems depart -
ment at the University College Cork. He was a Marie Sklodowska-Curie Research Fellow at 
LERO, the Irish Software Research Centre at Maynooth University, Ireland. He received his 
PhD in Business Information Systems from Auckland University of Technology in 2017. His 
research has appeared in various peer reviewed IS conferences, including ICIS, ECIS, 
AMCIS, HICSS, and ACIS, as well as IS journals, such as Information Systems Frontiers, 
Internet Research, Communication of the Association for Information Systems, Govern -
ment Information Quarterly, and elsewhere. 
Dr. Robert Bradshaw is an SFI funded Post-Doctoral Researcher in Maynooth University's 
Technology Adoption Research Centre under the supervision of Prof. Brian Donnellan. 
Robert holds a PhD in Geography from Maynooth University funded by the European 
Research Council. His thesis, “Instumentalization in the Public Smart Bikeshare Sector ”, 
was concerned with understanding how smart technologies are conceived, created and 
implemented, and explores the ways these processes are shaped by historical, geo- 
political, economic and technical contexts. His current research interests include philos -
ophy of technology, ethics, collaborative design and participatory governance. 
Dr. Harminder Singh is an Associate Professor in the Faculty of Business, Economics and 
Law at the Auckland University of Technology, where he teaches courses in information 
systems strategy, information systems risk, and analytics. Harminder's research examines 
the governance of IT-enabled work environments, especially from an ethical perspective. 
His research has been published or accepted for publication in the Journal of Strategic 
Information Systems, Information & Management, the Journal of Information Technology, 
the Journal of Computer Information Systems, and elsewhere. 
Prof Adegboyega Ojo is Full Professor of Digital Government at the School of Public Policy 
and Administration, Faculty of Public Affairs, Carleton University, Canada. He is also 
Adjunct Professor at Maynooth University School of Business, Republic of Ireland. He 
currently serves as editorial board member for Government Information Quarterly Jour-
nal, and Associate Editor for the Information Polity Journal and ACM Digital Government: 
Research and Practice Journal. 
Prof Brian Donnellan is Professor of Information Systems Innovation at Maynooth Uni-
versity and is Co-Director of the Innovation Value Institute. He researches and develops 
unifying frameworks and road-maps to deliver IT enabled innovation whilst validating 
that these frameworks/tools have a broad applicability across differing industries and 
contexts. Prior to becoming an academic he spent 20 years working in the ICT industry. 
Michael Guerin is Programme Manager of Dublin's smart city testbed – Smart Docklands – 
an initiative of Dublin City Council and CONNECT which aims to give startups and in-
novators an opportunity to trial and test technology in a real-life urban environment. The 
initiative also brings together tech super companies such as Google, Huawei, Microsoft and 
Intel; to implement cutting edge IoT technology in the city of Dublin. Michael engages with 
multiple stakeholder groups in The Docklands with the goal of creating smart city solutions 
with citizen at the centre of the process. H. Karimikia et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              