Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Leadership Quarterly
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/leaqua
Review
Functional leadership in interteam contexts: Understanding ‘what ’in the
context of why? where? when? and who?☆
Dorothy R. Cartera,⁎, Kristin L. Cullen-Lesterb, Justin M. Jonesa, Alexandra Gerbasic,
Donna Chrobot-Masond, Eun Young Naeb
aDepartment of Psychology, The University of Georgia, 125 Baldwin Street, Athens, GA 30602, USA
bDepartment of Management & Leadership, Bauer College of Business, University of Houston, 4750 Calhoun Rd, Houston, TX 77004, USA
cDepartment of Management, University of Exeter, Streatham Court, Rennes Drive, Exeter EX4 4PU, UK
dDepartment of Psychology, University of Cincinnati, 2600 Clifton Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45221, USA
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
LeadershipBoundary spanningGroup social capitalMultiteam systemsIntergroup relationsABSTRACT
Research on team leadership has primarily focused on leadership processes targeted within teams, in support of
team objectives. Yet, teams are open systems that interact with other teams to achieve proximal as well as distal
goals. This review clari ﬁes that de ﬁning ‘what ’constitutes functionally eﬀ ective leadership in interteam contexts
requires greater precision with regard to where (within teams, across teams) and why(team goals, system goals)
leadership processes are enacted, as well as greater consideration of when andamong whom leadership processes
arise. We begin by synthesizing ﬁndings from empirical studies published over the past 30 years that shed light
on questions of what, where, why, when, and who related to interteam leadership and end by providing three
overarching recommendations for how research should proceed in order to provide a more comprehensive
picture of leadership in interteam contexts.
The use of teams1in organizations is ubiquitous ( Mathieu,
Hollenbeck, van Knippenberg, & Ilgen, 2017 ), and thus, a primary
function of organizational leadership is to facilitate team success
(Kozlowski, Mak, & Chao, 2016 ;Morgeson, DeRue, & Karam, 2010 ).
Prior research on team leadership has focused primarily on identifyingfunctional (i.e., e ﬀective; McGrath, 1962 ) leadership processes and
relationships within teams without considering the larger systems
within which teams are embedded (c.f. Hogg, van Knippenberg, & Rast,
2012 ). However, no team is a ‘self-suﬃcient island ’—teams must in-
teract with and receive resources from their embedding environments
in order to succeed ( Ancona, 1990; Arrow, McGrath, & Berdahl, 2000;
Kozlowski & Klein, 2000). Indeed, formal as well as informal teamleaders often engage in boundary management activities to support
their teams, such as acquiring external resources, promoting teaminterests, or interpreting the embedding environment ( Ancona, 1990;
Roby, 1961 ;Yukl, 2012; Zaccaro, Rittman, & Marks, 2001 ), and lea-
dership is also needed to in ﬂuence collaborative e ﬀorts across inter-
dependent systems comprised of multiple teams pursuing shared goals
(Carter & DeChurch, 2014 ;Ernst & Chrobot-Mason, 2011, a ;Ernst &
Chrobot-Mason, 2011, b; Mathieu, Marks, & Zaccaro, 2001 ;Pittinsky &
Simon, 2007; Zaccaro, Marks, & DeChurch, 2012 ).
Despite many calls for researchers to adopt an ‘external ’perspective
to the study of team leadership by conceptualizing teams as “open
systems entailing complex interactions with people beyond their bor-ders ”(Ancona, 1990, p. 335), research on leadership in interteam con-
texts is relatively rare. For instance, studies based on the leadership
theories that have received the most research attention in recent dec-
ades (i.e., Transformational Leadership Theory and Leader-Member
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.leaqua.2019.101378
Received 16 November 2018; Received in revised form 22 December 2019; Accepted 23 December 2019☆Authors’ note: The development of this paper was supported in part by funding from the National Science Foundation (SES, #1853470, #1853404), the National
Institutes of Health (NIH, #UL1TR002378), and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA, #80NSSC18K0511). We would like to thank Kristen
Campbell for her assistance with identifying articles that were considered for inclusion in earlier versions of this paper.
⁎Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: dcarter3@uga.edu (D.R. Carter), klcullen-lester@bauer.uh.edu (K.L. Cullen-Lester), justin.jones@uga.edu (J.M. Jones),
gerbasi@exeter.ac.uk (A. Gerbasi), donna.chrobot-mason@uc.edu (D. Chrobot-Mason), enae@bauer.uh.edu (E.Y. Nae).
1In this paper, the term “teams” is used interchangeably with the term “groups ”. We acknowledge that there are often important distinctions between teams and
groups in terms of the level of internal interdependence among members and the di ﬀerentiation of members' tasks ( Kozlowski & Ilgen, 2006 ). However, in the context
of organizations, the similarities between teams and work groups are more relevant to the content discussed (i.e., members of both work groups and teams interact,pursue shared goals, see each other as members of the same collective, and are seen by others as members of the same collective; Ancona, 1990 ).The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378
Available online 14 January 2020
1048-9843/ © 2020 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
T
Exchange Theory [LMX]; c.f. Dinh et al., 2014), typically investigate the
role of intragroup leadership processes and relationships for individuals
and small groups. These studies seldom consider how the multilayered
interdependencies inherent to interteam situations (i.e., inter-
dependencies within as well as between teams; Kirkman & Harris,
2017 ) coupled with di ﬀerences in the priorities, identities, and cap-
abilities of di ﬀerent teams need to be managed in order to minimize
intergroup con ﬂict and maximize positive outcomes for speci ﬁc teams
and the larger systems they operate within.
The relative lack of research attention paid toward leadership in
interteam contexts is unfortunate given that such contexts present
serious challenges and tensions for leaders that go beyond the demands
of leadership within isolated teams. For instance, leaders operating in
interteam contexts often face trade-o ﬀs and competing demands and
may choose to promote intrateam relations and team goals at the ex-pense of interteam relations and system goals, or vice versa ( Pittinsky &
Simon, 2007). Interteam contexts may also require that leaders facil-itate appropriate patterns of interactions between interdependent teams
(Cummings & Kiesler, 2005 ;Luciano, DeChurch, & Mathieu, 2018 )
while avoiding ‘over collaboration ’between teams which can result in
ineﬃciencies, role overload and decreased motivation ( Cross, Rebele, &
Grant, 2016 ;Davison, Hollenbeck, Barnes, Sleesman, & Ilgen, 2012 ;
Marrone, Tesluk, & Carson, 2007). These tensions are not captured
adequately by models of team leadership that focus primarily on lea-
dership processes targeted within teams in support of team-level ob-
jectives.
We propose that de ﬁning ‘functional ’leadership becomes more
complex when researchers shift from studying leadership within iso-
lated teams to studying leadership in interteam contexts where teams
are embedded in larger interdependent systems. As Fig. 1 illustrates,
deﬁning functional leadership in interteam contexts not only involves
clarifying ‘what ’leaders are, or should be, doing (e.g., enacting speci ﬁc
leadership behaviors, facilitating certain processes, relationships, and
shared psychological states), ‘who ’is leading (e.g., formal leaders,
formal leadership teams, informal leaders) and ‘when ’(i.e., under
which circumstances), the multi-level nature of interteam contexts also
demands more consideration of ‘where ’leadership processes are tar-
geted (e.g., within teams, across team boundaries) and ‘why ’(e.g., to
support
team outcomes, to support system outcomes).
Using this framework to guide our review, we evaluate the degree to
which empirical studies of leadership and/or the targets of leadership
(e.g., interaction processes; psychological states) published over the
past 30 years have addressed questions of why,where ,what,who, and
when related to leadership in interteam contexts. Although most lea-
dership studies have taken an ‘internal ’perspective, several burgeoning
streams of research in areas such as group boundary spanning (e.g.,
Ancona & Caldwell, 1990; Tushman & Scanlan, 1981), group social ca-
pital (e.g., Oh, Chung, & Labianca, 2004), boundary spanning leadership
(e.g., Benoliel & Somech, 2015 ),intergroup leadership (Pittinsky &
Simon, 2007), and multiteam systems (e.g., Mathieu et al., 2001 ;Zaccaro
et al., 2012 ) are heeding calls to incorporate an external perspective byinvestigating leadership processes targeted across team boundaries.Indeed, our review reveals that researchers have provided many in-
sightful answers to the ﬁve questions in Fig. 1 .
However, we also identi ﬁed a number of limitations, assumptions,
and divisions which pervade the extant literature on leadership in in-
terteam contexts. Prior research has tended to progress in divergent
directions, as evidenced by researchers' use of di ﬀerent terminology
(e.g., intergroup leadership ;Pittinsky, 2009 ;multiteam leadership ;Zaccaro
& DeChurch, 2012 ), examination of di ﬀerent types of interteam inter-
actions (e.g., ambassadorial activities ;(Ancona & Caldwell, 1992, b,
1992, a );interteam coordination ;Davison, Hollenbeck, Barnes,
Sleesman, & Ilgen, 2012), and focus on objectives at di ﬀerent collective
levels of observation (e.g., team-level;Marrone, Tesluk, & Carson, 2007;
system -level;DeChurch & Marks, 2006 ). Studies within disparate re-
search 
streams are revealing di ﬀerent pieces of the larger puzzle of
functional leadership in interteam contexts. Our review aims to bringthese puzzle pieces together in order to provide a more comprehensive
understanding of this important phenomenon. In closing, we o ﬀer three
recommendations for how future integrative research might providegreater insight into how leaders (formal and informal) can navigate the
tensions of interteam contexts and promote the success of both teams
and the broader organizational systems teams operate within.
Review approach
The purpose of this review is to clarify the nature of functional
leadership in interteam contexts, integrate and critically evaluate re-
levant ﬁndings from prior research, and identify promising areas for
future inquiry. Broadly, leadership is deﬁ ned as a “process of in ﬂuen-
cing others to understand and agree about what needs to be done and
how to do it, and the process of facilitating individual and collective
eﬀorts to accomplish shared objectives ”(Yukl, 2006 , p. 8). Thus, lea-
dership processes are situated in relation to speci ﬁc individuals and/or
collectives ( where is leadership targeted ?) and are enacted to facilitate
speciﬁc objectives ( why is leadership enacted ?). As we depict in Fig. 2,
these two questions of where andwhyare useful for organizing studies
of leadership processes in intergroup contexts into four categories.
As shown in the ﬁrst quadrant ( Category 1)o f Fig. 2, leadership
processes might be targeted within teams (i.e., directly in relation to
team members) in support of team-level objectives (e.g., team perfor-
mance, viability, innovation). The vast majority of empirical studies ofleadership fall within Category 1. Examples include studies of team
leaders supporting team learning and adaptation ( Edmondson, 1999;
Kozlowski, Gully, McHugh, Salas, & Cannon-Bowers, 1996 ;Wageman,
2001 ), shared team leadership and team performance ( Zhu, Liao, Yam,
& Johnson, 2018), the e ﬀects of transformational leaders on the e ﬀec-
tiveness of individuals and teams ( Jung, Yammarino, & Lee, 2009 ), and
the dynamic delegation of leadership responsibility within teams(Klein, Ziegert, Knight, & Xiao, 2006).
However, leadership processes targeted across team boundaries in
support of team-level objectives ( Category 2) as well as leadership
Where is leadership targeted?
Leadership Within 
TeamsSystem 
Outcomes 
Team 
Outcomes  Processes and States 
across TeamsWhat processes and states targeted? Why (for what purpose)?
When (under what circumstances) 
does leadership occur?
Who is leading?Leadership Across 
Team Boundaries
Processes and States 
within TeamsInteraction Processes and Emergent States se m o c t u O s e s s e c o r P p i h s r eda e L
Fig. 1. Multi-level view of functional leadership in interdependent systems.D.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378
2
processes targeted within ( Category 3) and across ( Category 4) team
boundaries in support of system -level objectives are also critical to or-
ganizational success. Many scholars have emphasized that ‘external ’or
‘cross-boundary ’leadership behaviors that connect teams to entities and
resources in their embedding environments represent a critical category
of functional leadership behaviors for teams ( (Ancona & Caldwell,
1988, 1990) ;Balkundi & Harrison, 2006; Choi, 2002 ;Contractor,
DeChurch, Carson, Carter, & Keegan, 2012 ;Elkins & Keller, 2003;
Marrone, 2010 ;Oh, Labianca, & Chung, 2006 ;van Knippenberg, 2003;
Yan & Louis, 1999; Yukl, 2012 ;Zaccaro et al., 2001). Further, many
important objectives, including patient care ( DiazGranados, Dow,
Perry, & Palesis, 2014), disaster response ( DeChurch et al., 2011), new
product development ( Marks & Luvison, 2012 ), and military operations
(Davison, Hollenbeck, Barnes, Sleesman, & Ilgen, 2012 ), represent
distal goals that require leadership processes to guide coordinated ef-forts within and across multiple teams ( Mathieu et al., 2001 ).
Literature search
We used the 2 × 2 framework shown in Fig. 2 to guide our review of
previous research on leadership in interteam contexts. In recent years,
researchers have summarized studies of leadership processes targeted
within teams in support of team objectives (Category 1) in multiple
well-executed reviews of team leadership (e.g., Kozlowski et al., 2016;
Mathieu et al., 2017 ;Morgeson et al., 2010 ) and speci ﬁc leadership
theories (e.g., LMX; Martin, Guillaume, Thomas, Lee, & Epitropaki,
2016 ; Transformational Leadership; Banks, McCauley, Gardner, &
Guler, 2016 ;Wang, Oh, Courtright, & Colbert, 2011; shared leadership
within teams; Zhu et al., 2018 ). Therefore, we focused our review on
studies falling within one or more of the other three categories shown in
Fig. 2.
The starting point for our literature search was 1990, corresponding
with the appearance of articles calling for researchers to take an ‘ex-
ternal ’perspective
 to better understand the performance of teams
(Ancona, 1990). To identify articles, we conducted a search across a
variety of relevant online databases (Business Source Complete,
ECONLit, E-Journals, Medline, PsycINFO, and Psychology and Beha-vioral Sciences Collection via the EBSCOhost research databases) for
articles published between January 1990 and August 2019. We used
this approach in order to ensure that we identi ﬁed articles from a range
of academic disciplines. We required that articles contain one or moreof the following search terms in the abstract: inter-group or intergroup;
inter-team or interteam; boundary spanning or boundary activity;multi-team or multiteam; and between team(s). Additionally, wemanually searched the reference sections of key publications (e.g., re-
view articles, meta-analyses, empirical papers with high citation rates)on the topics of teams, multiteam systems, boundary spanning, and
intergroup relations in order to identify additional articles. We limited
the results of our search to peer-reviewed academic journals published
in English. Our initial search yielded 2617 articles.
In the next step, we removed duplicate articles and conducted a pre-
screening process of the articles' titles and abstracts using the following
inclusion criteria: (1) the research appeared to be an empirical study
(i.e., qualitative/quantitative/mixed-methods); (2) the research in-
vestigated how leaders (formal and/or informal) (a) manage or engage
in interaction processes across group boundaries (excluding theboundary between employees and customers), (b) a ﬀect intergroup
relations, and/or (c) facilitate superordinate (interteam/system-level)outcomes, and/or the research investigated processes or psychological
states that could be targets of cross-boundary leadership for team goals
(Category 2) or leadership in support of system goals (Categories 3 & 4);(3) the research was conducted within a workplace context or a la-
boratory simulation of a workplace context; (4) the research focused on
variables at the individual-, team-, and/or system-level of analysis (but
were not studies of entire ﬁrms); and (5) the publication outlet's impact
factor was equal to or higher than 1.0 (based on the Journal Citation
Reports, 2018). We chose this impact factor as an inclusion criterion to
ensure that our review drew on studies that are generally representative
of research in the ﬁeld and met standardized criteria for research
quality. Additionally, we excluded articles that did not consider out-comes at collective levels of analysis (e.g., studies showing that in-
dividuals who carry out boundary spanning activities gain personal
beneﬁts were excluded if they did not also discuss implications for
collectives; e.g., Burt, 1992). Further, as the focus of this review is on
cross-boundary leadership in the context of work teams , we followed the
precedent of Hogg et al. (2012) and did not consider studies examining
leadership across other demographic or social identity boundaries. This
pre-screening process resulted in 407 articles of which 405 full texts
were retrievable.
During the pre-screening process, we chose to err on the side of
inclusion (based on information provided in the article title and ab-stract). In the ﬁnal step of our process, the full text of each article was
reviewed carefully by the authorship team to con ﬁrm its relevance to
this review based on the inclusion criteria described previously. This
vetting process resulted in a smaller subset of 160 articles. Table 1
provides a list of the journals and the numbers of articles within eachWhere?
s m a e T  s s o r c A  s m a e T  n i h t i WWhy?
Team OutcomesCategory 1: Internally-focused 
leadership for the team
Influencing processes and states 
within teams to support
team-level outcomesCategory 2: Cross-boundary leadership 
for the team
Influencing processes and states 
across team boundaries to support 
team-level outcomesSystem OutcomesCategory 3: Internally-focused 
leadership for the system
Influencing processes and states 
within teams to support 
system-level outcomesCategory 4: Cross-boundary leadership 
for the system
Influencing processes and states 
across team boundaries to support
system-level outcomes
Fig. 2. An organizing framework for studies of functional leadership in interteam contexts.
Note. Shaded boxes are the focus of the current review.D.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378
3
journal included in our review. Notably, although many of the articles
in this ﬁnal list did not reference ‘leadership ’explicitly, they high-
lighted intrateam or interteam processes, states, or other attributes thatare potential targets of leadership in interteam contexts.
Article coding
Theﬁrst four authors extracted and coded each of the 160 articles to
identify the ways in which each article addressed the core elements of
functional leadership in interteam contexts ( why?where ?what?when ?
andwho?). We coded the answers to these ﬁve questions into emergent
sets of categories (see Table 2 for category examples). As a quality
check, every article was reviewed by at least two authors, and any in-consistencies were discussed until consensus was reached. We also
identiﬁed characteristics of the research designs used in each study. As
Table 3 summarizes, the majority of articles presented quantitative
research (64%); among these was a predominance of quantitative ﬁeld
studies (53%), which were predominantly cross-sectional (87%) usingsamples of working adults (90%). Studies of leadership (or targets of
leadership) for team goals were more likely to use quantitative (78%)
rather than qualitative methods (12%), studies of leadership for system
goals were more evenly split between quantitative (53%) and qualita-
tive methods (39%). We were encouraged to see studies using experi-
mental designs (still only 10% of the total studies reviewed here) and
mixed method approaches (9%). Additionally, many studies in-
corporated best practices for addressing common-method bias in-
cluding crisscross designs, temporal separation, and/or multi-source
data ( Podsako ﬀ, MacKenzie, Lee, & Podsako ﬀ, 2003 ;Podsako ﬀ,
MacKenzie, & Podsako ﬀ, 2012 ;Podsako ﬀ& Organ, 1986 ).
Synthesis of research on leadership in interteam contexts
Our review revealed that most empirical studies have answered the
question of ‘why ’leadership is enacted (i.e., for what purpose), by
emphasizing oneof two levels of collective objectives: (1) leadership
supports team-level objectives; or (2) leadership supports system -level
objectives, with only a small subset of studies emphasizing both team-
and system-level objectives simultaneously. We used the questions of
‘why ’and ‘where ’leadership occurs (internally-focused or cross-
boundary) in interteam contexts to organize and synthesize ﬁndings
from prior research (see online Appendix A
2for key ﬁndings from each
of the 160 articles). In the following sections, we clarify how the extantliterature has addressed the remaining three questions needed to un-
derstand ‘functional ’leadership in interteam contexts ( what?when ? and
who?) for each category.
Category 1: Internally-focused leadership for the team
Although a comprehensive review of empirical studies focusedTable 1
Journal titles and numbers of articles organized by disciplinary area.
Applied Psychology, Management, Human Resource Mgt., Org. Studies (94)
Academy of Mgt. J. (20)Org. Science (6)Human Relations (5)J. of Applied Psych. (5)J. of Mgt. (5)J. of Mgt. Studies (5)
Small Group Research (5)
Administrative Science Quarterly (4)J. of Org. Beh. (4)Leadership Quarterly (4)Group & Org. Mgt. (3)J. of Occupational & Org. Psych. (3)Mgt. Decision (3)
European J. of Work & Org. Psych. (3)
J. of Business Research (2)Org. Studies (2)American J. of Community Psych (1)Applied Psychology: An Int. Review (1)British J. of Industrial Relations (1)British J. of Mgt. (1)Frontiers in Psych. (1)
Int. J. of Human Resource Mgt. (1)
J. of Mgt. & Org. (1)J. of Leadership & Org. Studies (1)J. of Managerial Psych. (1)J. of Small Business Mgt. (1)Org. Beh. & Human Decision Processes (1)Personnel Psychology (1)Personnel Review (1)
Scandinavian J. of Mgt. (1)
Team Performance Mgt. (1)
Innovation, Mgt. Science, Operations, Strategy & Technology Mgt. (27)
Creativity & Innovation Mgt. (3)
Int. J. of Project Mgt. (3)J. of Engineering & Technology Mgt. (3)J. of Product Innovation Mgt. (3)R & D Mgt. (3)European J. of Innovation Mgt. (2)Information & Software Technology (2)Project Mgt. J. (2)
European J. of Operational Research (1)
Int. J. of Operations & Production Mgt. (1)J. of High Technology Mgt. Research (1)J. of Technology Mgt. Research (1)Research Policy (1)Technology Analysis & Strategic Mgt. (1)
Health & Medicine (9)
Int. J. of Medical Informatics (2)J. of Oncology Practice (2)Health & Social Care in the Community (1)Health Promotion Int. (1)
Health Services Research (1)
Int. J. of Environmental Research & Public Health (1)Intensive Care Medicine (1)
Other Disciplines (e.g., Int. Business, Education, Cognition, Information
Systems, Human Factors, Accounting, etc.) (30)
Human Factors (2)
Industrial Marketing Mgt. (2)J. of Service Research (2)Accounting Review (1)ACM Trans. on Mgt. Information Systems (1)Cognition, Technology & Work (1)
Communication Research (1)
Cross Cultural Mgt. (1)Educational Administration Quarterly (1)European J. of Marketing (1)IEEE Trans. on Software Engineering (1)Information Systems J. (1)Int. J. of Business Communication (1)J. of Information Technology (1)
J. of Int. Mgt. (1)
J. of Knowledge Mgt. (1)J. of Mgt. in Engineering (1)J. of Mgt. Information Systems (1)Table 1 (continued )
J. of Marketing Mgt. (1)
J. of Public Administration Research & Theory (1)
J. of World Business (1)Network Science (1)Public Administration (1)Public Mgt. Review (1)Small Business Economics (1)Social Networks (1)Sociological Focus (1)
Note:n= 160 articles; Beh. = Behavior; Int. = International; J. = Journal;
Mgt. = Management; Org. = Organizational, Organization;
Psych. = Psychology; Trans. = Transactions.
2doi: 10.17605/OSF.IO/AHTYFD.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378
4
solely on leadership targeted within teams in support of team objectives
(Category 1) is beyond the scope of this review, we summarize and
draw from Category 1 research in order to make comparisons between
the ways in which researchers have addressed questions of ‘what, ’
‘when, ’and ‘who ’in Category 1 versus the other categories.
What ? Identifying leadership processes targeted within groups has
been a primary focus of leadership research for nearly a century. Thesestudies typically leverage a functional perspective, arguing that team
leadership is ‘eﬀective ’if it ensures that all functions critical to task
accomplishment and team maintenance are addressed ( Fleishman et al.,
1991 ;Hackman & Walton, 1986; McGrath, 1962 ;Mumford, Zaccaro,
Harding, Jacobs, & Fleishman, 2000 ).
Early in ﬂuential studies organized leadership behaviors within
groups into two broad categories: task-oriented behaviors such as plan-
ning, deﬁ ning and clarifying objectives, problem-solving, and mon-
itoring goal progress; and person -oriented behaviors such as showing
concern for followers and expressing con ﬁdence in followers' abilities(e.g., Katz, Maccoby, Gurin, & Floor, 1951 ;Stogdill, 1948, 1974;
Stogdill & Coons, 1957 ). Additionally, with the rise of theories such as
Charismatic Leadership ( House, 1977 ;Weber, 1947), researchers began
to emphasize change -oriented leadership behaviors ( Yukl, 2012), which
are aimed at spurring and/or inspiring change within organizations.
The core idea that e ﬀective leadership within groups involves task-,
person-, and change-oriented behaviors has continued to pervade more
recent theories of leadership, such as Transformational/Transactional
leadership theory (e.g., Bass, 1985, 1990; Bass & Avolio, 1993, 1994);
Servant Leadership theory ( Greenleaf, 1970, 1977 ); and relational
theories, including LMX ( Dansereau, Graen, & Haga, 1975 ;Graen,
1976 ;Graen & Cashman, 1975 ). For example, person- and change-or-
iented behaviors are central to a transformational leadership style (e.g.,
providing individualized consideration; articulating an inspiring vision
for the future; Bass, 1985 ). Servant leaders are thought to engage in
both 
person-oriented behaviors (e.g., demonstrate empathy, develop
and empower followers) and task-oriented behaviors (e.g., problem-Table 2
Five core questions specifying the nature of functional leadership in intergroup contexts.
Core questions Exemplar answers derived from extant literature
1. Why is leadership enacted?
(i.e., for what objective(s)?)Team goals without mention of interteam interdependence ( Ferguson, Ormiston, & Wong, 2019 ;Keller, 2001 ); team goals
in intergroup competitions or coopetitions ( Bullinger, Neyer, Rass, & Moeslein, 2010 ;Carbonell & Rodríguez Escudero,
2019 ;van Bunderen, Greer, & van Knippenberg, 2018 ); team goals in collaborative interteam contexts ( Brion, Chauvet,
Chollet, & Mothe, 2012 ;Cha, Kim, Lee, & Bachrach, 2015 ;Drach-Zahavy, 2011 ;Grippa et al., 2018 ;Somech & Khalaili,
2014 ;Tasselli & Caimo, 2019 ); system goals ( Curnin, Owen, & Trist, 2014 ;Millikin, Hom, & Manz, 2010 ;Schotter &
Beamish, 2011 ;Zolper, Beimborn, & Weitzel, 2013 ); both team and system goals ( Friedman & Podolny, 1992 ;Lee &
Sawang, 2016 ;Lanaj, Hollenbeck, Ilgen, Barnes, & Harmon, 2013 ;Susskind, Odom-Reed, & Viccari, 2011 )
2. Where is leadership targeted? Within teams ( Birkinshaw, Ambos, & Bouquet, 2017 ;Tippmann, Scott, & Parker, 2017 ;Zhang, Wu, & Henke, 2015 );
across team boundaries ( Cuijpers, Uitdewilligen, & Guenter, 2016 ;Kratzer, Gemünden, & Lettl, 2008 ;Uitdewilligen &
Waller, 2018 )
3. What processes and states are targeted by
leadership?Communication ( Bearman, Paletz, Orasanu, & Thomas, 2010 ), collaboration ( Beck & Plowman, 2013 ), learning ( Chan,
Pearson, & Entrekin, 2003 ), coordination (Newell & Swan), identity ( Gray, Bunderson, Boumgarden, & Bechara, 2019 ),
cohesion ( Ferguson & Blackman, 2019 ), trust ( Chen & Wang, 2008 )
4. When is leadership occurring?
(i.e., under what circumstances?)During changes in organizational structure ( Birkinshaw, Ambos, & Bouquet, 2017 ); when performing non-routine tasks
(Chung & Jackson, 2013 ); while working in complex and dynamic environments ( Curnin, Owen, & Trist, 2014 ;DeChurch
et al., 2011 ;Gerber et al., 2016 ;Kellogg, Orlikowski, & Yates, 2006 ); during initial project phases ( Hoegl, Weinkauf, &
Gemuenden, 2014 ); when new resources are needed ( Waldman & Atwater, 1994 ); given certain levels of interteam
interdependence
(Benoliel & Somech, 2015 ;Glynn, Kazanjian, & Drazin, 2010 ;Kennedy, Sommer, & Nguyen, 2017 ;
Litchﬁeld, Karakitapo ğlu-Aygün, Gumusluoglu, Carter, & Hirst, 2018 ;Widmann & Mulder, 2018 )
4. Who is leading? Formal team leader ( Melo, Cruzes, Kon, & Conradi, 2013 ); multiple formal leaders of di ﬀerent teams ( Gasson, 2005 );
formal leadership team ( de Vries, Hollenbeck, Davison, Walter, & Van der Vegt, 2016 ;DeChurch & Marks, 2006 ); team
members without formal positions of authority ( Ingvaldsen & Rolfsen, 2012 ;Johannessen, McArthur, & Jonassen, 2015 ;
Marrone, Tesluk, & Carson, 2007 )
Table 3
Summary of methodological approaches in reviewed studies.
Team objective(s) emphasized System objective(s) emphasized Overall
No. of studies n=7 3 n=8 7 n= 160
Analytic approach 12% (9) qualitative methods;
78% (57) quantitative methods;
10% (7) mixed methods39% (34) qualitative methods;53% (46) quantitative methods;8% (7) mixed methods27% (43) qualitative methods;64% (103) quantitative methods;9% (14) mixed methods
Sample 92% (67) working adults;
7% (5) student samples;1% (1) other89% (77) working adults;9% (8) student samples2% (2) other90% (144) working adults;8% (13) student samples;2% (3) other
Study design 4% (3) experiments;
70% (51) ﬁeld/quasi- ﬁeld;
11% (8) case studies;15% (11) combination15% (13) experiments;38% (33) ﬁeld/quasi- ﬁeld;
29% (25) case studies;9% (8) combination of designs;3% (3) simulations;3% (3) archival;2% (2) secondary data10% (16) experiments;53% (84) ﬁeld/quasi- ﬁeld;
21% (33) case studies;12% (19) combination of designs;2% (3) simulations;2% (3) archival;1% (2) secondary data
Temporal design* 90% (46) cross-sectional;
10% (5) longitudinal82% (27) cross-sectional;18% (6) longitudinal87% (73) cross-sectional;13% (12) longitudinal
Common methods bias* 37% (19) mention explicitly;
27% (14) addressed through design elements;14% (7) statistical tests30% (10) mention explicitly;21% (7) addressed through design elements;15% (5) statistical tests35% (29) mention explicitly;25% (21) addressed through design elements;14% (12) statistical tests
Endogeneity* 6% (3) mention explicitly;
2% (1) statistical tests3% (1) mention explicitly;3% (1) statistical tests5% (4) mention explicitly;2% (2) statistical tests
Note. * indicates calculations based on quantitative ﬁeld studies.D.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378
5
solving, decision-making) guided by a deep understanding of the or-
ganization's mission ( Liden, Panaccio, Hu, & Meuser, 2014). Graen &
Uhl-Bien, 1995 argue that leaders should nurture high-quality LMX
relationships with followers characterized by trust, liking, and respect
and oﬀer followers opportunities to develop through task-related roles
and responsibilities. Moreover, less e ﬀective leadership styles, such as
Laissez Faire leadership ( Bass & Avolio, 1993 ) or Abusive Supervision
(Mackey, Frieder, Brees, & Martinko, 2017 ;Tepper, 2000, 2007) are
often depicted as the absence and/or opposite of task-, person-, and/or
change-oriented leadership behaviors (e.g., a lack of structure; hostile
rather than positive relationships).
Within teams, research suggests that task-oriented leadership be-
haviors can initiate structure for the team by (for example) clarifying
team task requirements, establishing reward contingencies, specifying
procedures, and providing feedback on task progress. Both task- and
person-oriented leadership can help team members work e ﬀectively by
facilitating the interpersonal interactions, cognitive architectures,feelings, and attitudes associated with e ﬀective teamwork ( Burke et al.,
2006 ). Research on teams has also emphasized the importance of
change-oriented leader behaviors that support team innovation, crea-
tive performance ( Gil et al., 2005; Spreitzer, De Janasz, & Quinn, 1999 ),
and processes of collective transformation and learning ( Kozlowski
et al., 1996 ). For instance, leaders who leverage after-action reviews
(Villado & Arthur Jr, 2013 ), establish a psychologically safe team cli-
mate ( Edmondson, 1999), and/or facilitate a shared understanding of
the task and team environment (e.g., through various task-oriented andrelational-oriented behaviors), can help teams better recognize and
learn from prior mistakes and prepare for future challenges ( Garvin,
Edmondson, & Gino, 2008).
Indeed, meta-analytic evidence has demonstrated that task-,
person-, and change-oriented leadership processes are positively asso-ciated with a variety of organizational outcomes, including group
performance ( Burke et al., 2006; DeRue, Nahrgang, Wellman, &
Humphrey, 2011; Judge, Piccolo, & Ilies, 2004). DeRue et al. (2011)
showed that initiating structure (i.e., an aspect of task-oriented lea-dership) represented the strongest predictor of group performance
whereas change-oriented behaviors (e.g., transformational leadership)
and person-oriented behaviors (e.g., consideration) accounted for
sizeable but lesser portions of the total variance.
When ? Like many other areas of organizational scholarship
(Gardner, Harris, Li, Kirkman, & Mathieu, 2017 ) as research on lea-
dership within teams has matured, many leadership scholars havemoved beyond simple categorization schemas of ‘what leaders do ’(e.g.,
task-, person-, change-oriented leadership) to specify critical boundaryconditions or moderator variables that determine when leadership be-
haviors and/or relational processes within teams are more or less ef-fective. For instance, classic theories, including Fiedler's (1967) con-
tingency theory and House's (1971) path-goal theory proposed a variety
of situational factors —both internal (e.g.,
 group structure, task de-
mands, team member attributes, state of relations between leader andteam) as well as external to the team (e.g., turbulence, uncertainty,
leader positional power) —that determine the e ﬀectiveness of leader-
ship behaviors within groups. Recent empirical studies in Category 1
have echoed these core ideas by investigating a variety of internal
moderators, including leader attributes ( Hu & Judge, 2017), task de-
mands ( Farh & Chen, 2018), task interdependence ( Aubé & Rousseau,
2005 ), virtuality ( Purvanova & Bono, 2009), and team diversity
(Salazar, Feitosa, & Salas, 2017 ), and external moderators, such as
environmental uncertainty ( Sung & Choi, 2012), organizational norms
(Newell, David, & Chand, 2007 ), top management support ( Hurt,
2016 ), and national culture ( Salk & Brannen, 2000 ).
Researchers have also begun to emphasize the role of time as a key
determinant of what constitutes ‘functional ’leadership for teams. For
example, Kozlowski et al. (1996) conceptualized leadership as invol-
ving dual roles that can operate simultaneously: “(1) a developmental
role, linked to the process of team evolution, and (2) a task contingentrolethat shifts its functional emphasis in response to the dynamics of
team task cycles ”(p. 262). Whereas the developmental role involves a
longer-term process through which leaders help team members meldinto a cohesive, culturally unique entity, the task contingent role is a
more dynamic process which involves developing team goals, strate-
gies, and expectations during phases of low intensity or routine task
conditions, and intervening during higher intensity, stressful phases.
Morgeson et al. (2010) connected these ideas with Marks, Mathieu, and
Zaccaro' (2001) argument that teams cycle through repeating phases of
‘transition ’and ‘action ’to identify functional leadership behaviors
corresponding to these two task phases. Morgeson and colleagues arguethat during transition phases, leadership should help compose the team,
deﬁne the mission, establish expectations, structure and plan tasks,
train and develop the team, and provide sensemaking and feedback.During action phases, leadership should monitor the team's progress
toward goals, manage team boundaries, challenge the team, perform
the team task, solve problems, provide resources, encourage team self-
management, and support a positive social climate.
Who ? Lastly, the question of ‘who is leading ?’(i.e., claiming and/or
being granted leadership in ﬂuence; DeRue & Ashford, 2010 )
 has be-
come increasingly relevant as organizations have embraced ﬂatter de-
centralized and team-based work structures ( Mathieu et al., 2017 )
where informal leaders and leadership processes often operate alongside
or in the absence of formal leaders ( Zaccaro, Heinen, & Shu ﬄer, 2009).
Indeed, although most studies of team leadership have focused on therole, actions, and relationships of formal leaders (e.g., team managers),
researchers often depict leadership as a dynamic and emergent social
process of in ﬂuence, which can occur up, down, and across the orga-
nizational hierarchy ( Carter, DeChurch, Braun, & Contractor, 2015;
Cullen-Lester & Yammarino, 2016 ;Day, Gronn, & Salas, 2004 ;Follett,
1924 ;Hollander & Julian, 1969; Pearce & Conger, 2003 ). For example,
a growing stream of research argues that there are bene ﬁts for teams
who engage in shared forms of leadership –“a dynamic, interactive
inﬂuence process among individuals in groups for which the objective is
to lead one another to the achievement of group or organizational goals
or both ”(Pearce & Conger, 2003 , p. 1). Meta-analyses have found that
shared leadership is positively associated with teamwork processes andemergent psychological states, and accounts for unique variance in
team performance beyond that accounted for by vertical (formal) lea-
dership ( D'Innocenzo, Mathieu, & Kukenberger, 2016 ;Nicolaides et al.,
2014 ;Wang, Waldman, & Zhang, 2014 ).
Recently, several studies have suggested that identifying ‘who ’is
doing ‘what ’‘when ’(in terms of time) holds the potential to advance the
understanding of functional leadership within teams substantially (e.g.,
Aime et al., 2014 ;Contractor et al., 2012 ). For example, Morgeson et al.
(2010) posited that team leadership (during transition and/or action
phases) might originate from formal and/or informal sources who reside
inside oroutside the team. Further, they proposed that di ﬀerent sources
of leadership might be better suited to ful ﬁll diﬀerent
 leadership
functions depending on the phase (transition/action) of team perfor-
mance. For example, an external/formal leader may be best positioned
to compose and monitor the team, establish expectations and goals,
manage team boundaries, provide resources, and encourage self-man-
agement. In contrast, internal/informal leaders may be best suited to
structure, plan, and perform the team task, solve problems, and support
the social climate. Some activities, like providing feedback can be ef-
fectively ful ﬁlled by all sources of leadership. Although these proposi-
tions have yet to be fully tested, they suggest many interesting lines ofinquiry for future research.
Category 2: Cross-boundary leadership for the team
We identi ﬁed 73 articles investigating cross-boundary leadership
processes enacted in support of team objectives (Category 2). A subset
of these articles discussed leaders, managers, and/or leadership pro-
cesses explicitly ( n= 17 articles). These studies convincinglyD.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378
6
demonstrate that (formal) leaders often play an active role in managing
interaction processes and relationships with external entities. However,
the majority of articles (76%) did not invoke the notion of leadership
explicitly, but rather, identi ﬁed cross-boundary interaction processes,
states, and/or interventions that could be targets of leadership in in-terteam contexts (and/or enacted by informal leaders). In combination,
Category 2 studies help clarify what cross-boundary leadership pro-
cesses are relevant to team outcomes, point to important boundaryconditions for cross-boundary leadership ( when ), and begin to identify
the ways in which responsibility for cross-boundary leadership might bedistributed across di ﬀerent people ( who).
What ? The literature on ‘boundary spanning ’has provided sub-
stantial insight into what ‘external ’team activities might constitute
cross-boundary leadership processes and/or might serve as targets ofleadership in interteam contexts ( Ancona, 1990; Joshi, Pandey, & Han,
2009 ;Marrone, 2010 ). In particular, Ancona and Caldwell's seminal
program of research (1988; 1990; 1992a; 1992b) identi ﬁed several
broad categories of external functions that link a group to its externalenvironment, with the external environment referring to “actors or
other teams residing within or outside of the boundary spanning team'shost organization ”(Marrone, 2010 , p. 914). Scouting activities —what
Marrone (2010) refers to as ‘information search ’—include collecting
information and resources from relevant outside parties, constructing a
mental model of the external environment (e.g., who does/does not
support the team), and seeking feedback from members of other groups.
Ambassadorial activities (or ‘representational activities ’inMarrone, 2010 )
reﬂect attempts to: open up lines of communication with other groups
(even without a speci ﬁc purpose), inform others about the team's pro-
gress, negotiate and coordinate details of intergroup interactions (e.g.,establishing give-and-take in intergroup exchanges), advocate for team
needs (e.g., to those with greater power), and inﬂ uence or ‘mold ’the
external environment to suit the team's agenda. Guarding or sentry ac-
tivities involve managing (e.g., delaying, delivering, denying) the ﬂow
of information and resources from the group to external entities and
protecting the team's boundary by selectively allowing information to
enter the
team. Lastly, task coordinator activities involve synchronizing
work e ﬀorts with other teams and monitoring joint progress and
strategy toward the accomplishment of shared goals.
Although researchers have referred to external team activities in
diﬀerent ways and have o ﬀered di ﬀerent categorization schemes (e.g.,
compare Faraj & Yan, 2009; Somech & Khalaili, 2014 ;Marrone, 2010;
Joshi et al., 2009 ;Ancona & Caldwell, 1998, 1992a ), there is a clear
consensus across prior research about the relevance of external activities
for team outcomes ( (Ancona & Caldwell, 1992, b, 1992, a) ;Marrone,
2010 ). External activities can have direct e ﬀects on team outcomes by
acting as conduits for information and resources that enable e ﬀective-
ness and innovation ( Ancona, 1993; (Ancona & Caldwell, 1992, b,
1992, a) ;Choi, 2002 ;Marrone, 2010). For example, many studies have
demonstrated positive relationships between external activities thatsupport the acquisition of information, expertise, and resources with
outcomes such as team creativity and innovation (e.g., Anderson &
Kragh, 2015; Büchel, Nieminen, Armbruster-Domeyer, & Denison,
2013 ;Tippmann, Scott, & Parker, 2017 ). External activities can also
have indirect eﬀects on team outcomes by impacting processes and
psychological states within teams (see Fig. 1). For instance, Henttonen,
Johanson, & Janhonen, 2014 found that team identity strength med-
iates the relationships between both bonding (i.e., within teams) and
bridging (i.e., with external entities) social network ties and team
performance. They argue that whereas bonding ties support team
identity by enabling similar attitudes and perceptions (and hence
liking) within teams, bridging ties support team identity by o ﬀering
team members information about ‘outgroups ’and thereby a ﬀord more
elaborated intergroup social comparisons.
Notably, cross-boundary processes are not always beneﬁcialfor all
team outcomes. For example, Ancona, (1990) distinguished di ﬀerent
‘types ’of teams based on the degree to which they leveraged cross-boundary
processes. ‘Informing ’teams remained isolated until they
were ready to inform outsiders of their progress; ‘parading ’teams em-
phasized team building and achieving visibility while passively obser-ving other teams; and ‘probing ’teams actively engaged outsiders, re-
vised their knowledge through external contacts, initiated programswith outsiders, and promoted their teams' achievements within their
organizations. Although ‘probing ’teams were rated as the highest
performers, these teams also su ﬀered short-term decrements in member
satisfaction and team cohesion. Other studies have shown that cross-
boundary processes can have negative implications for team perfor-
mance. For instance, in a study of the communication networks of 31
interdisciplinary hospital teams, Grippa et al., 2018 found that more
eﬀective teams were more inwardly focused and less connected to
outside members as compared to less e ﬀective teams. Similarly, a study
of inter-university project teams found that the degree to which teamleaders and team members bridged structural holes (i.e., connected
disconnected others; Burt, 1992) was negatively associated with team
performance ( Susskind, Odom-Reed, & Viccari, 2011). Indeed, pro-
moting an external focus and encouraging team members to engage in
cross-boundary processes may deplete limited resources ( Choi, 2002),
distract attention from critical internal processes, and ultimately di-minish the cohesiveness of the team ( Oh et al., 2006).
In fact, there is growing consensus that there are trade -oﬀsinherent
to cross-boundary processes for teams, and thus, functional leadership
involves helping teams strike an appropriate balance of internal and
cross-boundary interactions and team permeability. On the one hand,
when team boundaries are highly permeable, team cohesiveness and
coordination are likely to su ﬀer. Eﬀ ective team functioning may depend
on members di ﬀerentiating themselves as a coherent unit, separate
from the broader environment, by establishing a workspace, rules foroperating, and goals speci ﬁc to the team ( Choi, 2002; Sundstrom,
DeMeuse, & Futrell, 1990 ). Actions by leaders that reinforce team
boundaries and a ﬃrm teams' unique identities can decrease the like-
lihood that members will experience identity threat when they interact
with other teams ( Connaughton, Williams, & Shu ﬄer, 2012 ;Ernst &
Chrobot-Mason, 2011, a ;Hogg
 et al., 2012 ). On the other hand, if team
boundaries are not suﬃciently permeable, teams can experience isola-
tion and may not bene ﬁt from the knowledge and expertise of other
teams. For instance, several studies we reviewed referenced the ‘not-
invented -here’syndrome ( Katz & Allen, 1982), which refers to a ten-
dency for teams who have had success in the pastto become insular,
believe they have a monopoly on the ﬁeld, and thus, reject new ideas
and in ﬂuence from outside sources. The not-invented-here syndrome
can be a major barrier to the in ﬂow of new knowledge and thus, can
stiﬂe continued team learning and creative performance ( Chen & Wang,
2008 ). Therefore, leadership is needed to manage the permeability of
team boundaries by both protecting and insulating teams from negative
outside in ﬂuences and additionally, by allowing resources and in-
formation to ﬂow both into and out of the team as required by team
task demands (e.g., Benoliel & Somech, 2015 ).
Indeed, the extant literature emphasizes that leaders and leadership
processes play a primary role in managing (or enacting) external team
activities. Leaders can support their teams by assuming responsibility
for external activities. In this case, the external activities constitute
‘external ’or‘cross-boundary ’leadership processes. For example,
Takanashi & Lee, 2019 found that leaders of research and development
(R&D) teams who engaged in boundary spanning behaviors were better
able to mobilize external resources and enable their teams to achieve
greater commercial success. The importance of leaders' participation in
external activities is further supported by meta-analytic evidence
showing that higher performing teams tend to have leaders who are
well-connected in social networks, both internal and external to the
team ( Balkundi & Harrison, 2006 ) and studies showing that projects led
by formal leaders who actively engage in external project championingreceive more support from the organization and are more successful
(Markham, Green, & Basu, 1991 ;Waldman & Atwater, 1994 ). EvidenceD.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378
7
also suggests that leaders who have strong network ties can gather
political support and scan for ideas, and team leaders with many
structural holes in their networks (i.e., indicating brokerage between
contacts who are not connected to one another; Burt, 1992) tend to be
better able to protect their teams from outside interference ( Brion,
Chauvet, Chollet, & Mothe, 2012 ).
Leadership processes can also help set up conditions within teams
that facilitate connections between team members and outsiders.
Research shows that leaders in ﬂuence the strategies teams use to in-
teract with their environments, and in turn, di ﬀerences in teams' stra-
tegies help explain outcomes such as team performance and team
member satisfaction ( Ancona, 1990 ).Edmondson, 2003 showed that
eﬀective team leaders not only use their positional status to reach out to
other high-status individuals in the organization (i.e., span the team
boundary), they also encourage team members to engage in boundary-
spanning behaviors themselves by signaling the desirability of an ex-
ternal focus. Research has also shown that empowering (Chuang,
Jackson, & Jiang, 2016 ) and charismatic (Knipfer, Schreiner, Schmid, &
Peus, 2018) leadership behaviors within teams are linked to team ex-
ternal knowledge acquisition and the overall amount of team boundary-
spanning behavior, respectively. Similarly, Cha, Kim, Lee, & Bachrach,
2015 showed that teams with transformational leaders had higher in-
ternal teamwork quality and were perceived as more collaborative by
members of other teams, suggesting cross-boundary processes may be
smoother for teams with transformational leaders.
Researchers have also identi ﬁed a number of interventions leaders
might use to increase teams' engagement in cross-boundary processes.For example, Chuang, Jackson, & Jiang, 2016 examined the e ﬀect of
human resource management (HRM) systems in a sample of R&Dteams. They ﬁnd that when HRM systems support knowledge intensive
teamwork, R&D teams have higher levels of external knowledge ac-quisition and internal knowledge sharing, and these e ﬀects are stron-
gest when knowledge is less tacit and in the absence of ‘empowering ’
leaders. Foss & Rodgers, 2011 showed that assigning managers to cross-
unit initiatives was associated positively with their ability to use new
information from other units. Further, studies in Category 2 have
identiﬁed attributes at both individual- and team-levels that might be
targets of leadership in ﬂuence, such as individuals' task experience
(Dahl & Pedersen, 2005), depth of functional expertise ( de Vries,
Walter, Van der Vegt, & Essens, 2014), and focus on goals with a ‘global
impact ’(Pedersen, Soda, & Stea, 2019 ), and teams' functional diversity
(Ancona & Caldwell, 1992, a ), interdependence ( Benoliel & Somech,
2015 )
and climate ( Shin, Kim, & Hur, 2019).
When ? With the awareness that cross-boundary processes can have
positive, negative, null, and/or mixed e ﬀects on team outcomes, re-
searchers are seeking to better understand the boundary-conditions ormoderators that determine when cross-boundary interactions are most
beneﬁcial for teams. Paralleling research on leadership within teams
(Category 1) studies in Category 2 have suggested that aspects of both
theinternal team environment and the broader embedding environment
can determine the e ﬀectiveness of cross-boundary processes for teams.
These studies are beginning to uncover how leaders might ‘strike the
right balance ’by capitalizing on the bene ﬁts of cross-boundary pro-
cesses for teams while mitigating the costs.
With regard to the internal state of the team, some researchers have
considered how team properties, such as team task demands, or the
levels of task interdependence determine the necessity of cross-
boundary interactions. For example, Chung & Jackson, 2013 found that
the relationship between external work relationships on team perfor-mance depends on the routineness of the tasks that are performed. When
teams performed higher novelty tasks, the density of both internal and
external networks were predictive of team performance; whereas per-
formance on highly routine tasks did not bene ﬁt from dense external
network connections.
The internal psychological state of the team can also determine the
eﬀectiveness of cross-boundary processes. For instance, psychologicalproperties associated with the ‘not-invented-here ’syndrome can reduce
the eﬀectiveness of cross-boundary processes by leading teams to dis-
count the in ﬂuence and ideas o ﬀered by outsiders. In support of this
argument, Carbonell & Rodríguez Escudero, 2019 found the level of
team cohesion moderated the e ﬀect of boundary spanning such that
boundary spanning was less bene ﬁcial for highly cohesive teams.
Likewise, Dokko, Kane, & Tortoriello, 2014 showed that R&D teams
with strong team identiﬁ cation are less able to recombine knowledge
from the external environment and generate creative ideas. In contrast,strong identi ﬁcation with an overarching superordinate group (e.g., a
division) enhanced team creative generativity. Suggesting that the re-lationship between internal team psychological states and the bene ﬁts
of cross-boundary processes is complex and non-linear, Bullinger,
Neyer, Rass, & Moeslein, 2010 showed
 that in a competitive environ-
ment, teams with either very high or very low orientations toward co-
operation with other teams (but not moderate) were most innovative.
In contrast to Category 1, very few Category 2 studies have con-
sidered how the timing of cross-boundary processes might impact their
utility. Ancona & Caldwell, 1990 found that ambassadorial activities
appeared to be most relevant during the creation and di ﬀusion phases
of a team project. They suggest that a strategy that works early in thelife of a group may not support positive performance over time. Yet, the
vast majority of studies we reviewed did not consider the types of
temporal elements (e.g., phase of team performance, current task de-
mands, developmental stage, team history) that have been the focus of
recent leadership within teams (e.g., Aime et al., 2014 ;Kozlowski et al.,
1996 ;Morgeson et al., 2010).
The nature of a team's external environment can also shape the ef-
fectiveness of cross-boundary processes for teams. For example, Faraj &
Yan, 2009 found that under organizational conditions of high resource
scarcity and task uncertainty, teams engaged in increased boundary
activities —such as spanning, bu ﬀering, and reinforcing —in order to
secure resources and develop psychological safety among team mem-
bers. In another socio-structural study, Gleibs & Haslam, 2016 found
that team members' willingness to support a leader's strategy for in-tergroup relations was dependent upon the current social context (i.e.,
social relations), and the team's status. When social relations were
unstable, low status groups were more likely to support competitive
leaders, but high-status groups were more likely to support cooperative
leaders. Their ﬁndings underscore that leader e ﬀectiveness is con-
tingent upon the social environment surrounding the team, as this altershow leaders are perceived internally.
Who ? An equally important factor in ﬂuencing the e ﬀectiveness of
cross-boundary leadership may be who is assuming (or is granted) re-
sponsibility for cross-boundary leadership. Empirical research supportsthe active role that formal leaders play in cross-boundary leadership by
directly engaging in cross-boundary activities on behalf of their team
(e.g., Ancona, 1990 ;Liu, Schuler, & Zhang, 2013 ;Prysor & Henley,
2018 ). For example, Ancona & Caldwell, 1990 found that leaders en-
gaged more frequently in ambassadorial, scouting, coordinating, and
guarding activities than other members of the team. Further, Hirst &
Mann, 2004 showed that boundary spanning behaviors performed by
formal leaders had a stronger relationship with team performance than
boundary spanning behaviors performed by team members.
However, a number of other studies have suggested bene ﬁts of
distributing responsibility for boundary spanning across multiplemembers of the team ( Ancona et al., 2002 ;Contractor et al., 2012;
Elkins & Keller, 2003 ).Marrone, Tesluk, & Carson, 2007 demonstrated
that
teams are more e ﬀective when more team members are engaged in
boundary spanning. The authors posit that the presence of multipleboundary spanners may reduce the demands placed on individual team
members, increase the amount of resources brought into the team, re-
duce task uncertainty, and improve team member mental models re-
garding the external environment. Likewise, Ferguson & Blackman,
2019 found that boundary spanning was related to team cohesion and
performance in top management teams and this relationship wasD.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378
8
magniﬁed as an increasing number of team members —aside from the
CEO —participated in boundary spanning activities. Currently, how-
ever, both the extent to which formal versus informal leaders should
engage in cross-boundary leadership and the extent to which
‘boundary-spanning ’behaviors re ﬂect the phenomenon of ‘leadership ’
remain poorly understood.
The eﬀectiveness of teams' external activities may also depend on
the speci ﬁcpatterns of relationships that leaders (formal/informal) have
with people in the external environment ( Balkundi & Harrison, 2006;
Tushman & Scanlan, 1981 ). For example, Büchel, Nieminen,
Armbruster-Domeyer, & Denison, 2013 found that new product devel-
opment teams were most innovative when team members had trustingrelationships with external ‘project champions, ’and broad (non-
redundant) knowledge relationships. Oh, Chung, & Labianca, 2004
advanced the concept of group social capital in order to explain the
importance of patterns of cross-boundary connections for team perfor-mance. Their results suggest that groups were most e ﬀective when
group members had a moderate level of internal informal socializingrelationships and a large number of ties to the leaders of other teams.
Continuing this line of inquiry may prove invaluable to understanding
the patterns of cross-boundary leadership relationships that promote
team functioning.
Categories 3 and 4: Iinternally-focused and cross-boundary leadership for
the system
In contrast to most studies within Category 1, studies of leadership
in support of system goals rarely investigated and/or theorized about
leadership (or targets of leadership) processes targeted within teams
(Category 3) without alsoconsidering how these processes impact cross-
boundary processes or states (Category 4). Therefore, re ﬂecting the
literature, we present ﬁndings from Categories 3 and 4 within a single
section. We identi ﬁed 86 articles that emphasized the achievement of
superordinate system -level objectives requiring interdependent interac-
tions across multiple teams. Thirty of these articles (35%) discussed
leaders or leadership processes explicitly, and a small subset ( n=7
articles) evaluated both team- and system-level objectives simulta-
neously. Scholars have long recognized the importance of collaboration
across multiple groups (e.g., teams, organizational units) for organiza-
tional success ( Blake, Shepard, & Mouton, 1964 ;Brett & Rognes, 1986;
Thompson, 1967 ). However, the majority (72%) of the studies we
identiﬁed that focused on system-level objectives were published
during the last decade, suggesting an increasing interest in the driversand outcomes of interteam collaboration in interdependent systems.
What ?
Three separate, but conceptually related, areas of research
have emerged over the past two decades which clarify what leaders and
leadership processes need to accomplish in order to support super-ordinate goals. The ﬁrst two areas, which we refer to as ‘intergroup
leadership ’research ( Hogg et al., 2012 ;Pittinsky, 2009 ;Pittinsky &
Simon, 2007) and ‘boundary spanning leadership ’research ( Ernst &
Chrobot-Mason, 2011, a ), respectively, have origins within social psy-
chological theories of intergroup relations ( Tajfel & Turner, 1979;
Turner, 1985 ). These two domains focus explicitly on leaders and lea-
dership processes in intergroup contexts and highlight the psycholo-
gical challenges leaders are likely to face when leading multiple dif-
ferentiated groups (e.g., identity threat, anxieties, misaligned goals,
questions regarding the leaders' priorities and loyalties). The third area,
‘multiteam system functioning ’(Mathieu et al., 2001 ;Shuﬄer, Jiménez-
Rod ŕıguez, & Kramer, 2015; Zaccaro et al., 2012), has its origins within
industrial/organizational psychology and organizational behavior anddraws heavily from theories of team functioning ( Hackman & Morris,
1975 ;McGrath, 1964 ) and organizational design (e.g., Thompson,
1967 ). Although leadership is not always the primary focus of multi-
team system research, most multiteam system studies explicitly or im-plicitly investigate leadership (in the functional sense) as a factor
contributing to system functioning.Studies of intergroup leadership, boundary spanning leadership,
and multiteam systems all have in common an emphasis on conveying
the diﬃculties associated with facilitating collaboration in inter-
dependent systems comprised of multiple groups or teams. It is notuncommon for teams to succeed individually but fail collectively as a
system due to critical misalignment and collaboration problems be-
tween teams ( Marks, DeChurch, Mathieu, Panzer, & Alonso, 2005 ).
Indeed, numerous studies began by highlighting interteam collabora-tion challenges. One recurring theme re ﬂects the challenges associated
with collaboration across teams with very diﬀerent characteristics (e.g.,
geographic locations, norms, goals, priorities, areas of expertise;
Luciano et al., 2018). For example, Alter, 1990 found that functional
diﬀerentiation between teams in an interorganizational service delivery
context created con ﬂict and inhibited coordination. Likewise, Gerber
et al., 2016 illustrated how clinical research systems struggled to co-
ordinate due to a lack of collective identity, low cohesion, and di ﬀering
goals
between teams which ultimately bred competition. Similarly, in a
study of university- ﬁrm R&D teams, Takanashi & Lee, 2019 , found that
teams struggled to overcome di ﬀerences in culture, goals, and values,
resulting in tensions that constructed barriers to collaboration.
Many studies also highlighted collaboration di ﬃculties associated
with change either within the system or external to the system. For
example, in a study of multi-agency emergency management systems,Curnin, Owen, & Trist, 2014 described how dynamics inherent to the
operating environment placed demands on teams to share informationand make decisions quickly, hindering collaboration. Problems asso-
ciated with dynamism have also been observed during crisis response as
emergency medical services and emergency department teams must
coordinate their e ﬀorts in a rapidly changing environment. Accord-
ingly, Reddy et al., 2009 highlight how environmental dynamism in
emergency response can make it di ﬃcult for geographically distributed
teams to provide context during their between-team communications,negatively impacting system-wide collaboration. Likewise, Taneva,
Grote, Easty, & Plattner, 2010 , found that one of the most common
causes of breakdowns in perioperative patient care was interteam co-ordination failures stemming from rapidly changing environments.
Luciano et al. (2018) theorize that the reason why di ﬀerences be-
tween teams and excessive dynamism (e.g., uncertainty, ﬂuidity,
change) make interteam collaboration challenging is that these forcesenhance the boundaries between teams and cause disruptions for
system functioning. In turn, strong team boundaries and system dis-
ruptions can lead constituent members to orient their interactions to-
ward fellow teammates and away from members of other teams, thus
limiting the development of the interteam behavioral processes (e.g.,
coordination) and a ﬀective/motivational and cognitive psychological
states (e.g., psychological safety, shared mental models) needed to
achieve shared goals. However, as Luciano et al. emphasize, “this is not
to suggest that low di ﬀerentiation is the solution ”(p. 1087). The dif-
ferences between teams and the dynamic nature of complex environ-
ments are often the very reason multiteam systems are established in
theﬁrst place. Thus, leadership and other boundary-related coordina-
tion mechanisms (i.e., potential targets of leadership) are needed inorder to manage behavioral processes and psychological states within
and across teams. Echoing Luciano and colleagues' argument that dif-
ferences between teams should not be minimized, but instead, should
be encouraged, Lanaj, Foulk, & Hollenbeck, 2018 found that multiteam
systems perform most e ﬀectively when lower level component teams
hold di ﬀerent preferences for risk-taking from their formal leadership
teams. When component teams are allowed to hold and express dif-ferences in opinion from formal leaders the system may be more likely
to learn and evaluate ideas during interteam communication and less
likely to fall prey to ‘groupthink ’(Janis, 1971 ).
Interteam states and processes as targets of leadership . Paralleling re-
search on leadership within teams in support of team objectives
(Category 1) many of the studies we reviewed in Categories 3 and 4highlighted
behavioral processes and psychological states within, andD.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378
9
especially across, component team boundaries as key targets of lea-
dership in ﬂuence. For example, a few articles explored how ‘boundary
spanning ’activities, deﬁ ned broadly, are relevant to system objectives.
Floyd & Wooldridge, 1997 found that middle managers' boundary
spanning was related to their own strategic in ﬂuence as well as the
performance of the system as a whole. Glaser, Fourné, & Elfring, 2015
highlight how overlapping boundary spanning ties between middlemanagers and top management team members facilitates innovation
across a multi-group business unit. Further, in a study of innovation in
science and technology parks, Corsaro, Ramos, Henneberg, & Naudé,
2012 illustrate how boundary spanning drives resource transfer in in-
terorganizational collaboration, supporting innovation.
Several studies emphasized the importance of interteam commu-
nication quality and quantity to system performance. For instance,
Arnett & Wittmann, 2014 found that communication quality was po-
sitively associated with knowledge exchange between groups. Kratzer,
Gemünden, & Lettl, 2008 examined the quantity of informal commu-
nication between teams. Interestingly, they found that there was aninverted U -shaped relationship between informal interteam commu-
nication and the creativity of multi-team R&D projects. The authorsposit that although frequent interteam communication may lead to
improved transfer of information, extremely high levels of interteam
communication may prove to be a distraction, reducing individual
autonomy and creativity, as well as overall e ﬃciency.
However, the majority of studies in Categories 3 and 4 depict in-
terteam coordination (i.e., synchronization of actions across teams;
Marks, DeChurch, Mathieu, Panzer, & Alonso, 2005 ) as the most critical
behavioral process associated with system outcomes, particularly
within research on multiteam systems. Moreover, research on multi-
team systems emphasizes that leaders and leadership processes play a
primary role in facilitating interteam coordination. The majority ofstudies of leadership in multiteam system contexts have investigated
leadership originating from a formal leadership team (i.e., an ‘integra-
tion’team) that is situated hierarchically above other component
teams.
For example, DeChurch & Marks, 2006 experimental study showed
that training formal leadership teams on how to develop strategy aswell as monitor and communicate information related to the multiteam
task across teams fostered interteam coordination and system perfor-
mance. Using the same simulation, Murase, Carter, DeChurch, & Marks,
2014 , demonstrated that the development of system-wide shared
mental models about interteam coordination is a key mechanism
linking leadership teams' communication about strategy to interteam
coordination and performance. Bick, Spohrer, Hoda, Scheerer, &
Heinzl, 2018 also discuss the importance of shared mental models in
multiteam contexts. The authors found that team processes such as
planning led to mental model convergence and a lack of similar mental
models prohibited e ﬀective coordination between teams. Findings from
Firth, Hollenbeck, Miles, Ilgen, & Barnes, 2015 also emphasize the
importance of shared mental models across teams. Their work showed
that frame-of-reference training (i.e., training that reduced incon-
sistencies across teams regarding how shared problems are con-
ceptualized) bene ﬁted within-team coordination, between-team co-
ordination and multiteam system performance.
Formal leadership teams (or other formal boundary spanning me-
chanisms) are thought to be particularly critical in multiteam systemcontexts given the large size and complex processing demands of these
systems ( Davison,
 Hollenbeck, Barnes, Sleesman, & Ilgen, 2012 ). In-
deed, Davison and colleagues demonstrated that unbridled coordina-
tion through mutual adjustment (operationalized as attending to the
same element of a simulation at the same time) between lower level
component teams was negatively associated with system performance.
However, mutual adjustment processes between formal boundary
spanners and leadership team members bene ﬁted system performance.
Similarly, a study by de Vries, Hollenbeck, Davison, Walter, & Van der
Vegt, 2016 demonstrated that intrapersonal functional diversity (i.e.,breadth of intraindividual knowledge) facilitates horizontal coordina-
tion but inhibits aspirational behavior. However, this e ﬀect is moder-
ated by vertical coordination, such that the negative e ﬀects of in-
trapersonal functional diversity are not realized in the presence of
vertical coordination between component teams and the formal lea-
dership team. Lanaj, Hollenbeck, Ilgen, Barnes, & Harmon, 2013 also
found that decentralized planning structures (i.e., where plans are de-veloped within lower level component teams ﬁrst before being passed
to the leadership team) had some bene ﬁt for system performance at-
tributable to enhanced proactivity and aspiration levels, but also re-
sulted in an overall negative e ﬀect attributable to risk taking and co-
ordination failures.
In addition to behavioral processes and shared cognitions, many of
the studies we reviewed emphasized the need for leadership processesto relieve aﬀective and/or motivational barriers associated with inter-
team collaboration. For example, intergroup leadership theory(Pittinsky & Simon, 2007 ) suggests that leaders need to be mindful of
the anxieties group members may experience when working with othergroups and emphasizes that intergroup collaboration can threaten the
distinctiveness of group identities and/or lead group members to feel
that the value of their own group's identity is diminished ( Hewstone &
Brown, 1986 ). Pittinsky and Simon proposed that leaders may improve
intergroup relations by encouraging contact between members of dif-
ferent groups, managing resources and interdependencies to reduce or
prevent competition and con ﬂict, promoting shared ‘superordinate
identities ’as well as ‘dual identities ’to meet members' needs for dis-
tinctiveness and belonging, and fostering positive intergroup attitudes.
Several studies provide support for this idea. Richter, West, van
Dick, & Dawson, 2006 demonstrated that the relationship between
group identity and e ﬀective intergroup relations was positive at high
levels of system identi ﬁcation but not at low levels. Likewise,
Gumusluoglu, Karakitapo ğlu-Aygün, & Scandura, 2017, found that
benevolent leaders fostered team identi ﬁcation to the bene ﬁt of team
innovative behavior, and simultaneously, fostered a cross-team identity
positively in ﬂuencing interteam innovative behavior. Cuijpers,
Uitdewilligen, & Guenter, 2016 further illustrated that system identity
was more important for multiteam system processes and performance
than team identity. Similarly, Porck
 et al., 2018 showed that organi-
zational identi ﬁcation supported intergroup strategic consensus
whereas team identi ﬁcation can overpower it. In contrast, Porck et al.,
2019 argued that superordinate identi ﬁcation develops feelings of un-
certainty that deplete team members' cognitive resources. Supportingtheir hypotheses they ﬁnd (using the same laboratory simulation con-
text as several other multiteam system studies; e.g., Davison,
Hollenbeck, Barnes, Sleesman, & Ilgen, 2012; Firth, Hollenbeck, Miles,
Ilgen, & Barnes, 2015 ;Lanaj, Hollenbeck, Ilgen, Barnes, & Harmon,
2013 ) that team identi ﬁcation was positively associated with system
performance, whereas system identi ﬁcation was negatively associated
with system performance. Moreover, these e ﬀects were stronger under
conditions of high task complexity and weaker under conditions of lowtask complexity. These mixed results suggest there are both downsides
as well as upsides to team and system identi ﬁcation and begs the
question of what role leadership should play in helping to balance and/or alleviate the apparent tensions in order to ensure optimal team and
system functioning.
Hogg et al. (2012) also questioned the bene ﬁts of creating a super-
ordinate identity and proposed that intergroup leaders should instead
help groups develop intergroup relational identities (i.e., identities de-
ﬁned by the relationships between one's own team and other teams).
They argue that intergroup relational identities can allow teams tomaintain their distinctiveness, while also promoting e ﬀective colla-
boration. Empirical studies have not veri ﬁed how leaders might facil-
itate the development of intergroup relational identities. However,
theoretical work suggests that leaders can promote these identities
through their rhetoric (e.g., by communicating about what resources the
diﬀerent teams might bring to and receive from intergroupD.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378
10
interactions), by modeling positive intergroup relations through their
own cross-boundary processes, and by facilitating interactions among
members of di ﬀerent teams ( Ernst & Chrobot-Mason, 2011a ;Hogg
et al., 2012). By forming positive interpersonal relationships with
members of each group, a leader may role-model desired intergroup
relations and foster intergroup trust. However, leaders also need to be
aware of and manage group members' perceptions of their intergroup
behaviors. On the one hand, leaders may be perceived as less e ﬀective
within their own groups if they are seen as being overly supportive ofanother group's goals, identity, or status ( Hogg et al., 2012 ). On the
other hand, a leader who exhibits an over-emphasis on activities withinteams can undermine the team's ability to collaborate e ﬀectively with
others ( Pittinsky & Simon, 2007 ).
Similarly, Ernst and Chrobot-Mason's work on boundary spanning
leadership ( Ernst & Chrobot-Mason, 2011a; 2011b) proposed that lea-
ders can use a series of interrelated strategies to promote collaborative
psychological relationships between groups. The ﬁrst strategy, ‘mana-
ging boundaries, ’begins within teams and consists of two steps: buf-
fering and re ﬂecting. The goal of bu ﬀering is to protect a team from
undue outside in ﬂuences, a ﬃrm the team's identity, and promote a
sense of safety and security among team members. Teams then engage
in reﬂecting by clarifying their own values, priorities, expertise, roles,
and needs and prepare to share this information with members of otherteams. Ernst and Chrobot-Mason argue that these internally focused
leadership behaviors prepare teams to e ﬀectively engage with other
entities within and beyond their organization as collaborative partners
and help team members avoid identity threat. Second, they propose
that it is important to have members of di ﬀerent groups connect on a
personal level (i.e., without a focus on intergroup di ﬀerences) to foster
interpersonal trust.
In addition to (team, system, and/or intergroup relational) iden-
tities, several studies have identi ﬁed other a ﬀective and motivational
constructs within and across teams that might be targets of leadership
inﬂuence in support of superordinate goals. For example, emerging
research highlights the impact of states such as anxiety and psycholo-gical safety on system e ﬀectiveness. Park & DeShon, 2018 for example,
studied how the quality of group discussions in ﬂuences competition,
fear, and greed between groups. Notably they ﬁnd that groups who
engaged in structured discussions were more likely to have high qualitydiscussions, which in turn reduced greed and fear, and decreased the
likelihood of competing with outsiders. In a study of ad hoc multiteam
system aircrews, Bienefeld & Grote, 2014 found that psychological
safety within teams
mediated the e ﬀects of leader inclusiveness on team
members' speaking up behavior within teams and boundary-spanners'
speaking up across team boundaries. Interestingly, team boundary-
spanners' perceptions of leader inclusiveness and psychological safety
between teams had no e ﬀect on speaking up between teams; rather, it
was the boundary spanners' perceptions of within team psychologicalsafety that mattered most. Fleştea, Cur şeu, & Fodor, 2017 also in-
vestigated psychological safety, exploring the inﬂ uence of power dis-
parity. The authors ﬁnd that high power disparity positively in ﬂuences
system performance by engaging team members in a higher level ofinformation processing, but also has negative e ﬀects on performance as
it stiﬂes perceptions of psychological safety and fosters a negative af-
fective climate.
A subset of studies has explored the e ﬀects of motivational con-
structs such as goals, priorities, and collective e ﬃcacy. In a study of a
semiconductor plant, Millikin, Hom, & Manz, 2010 illustrated that
systems comprised of highly cohesive component teams that engaged in
self-management (i.e., setting goals, focusing on intrinsic rewards, en-
gaging in positive self-talk) were the most productive. In a case study ofthe response to the space shuttle Columbia disaster, Beck & Plowman,
2013 found that establishing, communicating, and monitoring shared
superordinate goals was pivotal for the emergence of collaboration
between teams. Goal alignment both within and between teams appears
to be another important motivational factor. For instance, Meth,Lawless, & Hawryluck, 2009 found that one of the greatest sources of
conﬂict in intensive care units is the presence of incompatible and/or
inconsistent goals regarding patient care across the various healthcareteams that comprise the unit, ultimately resulting in reductions in
quality of care. Unfortunately, some research has shown that di ﬀerent
teams are not necessarily aware of the fact that their goals are mis-
aligned. For instance, Power & Alison, 2017 observed that di ﬀerent
agencies in an emergency response system prioritized di ﬀerent goals
(i.e., approach goals vs. avoid goals). Despite the observed goal con-
ﬂicts, however, participants believed that their interagency goals were
aligned with one another (according to their ratings of goal alignment),suggesting that members of di ﬀerent teams may be unaware of goal
conﬂicts.
When ? Studies in Categories 3 and 4 suggest that many factors can
act as boundary conditions determining the e ﬀectiveness of speci ﬁc
leadership processes within and across teams. These factors may ori-
ginate
within teams (e.g., strength of team identi ﬁcation, Gumusluoglu,
Karakitapo ğlu-Aygün, & Scandura, 2017 ), across teams (e.g., level of
interteam interdependence), and in the embedding environment (e.g.,
system dynamism; Uitdewilligen & Waller, 2018 ).
For instance, several studies have emphasized that the nature of
interteam interdependence can play an in ﬂuential role for various func-
tions and outcomes both within and across teams. Marks, DeChurch,
Mathieu, Panzer, & Alonso, 2005 showed that interteam processes were
more critical at high levels of interteam interdependence than at lowerlevels where teams functioned under greater autonomy. In another
study by Glynn, Kazanjian, & Drazin, 2010 , team identi ﬁcation and
team members' perceptions of interteam interdependence interacted topredict intentions to innovate such that individuals with high team
identiﬁcation and high interteam interdependence perceptions had
lower intentions to innovate.
Recent work by Kennedy, Sommer, & Nguyen, 2017 utilized com-
putational modeling and virtual experiments to investigate how leaders
facilitate multiteam system communication across di ﬀering levels of
team interdependence and project complexity. Their results show thatthe level of interdependence between teams in ﬂuences the frequency
with which leaders must make changes to communication plans in re-sponse to changing project complexity. Speci ﬁcally, whereas systems
with low to moderate interteam interdependence may rely on similarpaths of communication for tasks of varying complexity (i.e., e-mail,
video conferencing, sharing information indirectly through leadership),
multiteam systems with high interteam interdependence must adapt
their mix of communication tools depending on task complexity to
prevent communication channels from becoming overburdened.
A number of Studies in Categories 3 and 4 have also begun to ex-
plore how leadership processes need to shift depending on the timing or
phase of task performance. For example, DeChurch & Marks, 2006
evaluated leadership teams' use of strategizing behaviors during tran-
sition phases (e.g., gathering information, establishing roles and re-
sponsibilities, planning), and coordination behaviors during action
phases (e.g., orchestrating actions, adapting roles and responsibilities to
meet changing task demands, managing the ﬂow of information). Other
research has examined the critical role of leader planning duringtransition phases ( Lanaj, Hollenbeck, Ilgen, Barnes, & Harmon, 2013 )
and the importance of e ﬀective team boundary management, especially
in the early conceptual phases of a collaborative project to prevent
teams from falling behind schedule ( Hoegl & Weinkauf, 2005 ).
Further, Park & DeShon, 2018 found that discussion leaders who
advocate for cooperation between teams are better able to inﬂ uence
team members early in the formation of a group when members are
receptive to normative power. However, over time, high-quality in-ternal discussions were more important for decreasing team members'
feelings of greed and fear, and therefore their desire to compete with
outsiders. In another recent study Quiroz, Brunson, & Bigras, 2017
present an in-depth case study of the dynamic processes of mutualadjustment that occurred between two professional teams participatingD.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378
11
in a multicomponent community-based intervention (CBI). During the
initial stages of collaboration, mutual adjustment involved division of
roles and responsibilities based on areas of expertise, withdrawal from
partner's area of expertise, and a relative paucity of direct interaction
between groups. Interestingly, after a shock to the system, these rules
transformed. Rather than dividing work based on expertise, the teams
worked together directly to ﬁnd a solution; new links were created to
enhance intergroup communication; and groups came to function witha coherent joint approach to intervention. In combination, these studies
exemplify the growing acknowledgement that the timing of leadership
is a critical determinant of leadership e ﬀectiveness.
Who ? A few studies have begun to illustrate the potential im-
portance of informal leadership in ﬂuence processes in the context of
superordinate goals. For example, Kratzer, Gemünden, & Lettl, 2008
study of multi-team R&D projects found that there are bene ﬁts to a
moderate overlap in formal and informal communication structures. Acase study of subsea operations in the oil industry, found that when
formal leaders were inaccessible, individual team members would re-
spond by performing leadership functions without explicit delegation
by the formal leader ( Johannessen, McArthur, & Jonassen, 2015 ).
Whereas another a case study found that formal and informal leader-ship structures were put in place both within and between teams to
ensure the success of school reform in complex environments, which
require cross-sector collaboration and leadership structures that
leverage the expertise of the functional groups ( Malin & Hackmann,
2019 ). These studies illustrate the often-complementary relationship
between formal and informal leadership.
However, informal leadership processes are not always e ﬀective in
the context of system goals. For instance, supporting the implementa-
tion of a formal leadership team ( Davison, Hollenbeck, Barnes,
Sleesman, & Ilgen, 2012 ),Ingvaldsen & Rolfsen, 2012 examined how
shared leadership and rotating group spokespersons can be used as al-
ternatives to hierarchical control in autonomous work groups using aqualitative case study of a manufacturing ﬁrm. They found that the two
alternatives tend to under-perform as they weakened the system'sability to regulate non-routine situations and evaluate integral pro-
cesses. Their ﬁndings underscore the need for further research clar-
ifying why informal leadership emerges, as in some circumstances in-formal leadership may prove to be detrimental. Another example comes
from Newell & Swan, 2000 , who conducted a case study of a multi-
disciplinary research system. They argued that high levels of trust werenecessary to facilitate the levels of communication needed to generate
scienti ﬁc innovation; however, the system experienced a severe dis-
trust, power struggles, a lack of accountability across sites, and a highlevel of ambiguity for lower-level group members. These ﬁndings sug-
gest that even in the presence of formal authority structures, powerstruggles and informal in ﬂuence processes might disrupt system func-
tioning.
Three recommendations for advancing integrative research on
leadership in interteam contexts
Our review demonstrates that leadership scholars are increasingly
answering calls (e.g., Ancona, 1990 ;Hogg et al., 2012 ;Pittinsky &
Simon, 2007 ) to adopt an external perspective by examining how team
members and leaders reach beyond team boundaries to support teamoutcomes (e.g., Marrone, 2010; Oh, Chung, & Labianca, 2004 ;Oh,
Labianca, & Chung, 2006 ) and coordinate with other teams as part of
interdependent systems (e.g., Davison,
 Hollenbeck, Barnes, Sleesman, &
Ilgen, 2012 ;DeChurch et al., 2011; DeChurch & Marks, 2006). Re-
searchers have made great strides in terms of clarifying what interac-
tion processes, states, and leadership behaviors comprise ‘functional ’
leadership in interteam contexts, as well as why andwhere leadership is
enacted. However, our review also revealed that research is far from
oﬀering a complete picture of leadership in interteam contexts as stu-
dies have progressed within separate siloed literatures that emphasizeleadership processes needed to support team or system objectives, but
not both. Further, our review identi ﬁed critical limits to our current
understanding of when certain leadership processes are most appro-
priate and who (i.e., which people) should assume responsibility for
leadership. Therefore, in the following, we build on these limitations tooﬀer three overarching recommendations for future research that aims
to move the ﬁeld from collecting pieces of a jumbled puzzle to com-
pleting a coherent picture of leadership in interdependent organiza-
tional systems.
#1 - Clarify how leaders balance ‘what ’across levels of ‘why ’and ‘where ’
The studies we reviewed convincingly demonstrate that leadership
processes within and across team boundaries are relevant to the
achievement of both team- and system-level collective goals. However,
the extant literature hints at the idea that the leadership processes that
support team goals might notalways support system goals, or vice
versa. For example, whereas the literature on boundary managementemphasizes that leaders enable team success by securing external re-
sources that support team objectives and by protecting the team from
outside demands ( (Ancona & Caldwell, 1988, 1992, b) ;Choi, 2002 ), the
literature on multiteam systems has argued that leadership processesneed to ensure that all component teams in the system act in pursuit of
shared superordinate goals, regardless of whether teams ‘win’in-
dividually ( Lanaj, Hollenbeck, Ilgen, Barnes, & Harmon, 2013 ). Ex-
amining team or system success in isolation makes it challenging for
researchers to provide practically relevant guidance for how leadershipcan support success across both collective levels. Thus, our ﬁrst re-
commendation is for future research to integrate across research areasin order to better clarify how leaders balance the competing demands of
interteam contexts. In order to do so, we propose four key advance-ments.
First, and most obviously, we believe that it is imperative for studies
of leadership in interdependent systems to measure and theorize about
performance at multiple levels of observation. The failure of most stu-
dies of cross-boundary processes to examine both team and systemoutcomes in the same research study is especially problematic given
arguments made repeatedly in studies falling within Categories 2, 3,
and 4 that what is ‘good
 for the team ’and what is ‘good for the system ’
may be at odds with each other. Leaders at all levels in organizations
have to navigate inherent tensions which result from multilevel goal
hierarchies, multilayered goal and task interdependencies ( Kirkman &
Harris, 2017), and political and relational dynamics that knit togetherorganizational systems. It is impossible to evaluate empirically how
leaders balance these competing demands without evaluating outcomes
at multiple collective levels.
Second, we identi ﬁed many discrepancies across the di ﬀerent ca-
tegories of research in terms of what leadership processes are empha-
sized most often. We suggest that developing a comprehensive under-standing of how leaders balance the demands of interteam contexts may
require more integration of the ideas about ‘what leaders do ’in these
siloed areas of research. For example, in Category 1, researchers em-phasize the importance of task-,person - and change -oriented leadership
behaviors for team performance ( Burke et al., 2006 ;DeRue et al., 2011;
Judge et al., 2004 ). However, examining the behaviors discussed in
Categories 2, 3, and 4, reveals an overwhelming emphasis on task-or-
iented behaviors (e.g., information search/scouting, guarding/sentry,
task coordination, strategy development). The lack of attention towardperson- and change-oriented behaviors is an important oversight as
leveraging person-oriented and change-oriented leadership behaviorsmight be imperative in intergroup contexts characterized by competing
priorities. For example, change-oriented leadership behaviors (e.g.,
oﬀering an inspiring vision) might allow the leader of one team to re-
duce his or her own goal con ﬂicts by shifting the goals others prioritize
to better align with his or her own priorities. Studies of leadership in the
context of superordinate goals (Categories 3 and 4) may also bene ﬁtD.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378
12
from leveraging more of the nuances of ‘boundary management ’ac-
tivities identi ﬁed in Category 2. For example, although task coordina-
tion is heavily emphasized in studies of multiteam systems, other in-
terteam processes that have been shown to support team performance,
such as the degree to which teams scout information, represent their
work to others, and guard/protect their borders ( Ancona & Caldwell,
1992, b) are largely ignored. Again, skill in these more ‘politically-or-
iented ’behaviors may be essential to leaders' abilities to navigate the
tensions of interteam contexts.
Third, many studies in Categories 2 and 4 suggest that certain cross-
boundary processes might have non-linear eﬀects for team or system
objectives. For example, the literature on boundary spanning empha-
sizes that team leaders should help their teams strike an appropriate
balance of team permeability ( Benoliel & Somech, 2015). Likewise, the
literature on multiteam systems suggests that although coordinationbetween teams through direct mutual adjustment is often necessary,
ineﬃcient patterns of interteam coordination that are not well-matched
to task demands can be harmful ( Davison, Hollenbeck, Barnes,
Sleesman, & Ilgen, 2012; Marks, DeChurch, Mathieu, Panzer, & Alonso,
2005 ). These previous investigations which have uncovered non-linear
eﬀects of ‘beneﬁcial’ team interteam phenomena point to a need for
future research to continue this line of inquiry, particularly in light ofmounting evidence that many phenomena exhibit a ‘too much of a good
thing ’eﬀect (Pierce & Aguinis, 2013). We also encourage research to
identify speci ﬁc recommendations for leaders about how to establish
the‘optimal ’levels of team and interteam states and processes.
Finally, we emphasize that, as researchers, we cannot assume that it
is clear which goals will take priority. Leadership, in this review, has
been functionally de ﬁned as meeting the needs of the team and/or the
system to enable goal-ful ﬁllment. However, this is the functional
ideal —in reality it is less clear which ‘needs ’leaders will focus on
meeting. One speci ﬁc pathway to understand how leaders may navigate
tensions created by con ﬂicting team/team or team/system goals is to
consider leaders' accountability. Accountability refers to the “perceived
expectation that one's decisions or actions will be evaluated by a salient
audience and that rewards or sanctions are believed to be contingent on
this
expected evaluation ”(Hall & Ferris, 2011 , p. 134). Notably, re-
wards and sanctions do not need to be material in nature (e.g., pay orperformance evaluations), but rather, can come in the form of im-
plications for one's social reputation (see review by Hall, Frink, &
Buckley, 2017 ).
We expect personal and professional dynamics in many workplaces
to produce accountability structures that di ﬀer widely from what one
might expect based on formal hierarchies or work ﬂow processes.
Individuals' are driven to maintain good standing in the eyes of thosethey deem to be key constituents ( Tetlock, 1999 ), thus, how individuals
prioritize team and system goals may be governed by their perceivedaccountability to di ﬀerent actors or groups in the organization. For
example, leaders may need to give an account of their actions to notonly superiors, but also peers, and subordinates. Relatedly, a key ‘role’
of leadership may be to communicate what is important and to whommembers are accountable. Organizations might assume certain ‘pre-
scribed ’objectives are also ‘perceived, ’but that is not always the case,
and leaders (formal and informal) can signi ﬁcantly impact local per-
ceptions of what is important (e.g., within teams). Despite being de-scribed as “the adhesive that binds social systems together ”(Frink &
Klimoski, 1998 , p. 3), our review found that discussions of account-
ability are absent from studies of leadership in interteam contexts.
#2 - Elaborate ‘what ’in the context of ‘when ’
Many of the studies we reviewed demonstrated the growing ma-
turity of the leadership ﬁeld by exploring critical boundary conditions
of leadership processes which originate within teams, between teams,
and/or in the embedding environment. However, we also identi ﬁed
signiﬁcant opportunities to advance knowledge about leadership ininterteam contexts by examining additional moderators —particularly
with regard to leadership processes spanning team boundaries.Therefore, our second recommendation is to better elaborate ‘what ’
leaders do in the context of ‘when. ’We highlight a few examples below.
First, like most areas of organizational research, there is an obvious
need to better understand how leadership processes within and acrossteams play out across time. We found almost no research in Category 2
investigating how the timing of cross-boundary activities might impactteam outcomes. In contrast, research on multiteam systems has begun
to consider how interteam leadership processes might need to be mat-
ched to the phase of system task performance ( DeChurch et al., 2011;
DeChurch & Marks, 2006; Lanaj, Hollenbeck, Ilgen, Barnes, & Harmon,
2013 ).
However, across all categories of our framework, we found a
preponderance of short-term and cross-sectional studies (see Table 3). It
is diﬃcult to make ﬁrm recommendations for leaders based on short-
term studies of leadership and collaboration given evidence suggesting
teams and systems change in meaningful ways over time ( Gersick,
1991 ;Kozlowski et al., 1996 ). In fact, in one of the few studies of cross-
boundary processes across time, Ancona (1990) showed teams that use
‘probing ’strategies su ﬀered short term decrements in team satisfaction
but performed the best in the long term.
Notably, cross-sectional designs can also severely undermine the
ability to assess causality and endogeneity concerns. Brie ﬂy, endogeneity
concerns exist when the e ﬀect of x on y cannot be interpreted because it
includes omitted causes and results due to a variety of study design
ﬂaws, including omitted variables, omitted selection, simultaneity,
common-method variance, and measurement error (for an in-depthreview of endogeneity see Antonakis, Bendahan, Jacquart, & Lalive,
2010 ;Antonakis & House, 2014 ). Although it appears (see Table 3 ) that
researchers often address one potential source of endogeneity (i.e., by
using multi-source data), there are additional recommendations that
can help address other sources. First, increased use of appropriate
control variables, which Antonakis et al. (2010) deﬁned as “exogenous
sources of variance that do not correlate with the error term ”(p. 1099),
can help address omitted variable bias. Second, increasing the use ofexperimental or quasi-experimental designs could allow researchers to
disentangle causal e ﬀects ( Stone-Romero, 2008 ). Further, none of the
studies we reviewed utilized ﬁeld experiments . Field experiments have
been used in other disciplines, including economics, for a considerable
period of time (some would argue since the 1920s; Levitt & List, 2009).
Although the use of ﬁeld experiments is less prevalent in the realm of
leadership research (with notable exceptions e.g., Dvir, Eden, Avolio, &
Shamir, 2002 ), there are substantial bene ﬁts of using ﬁeld experiments
that could reduce potential concerns regarding causality and en-
dogeneity and might be a fertile ground for testing theory central to
leadership in intergroup contexts in a controlled and rigorous way.
Second, although qualitative studies of multiteam systems often
emphasize that task demands and system memberships can shift dy-
namically over time, quantitative studies, especially those conducted in
laboratory settings, have tended to model multiteam systems with ex-
tremely stable memberships and task demands that operate on rela-
tively short (3 –4 h) time frames. Thus, we identi ﬁed a need for quan-
titative
studies of interdependent systems to consider how leadership
processes might support major changes in task demands and system
memberships. Important questions include: What leadership processesallow high functioning systems to remain so when power dynamics shift
as teams that were more central to system task demands become less
central? What leadership processes are most e ﬀective in dynamic in-
terdependent systems where team membership is highly ﬂuid (i.e.,
teams are aggregating and disaggregating as a system in response to
environmental changes)?
Third, additional research is warranted that evaluates how the types
of system tasks might determine the most e ﬀective patterns of leader-
ship and teamwork processes. Teams and systems tackle a variety oftypes of tasks ranging from more conceptual (e.g., intellective tasks,
decision-making tasks, creativity tasks, cognitive con ﬂict tasks) to moreD.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378
13
behavioral (e.g., planning, resolving mixed motives, competitions,
psycho-motor tasks; McGrath, 1984 ). However, whereas the qualitative
(e.g., case studies) of multiteam systems we reviewed considered bothhighly conceptual (e.g., innovation) as well as highly behavioral (e.g.,
disaster response) system demands, the majority of the quantitative
empirical studies we reviewed focused exclusively on behavioral tasks
(e.g., military simulations; Davison, Hollenbeck, Barnes, Sleesman, &
Ilgen, 2012 ;DeChurch & Marks, 2006 ;de Vries, Hollenbeck, Davison,
Walter, & Van der Vegt, 2016 ;Marks, DeChurch, Mathieu, Panzer, &
Alonso, 2005 ;Murase, Carter, DeChurch, & Marks, 2014; Lanaj,
Hollenbeck, Ilgen, Barnes, & Harmon, 2013; Firth, Hollenbeck, Miles,
Ilgen, & Barnes, 2015 ;Lanaj, Foulk, & Hollenbeck, 2018; Porck et al.,
2019 ). Interestingly, an overarching conclusion from these studies ap-
pears to be that a multiteam system will function best when teamidentiﬁcation is strong, teams are rather insular, and interteam co-
ordination processes are handled almost exclusively by a select set ofboundary spanners and members of formal leadership teams. However,
in the context of creativity tasks, studies from Category 2 have sug-
gested that when teams are overly insular and believe they have a
monopoly on a particular domain, they may be unwilling to be inﬂ u-
enced by the contributions o ﬀered by ‘outsiders ’and consequently, may
suﬀer creativity decrements ( Dokko, Kane, & Tortoriello, 2014;
Carbonell & Rodríguez Escudero, 2019 ). Further, whereas studies of
team boundary spanning have suggested that teams engage in more
boundary activities during times of task uncertainty ( Faraj & Yan,
2009 ), theoretical work on multiteam systems suggests that team
members may engage in lessinterteam interaction under situations of
high task uncertainty ( Luciano et al., 2018 ). Clearly more research is
needed to disentangle these inconsistencies and provide more targetedrecommendations for leaders.
Relatedly, we believe that exploring how leadership processes
should be matched to the nature of interteam interdependence (driven by
task demands) is a promising avenue for future research. Pairs of in-
terdependent teams in organizational systems might be engaged in
pooled (additive), sequential ,reciprocal , and/or intensive forms of inter-
dependence at certain points in time ( Kennedy, Sommer, & Nguyen,
2017 ;Marks, DeChurch, Mathieu, Panzer, & Alonso, 2005 ;Mathieu
et al., 2001). These di ﬀerent forms of interteam interdependence may
be used as a preliminary guide for structuring leadership processes
between teams (e.g., determining ‘who’should enact leadership and
‘what ’processes
are most critical) and for helping leaders understand
how to prioritize goals (establish ‘why’for the team) when they face
potential trade-o ﬀs across levels of a multiteam goal hierarchy. That is,
when teams are pursuing shared goals that require pooled forms of
interdependence, they work separately, but may bene ﬁt from an
awareness of what other teams are doing. Under these circumstances,
emphasizing team level goals is a top priority and external leadership
processes (and/or boundary activities) may be kept to a minimum.However, as pairs of teams move toward highly intensive forms of in-
terdependence driven by superordinate goals, leadership processes mayneed to shift toward enhancing collaborative psychological states be-
tween teams that support joint problem solving and integration of ideas
without also losing sight of team-level goal accomplishment, and may
need to involve more (formal and informal) leaders. Unfortunately,
only a small subset of the studies we reviewed described the nature of
interteam interdependencies in great detail, particularly within Cate-
gory 2. Thus, in order to build an evidence base related to these pro-
positions, we strongly suggest that future research specify the nature of
the interteam interdependencies between pairs of teams when ex-amining team and leadership processes.
#3 - Evaluate ‘who ’should (or is likely to) enact ‘what ’‘where ’
Quantitative studies of leadership within teams in support of team
goals (Category 1) are ﬁnding that informal leadership (provided by
members of the group) is important and often, augments formalleadership to improve team e ﬀectiveness (e.g., Aime et al., 2014;
Carson, Tesluk, & Marrone, 2007 ;D'Innocenzo et al., 2016; Klein et al.,
2006 ;Nicolaides et al., 2014 ;Wang et al., 2014 ). However, across the
other three categories of research, we found a paucity of quantitative
investigations of informal leadership. This is unfortunate because
qualitative case studies across all three areas have often found that
informal leadership processes do, in fact, exist in interteam contexts
(Bienefeld & Grote, 2014 ;Johannessen, McArthur, & Jonassen, 2015;
Malin & Hackmann, 2019), and may not always support team or systemobjectives ( Ingvaldsen & Rolfsen, 2012 ). Therefore, our third re-
commendation is for future research to more carefully evaluate theantecedents andoutcomes of informal leadership in ﬂuence in interteam
contexts.
For example, in the context of studies within Category 2, researchers
have depicted cross-boundary processes as functions that formal leadersmight enact and additionally, as functions that can be distributed
among multiple team members ( Marrone, Tesluk, & Carson, 2007).
However, the studies we reviewed typically measured the overall‘amount ’of
team boundary spanning without considering which team
members are enacting those processes ( Ancona et al., 2002 ;Elkins &
Keller, 2003 ;Ferguson & Blackman, 2019 ). The few exceptions to this
trend suggest that there are meaningful e ﬀects when the patterning of
team members' boundary spanning behavior is taken into account
(Büchel, Nieminen, Armbruster-Domeyer, & Denison, 2013 ;Oh, Chung,
& Labianca, 2004 ). Given the complex, multifaceted nature of most
modern workplaces, targeted, purposeful, and coordinated patterns of
boundary spanning e ﬀorts are likely to yield more positive results than
unstructured activities, left solely to chance. Leadership in interteamcontexts should work to ensure that the right people within the team
are connecting with the right other people external to the team and that
the cross-boundary actions of team members are not unnecessarilyduplicated or working at cross-purposes. Research is needed to provide
more targeted guidance about how teams can best distribute responsi-bility for cross-boundary processes to support collective goals.
The vast majority of quantitative studies in Categories 3 and 4 have
investigated leadership in ﬂuence after a formal leadership team has
been established. There are certainly numerous bene ﬁts to having a
formal leadership team that is devoted to achieving the shared super-
ordinate goal of the system and is focused exclusively on managing all
interteam coordination demands ( Davison, Hollenbeck, Barnes,
Sleesman, & Ilgen, 2012 ;DeChurch & Marks, 2006; Firth, Hollenbeck,
Miles, Ilgen, & Barnes, 2015 ). Unfortunately, not all systems contain a
formal leadership team, at least not during the initial stages of systemperformance. Moreover, even when formal leadership teams are es-
tablished, there may be power dynamics at play and disagreements
about which goals should be prioritized ( Newell & Swan, 2000). Indeed,
Lanaj, Foulk, & Hollenbeck, 2018 ﬁndings that formal leadership teams
and lower level component teams can hold (and express) di ﬀerent
preferences for risk taking hint at the possibility that ‘leadership ’in-
ﬂuence can emanate from formal as well as informal sources.
Therefore, we strongly suggest that future research should seek to
better understand why informal leadership in ﬂuence processes arise
within and across teams —particularly in the context of interdependent
teams whose joint e ﬀortscould be used to achieve important societal or
organizational goals. Doing so could help illuminate whether the pat-terns of leadership in ﬂuence that are associated with high levels of
system performance under certain circumstances are also the patternsthat are likely to arise. Moreover, should researchers ﬁnd that the pat-
terns of leadership that are likely to emerge are notthe patterns of
leadership
that are most e ﬀective, understanding the antecedents of
these social systems could help point toward organizational interven-tions.
For example, the design of organizational structures and work ﬂows
as well as decisions regarding goals, reward systems, and personnel
(e.g., new hires or inter-unit transfers) are often not made with the
explicit purpose of in ﬂuencing how employees interact with each other;D.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378
14
nevertheless, these decisions by formal leaders shape how networks of
relationships (including informal leadership) develop in the workplace
(Antonakis & House, 2014; Brass, 2001 ;Brass & Krackhardt, 1999 ).
These decisions “fundamentally alter the internal social structure of
organizations by ﬂuctuating the pool of human capital (i.e., composi-
tion), altering employee interaction patterns (i.e., con ﬁguration), and
changing the nature of employee relationships (i.e., content) ”(Methot,
Rosado-Solomon, & Allen, 2018 ; p. 726). Thus, formal leaders should
include in their calculus how decisions regarding personnel assign-
ments, work design, goals, and performance evaluations might shape
the development of relationships among employees that impact the
achievement of collective goals ( Cullen-Lester, Maupin, & Carter,
2017 ).
Notably, simply prescribing patterns of cross-boundary activities
needed to achieve team and system goals may not be su ﬃcient and
could even be detrimental (e.g., employees may respond negatively if
they feel the organization is trying to control or prescribe whom they
should talk to, develop friendships with, or try to inﬂ uence). Thus, we
argue that leaders would be better served to focus on understandinghow they can set up the ‘facilitating conditions ’(Hackman, 2012) that
support the emergence of bene ﬁcial networks of informal in ﬂuence in
interdependent systems (i.e., conditions that allow groups to chart their
own course in support of both team and system goals) as opposed to
attempting to prescribe formalized structures in their entirety. For in-
stance, research suggests that actions of formal leaders' signal whether
it is advisable for members of their team to form cross-boundary re-
lationships. Leaders encourage cooperation or, conversely, competition
with their rhetoric and the goals and structures they emphasize ( Kaiser,
Hogan, & Craig, 2008). For example, leaders who emphasize intra-or-ganizational comparisons may improve performance for their team by
increasing motivation, but this decision may also evoke feelings of
rivalry with others ( Kilduﬀ, 2014; Kilduﬀ, Elfenbein, & Staw, 2010) and
lead to destructive competitive emotions (e.g., envy; Nickerson &
Zenger, 2008 ) and behaviors (e.g., dishonesty; Charness, Masclet, &
Villeval, 2013; Chan, Li, & Pierce, 2014 ; excessive risk taking;
Kacperczyk, Beckman, & Moliterno, 2015 ).
Future research might also draw inspiration from the ﬁelds of eco-
nomics (e.g., retirement savings), healthcare (e.g., exercise or foodchoices), and marketing (e.g., product purchases) to learn how leaders
might ‘nudge ’employees toward making decisions that will help their
team and the broader organizational system in which the team is em-bedded when developing, maintaining, and altering their workplace
relationships. Recently, Tawse, Patrick, and Vera (2019) proposed that
nudges
(i.e., “any aspect of the choice architecture that alters people's
behavior in a predictable way ”,Thaler & Sunstein, 2008 , p. 6) might be
used to encourage strategic leaders to shift their attention from plan-ning activities to the hard work of strategy implementation. They
proposed that nudges may be used to create an implementation mindset
by removing planning distractions and using verbal framing to
strengthen managers' willpower. Future research might focus on iden-
tifying nudges that leaders might use to encourage desirable cross-
boundary behaviors. Although the aim is not to ‘prescribe ’the devel-
opment of speci ﬁc relationships, formal leaders still need to have a
clear picture of what types and patterns of cross-boundary connections
are needed in order to achieve collective goals across levels so that they
might create conditions that encourage employees to form these re-
lationships themselves.
Conclusion
Enacting leadership in interteam contexts is often a balancing act
and a moving target —and so is the study of leadership in interteam
contexts. We applaud previous researchers who have taken on the im-
mensely complex challenge of delineating the nature of ‘functional ’
leadership in interteam contexts. We hope this review serves as afoundation for future research that connects ideas and perspectivesacross disparate areas of inquiry in order to further clarify how formaland informal leaders and leadership processes within and across teams
support organizational objectives across team and system levels.
References
Aime, F., Humphrey, S., DeRue, D. S., & Paul, J. B. (2014). The riddle of heterarchy:
Power transitions in cross-functional teams. Academy of Management Journal, 57 (2),
327–352.
Alter, C. (1990). An exploratory study of con ﬂict and coordination in interorganizational
service delivery system. Academy of Management Journal, 33 (3), 478 –502.
Ancona, D., Bresman, H., & Kaeufer, K. (2002). The comparative advantage of X-teams.
MIT Sloan Management Review, 43 (3), 33 –39.
Ancona, D. G. (1990). Outward bound: Strategic for team survival in an organization.
Academy of Management Journal, 33 (2), 334 –365.
Ancona, D. G. (1993). The classics and the contemporary: A new blend of small group
theory. In J. K. Murnighan (Ed.). Social psychology in organizations: Advances in theory
and research (pp. 225 –243). Englewood Cli ﬀs, NJ: Prentice Hall .
Ancona, D. G., & Caldwell, D. F. (1988). Beyond task and maintenance: De ﬁning external
functions in groups. Group & Organization Studies, 13 (4), 468 –494.
Ancona, D. G., & Caldwell, D. (1990). Beyond boundary spanning: Managing external
dependence in product development teams. The Journal of High Technology
Management Research, 1 (2), 119 –135.
Ancona, D. G., & Caldwell, D. F. (1992a). Demography and design: Predictors of new
product team performance. Organization Science, 3 (3), 321 –341.
Ancona, D. G., & Caldwell, D. F. (1992b). Bridging the boundary: External activity and
performance in organizational teams. Administrative Science Quarterly, 37 (4),
634–655.
Ancona, D. G., & Caldwell, D. F. (1998). Rethinking team composition from the outside in.
In D. H. Gruenfeld (Ed.). Research on managing groups and teams (pp. 21 –37). Stamford
CT: Elsevier Science/JAI Press .
Anderson, P. H., & Kragh, H. (2015). Exploring boundary-spanning practices among
creativity managers. Management Decision, 53 (4), 786 –808.
Antonakis, J., Bendahan, S., Jacquart, P., & Lalive, R. (2010). On making causal claims: A
review and recommendations. The Leadership Quarterly, 21 (6), 1086 –1120 .
Antonakis, J., & House, R. J. (2014). Instrumental leadership: Measurement and extension
of transformational –transactional leadership theory. The Leadership Quarterly, 25 (4),
746–771.
Arnett,
D. B., & Wittmann, C. M. (2014). Improving marketing success: The role of tacit
knowledge exchange between sales and marketing. Journal of Business Research,
67(3), 324 –331.
Arrow, H., McGrath, J. E., & Berdahl, J. L. (2000). Small groups as complex systems.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications .
Aubé, C., & Rousseau, V. (2005). Team goal commitment and team e ﬀectiveness: The role
of task interdependence and supportive behaviors. Group Dynamics: Theory, Research,
and Practice, 9 (3), 189 –204.
Balkundi, P., & Harrison, D. A. (2006). Ties, leaders, and time in teams: Strong inference
about network structure ’seﬀects on team viability and performance. Academy of
Management Journal, 49 (1), 49 –68.
Banks, G. C., McCauley, K. D., Gardner, W. L., & Guler, C. E. (2016). A meta-analytic
review of authentic and transformational leadership: A test for redundancy. The
Leadership Quarterly, 27 (4), 634 –652.
Bass, B. M. (1985). Leadership and performance beyond expectations. New York: Free Press .
Bass, B. M. (1990). From transactional to transformational leadership: Learning to share
the vision. Organizational Dynamics, 18 (3), 19 –31.
Bass, B. M., & Avolio, B. J. (1993). Transformational leadership: A response to critiques.
In M. M. Chemers, & R. Ayman (Eds.). Leadership theory and research: Perspectives and
directions (pp. 49 –80). San Diego, CA, US: Academic Press .
Bass, B. M., & Avolio, B. J. (Eds.). (1994). Improving organizational e ﬀectiveness through
transformational leadership. Thousand Oaks, CA, US: Sage Publications, Inc .
Bearman, C., Paletz, S. B., Orasanu, J., & Thomas, M. J. (2010). The breakdown of co-
ordinated decision making in distributed systems. Human Factors, 52 (2), 173 –188.
Beck, T. E., & Plowman, D. A. (2013). Temporary, emergent interorganizational colla-
boration in unexpected circumstances: A study of the Columbia space shuttle re-
sponse e ﬀort.Organization Science, 25 (4), 1234 –1252 .
Benoliel, P., & Somech, A. (2015). The role of leader boundary activities in enhancing
interdisciplinary team e ﬀectiveness. Small Group Research, 46 (1), 83 –124.
Bick, S., Spohrer, K., Hoda, R., Scheerer, A., & Heinzl, A. (2018). Coordination challenges
in large-scale software development: A case study of planning misalignment in hybrid
settings. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 44 (10), 932 –950.
Bienefeld,
N., & Grote, G. (2014). Speaking up in ad hoc multiteam systems: Individual-
level e ﬀects of psychological safety, status, and leadership within and across teams.
European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 23 (6), 930 –945.
Bienefeld, N., & Grote, G. (2014). Shared leadership in multiteam systems: How cockpit
and cabin crews lead each other to safety. Human Factors, 56 (2), 270 –286.
Birkinshaw, J., Ambos, T. C., & Bouquet, C. (2017). Boundary spanning activities of
corporate HQ executives insights from a longitudinal study. Journal of Management
Studies, 54 (4), 422 –454.
Blake, R. R., Shepard, H. A., & Mouton, J. S. (1964). Managing intergroup con ﬂict in in-
dustry. Houston, TX: Gulf Publishing Company .
Brass, D. J. (2001). Social capital and organizational leadership. In S. J. Zaccaro, & R. J.
Klimoski (Eds.). The nature of organizational leadership (pp. 132 –152). San Francisco,
CA: Jossey-Bass .
Brass, D. J., & Krackhardt, D. (1999). The social capital of 21st century leaders. In J. G.D.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378
15
Hunt, & R. L. Phillips (Eds.). Out-of-the-box leadership (pp. 179 –194). Stamford, CT:
JAI Press .
Zolper, K., Beimborn, D., & Weitzel, T. (2013). When the river leaves its bed: Analyzing
deviations between planned and actual interaction structures in IT change processes.
Journal of Information Technology, 28 (4), 333 –353.
Brett, J.M., & Rognes, J.K. (1986). Intergroup relations in organizations. In P.S. Goodman
& Associates (Eds.), Designing e ﬀective work groups (pp. 202 –236). San Francisco,
CA: Jossey-Bass.
Brion, S., Chauvet, V., Chollet, B., & Mothe, C. (2012). Project leaders as boundary
spanners: Relational antecedents and performance outcomes. International Journal of
Project Management, 30 (6), 708 –722.
Büchel, B., Nieminen, L., Armbruster-Domeyer, H., & Denison, D. (2013). Managing
stakeholders in team-based innovation: The dynamics of knowledge and trust net-
works. European Journal of Innovation Management, 16 (1), 22 –49.
Bullinger, A. C., Neyer, A. K., Rass, M., & Moeslein, K. M. (2010). Community-based
innovation contests: Where competition meets cooperation. Creativity and Innovation
Management, 19 (3), 290 –303.
Burke, C. S., Stagl, K. C., Klein, C., Goodwin, G. F., Salas, E., & Halpin, S. M. (2006). What
type of leadership behaviors are functional in teams? A meta-analysis. The Leadership
Quarterly, 17 (3), 288 –307.
Burt, R. S. (1992). Structural holes. The social structure of competition. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press .
Carbonell, P., & Rodríguez Escudero, A. I. (2019). The dark side of team social cohesion in
NPD team boundary spanning. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 36 (2),
149–171.
Carson, J. B., Tesluk, P. E., & Marrone, J. A. (2007). Shared leadership in teams: An
investigation of antecedent conditions and performance. Academy of Management
Journal, 50 (5), 1217 –1234 .
Carter, D. R., & DeChurch, L. A. (2014). Leadership in multiteam systems: A network
perspective. In D. Day (Ed.). The Oxford handbook of leadership (pp. 483 –505). New
York, NY: Oxford University Press .
Carter, D. R., DeChurch, L. A., Braun, M., & Contractor, N. (2015). Social network ap-
proaches to leadership: An integrative conceptual review. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 100 (3), 597 –622.
Cha, J., Kim, Y., Lee, J. Y., & Bachrach, D. G. (2015). Transformational leadership and
inter-team collaboration: Exploring the mediating role of teamwork quality and
moderating role of team size. Group & Organization Management, 40 (6), 715 –743.
Chan, C. C., Pearson, C., & Entrekin, L. (2003). Examining the e ﬀects of internal and
external team learning on team performance. Team Performance Management, 9 (7/8),
174–181.
Chan,
T. Y., Li, J., & Pierce, L. (2014). Compensation and peer e ﬀects in competing sales
teams. Management Science, 60 (8), 1965 –1984 .
Charness, G., Masclet, D., & Villeval, M. C. (2013). The dark side of competition for status.
Management Science, 60 (1), 38 –55.
Chen, M. H., & Wang, M. C. (2008). Social networks and a new venture ’s innovative
capability: The role of trust within entrepreneurial teams. R&D Management, 38 (3),
253–264.
Choi, J. N. (2002). External activities and team e ﬀectiveness: Review and theoretical
development. Small Group Research, 33 (2), 181 –208.
Chuang, C. H., Jackson, S. E., & Jiang, Y. (2016). Can knowledge-intensive teamwork be
managed? Examining the roles of HRM systems, leadership, and tacit knowledge.
Journal of Management, 42 (2), 524 –554.
Chung, Y., & Jackson, S. E. (2013). The internal and external networks of knowledge-
intensive teams: The role of task routineness. Journal of Management, 39 (2), 442 –468.
Connaughton, S. L., Williams, E. A., & Shuﬄ er, M. L. (2012). Social identity issues in
multiteam systems: Considerations for future research. In S. J. Zaccaro, M. A. Marks,& L. A. DeChurch (Eds.). Multiteam systems: An organization form for dynamic and
complex environments (pp. 109 –140). New York, NY: Routledge Taylor & Francis
Group .
Contractor, N. S., DeChurch, L. A., Carson, J., Carter, D. R., & Keegan, B. (2012). The
topology of collective leadership. The Leadership Quarterly, 23 (6), 994 –1011 .
Corsaro, D., Ramos, C., Henneberg, S. C., & Naudé, P. (2012). The impact of network
conﬁgurations on value constellations in business markets —The case of an innova-
tion network. Industrial Marketing Management, 41 (1), 54 –67.
Cross, R., Rebele, R., & Grant, A. (2016). Collaborative overload. Harvard Business Review,
94(1), 74 –79.
Cuijpers, M., Uitdewilligen, S., & Guenter, H. (2016). E ﬀects of dual identi ﬁcation and
interteam conﬂ ict on multiteam system performance. Journal of Occupational and
Organizational Psychology, 89 (1),
 141–171.
Cullen-Lester, K. L., Maupin, C. K., & Carter, D. R. (2017). Incorporating social networks
into leadership development: A conceptual model and evaluation of research and
practice. The Leadership Quarterly, 28 (1), 130 –152.
Cullen-Lester, K. L., & Yammarino, Y. J. (2016). Collective and network approaches to
leadership: Special issue introduction. The Leadership Quarterly, 27 (2), 173 –180.
Cummings, J. N., & Kiesler, S. (2005). Collaborative research across disciplinary and
organizational boundaries. Social Studies of Science, 35 (5), 703 –722.
Curnin, S., Owen, C., & Trist, C. (2014). Managing the constraints of boundary spanning
in emergency management. Cognition, Technology & Work, 16 (4), 549 –563.
Dahl, M. S., & Pedersen, C. (2005). Social networks in the R&D process: The case of the
wireless communication industry around Aalborg, Denmark. Journal of Engineering
and Technology Management, 22 (1–2), 75 –92.
Dansereau, F., Graen, G., & Haga, W. J. (1975). A vertical dyad linkage approach to
leadership within formal organizations: A longitudinal investigation of the rolemaking process. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 13 (1), 46 –78.
Davison, R. B., Hollenbeck, J. R., Barnes, C. M., Sleesman, D. J., & Ilgen, D. R. (2012).
Coordinated action in multiteam systems. Journal of Applied Psychology, 97 (4),808–824.
Day, D. V., Gronn, P., & Salas, E. (2004). Leadership capacity in teams. The Leadership
Quarterly, 15 (6), 857 –880.
de Vries, T. A., Hollenbeck, J. R., Davison, R. B., Walter, F., & Van der Vegt, G. S. (2016).
Managing coordination in multiteam systems: Integrating micro and macro per-
spectives. Academy of Management Journal, 59 (5), 1823 –1844 .
de Vries, T. A., Walter, F., Van der Vegt, G. S., & Essens, P. J. (2014). Antecedents of
individuals ’interteam coordination: Broad functional experiences as a mixed bles-
sing. Academy of Management Journal, 57 (5), 1334 –1359 .
DeChurch, L. A., Burke, C. S., Shuﬄ er, M. L., Lyons, R., Doty, D., & Salas, E. (2011). A
historiometric analysis of leadership in mission critical multiteam environments. The
Leadership Quarterly, 22 (1), 152 –169.
DeChurch, L. A., & Marks, M. A. (2006). Leadership in multiteam systems. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 91 (2), 311 .
DeRue, D. S., & Ashford, S. J. (2010). Who will lead and who will follow? A social process
of leadership identity construction in organizations. Academy
 of Management Review,
35(4), 627 –647.
Derue, D. S., Nahrgang, J., Wellman, N., & Humphrey, S. E. (2011). Trait and behavioral
theories of leadership: An integration and meta-analytic test of their relative validity.
Personnel Psychology, 64 (1), 7 –52.
DiazGranados, D., Dow, A. W., Perry, S. J., & Palesis, J. A. (2014). Understanding patient
care as a multiteam system. Pushing the boundaries: Multiteam systems in research and
practice (pp. 95 –113). Houston, TX: Emerald Group Publishing Limited .
Dinh, J. E., Lord, R. G., Gardner, W. L., Meuser, J. D., Liden, R. C., & Hu, J. (2014).
Leadership theory and research in the new millennium: Current theoretical trends
and changing perspectives. The Leadership Quarterly, 25 (1), 36 –62.
D’Innocenzo, L., Mathieu, J. E., & Kukenberger, M. R. (2016). A meta-analysis of di ﬀerent
forms of shared leadership –team performance relations. Journal of Management,
42(7), 1964 –1991 .
Dokko, G., Kane, A. A., & Tortoriello, M. (2014). One of us or one of my friends: How
social identity and tie strength shape the creative generativity of boundary-spanning
ties. Organization Studies, 35 (5), 703 –726.
Drach-Zahavy, A. (2011). Interorganizational teams as boundary spanners: The role of
team diversity, boundedness, and extrateam links. European Journal of Work and
Organizational Psychology, 20 (1), 89 –118.
Dvir, T., Eden, D., Avolio, B. J., & Shamir, B. (2002). Impact of transformational lea-
dership on follower development and performance: A ﬁeld experiment. Academy of
Management Journal, 45 (4), 735 –744.
Edmondson, A. C. (1999). Psychological safety and learning behavior in work teams.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 44 (2), 350 –383.
Edmondson, A. C. (2003). Speaking up in the operating room: How team leaders promote
learning in interdisciplinary action teams. Journal of Management Studies, 40 (6),
1419 –1452 .
Elkins, T., & Keller, R. T. (2003). Leadership in research and development organizations:
A literature review and conceptual framework. The Leadership Quarterly, 14 (4/5),
587–606.
Ernst, C., & Chrobot-Mason, D. (2011a). Boundary spanning leadership. New York, NY:
McGraw-Hill .
Ernst, C., & Chrobot-Mason, D. (2011b). Flat world, hard boundaries: How to lead across
them. MIT Sloan Management Review, 52 (3), 81 –88.
Faraj,
S., & Yan, A. (2009). Boundary work in knowledge teams. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 94 (3), 604 –617.
Farh, C. I., & Chen, G. (2018). Leadership and member voice in action teams: Test of a
dynamic phase model. Journal of Applied Psychology, 103 (1), 97 –110.
Ferguson, A. J., Ormiston, M. E., & Wong, E. M. (2019). The e ﬀects of cohesion and
structural position on the top management team boundary spanning –ﬁrm perfor-
mance relationship. Group & Organization Management, 44 (6), 1099 –1135 .
Ferguson, S., & Blackman, D. (2019). Translating innovative practices into organizational
knowledge in the public sector: A case study. Journal of Management & Organization,
25(1), 42 –57.
Fiedler, F. E. (1967). A theory of leadership e ﬀectiveness. New York: McGraw-Hill .
Firth, B. M., Hollenbeck, J. R., Miles, J. E., Ilgen, D. R., & Barnes, C. M. (2015). Same
page, di ﬀerent books: Extending representational gaps theory to enhance perfor-
mance in multiteam systems. Academy of Management Journal, 58 (3), 813 –835.
Fleishman, E. A., Mumford, M. D., Zaccaro, S. J., Levin, K. Y., Korotkin, A. L., & Hein, M.
B. (1991). Taxonomic e ﬀorts in the description of leader behavior: A synthesis and
functional interpretation. The Leadership Quarterly, 2 (4), 245 –287.
Fleştea, A. M., Cur şeu, P. L., & Fodor, O. C. (2017). The bittersweet e ﬀect of power dis-
parity: Implications for emergent states in collaborative multi-party systems. Journal
of Managerial Psychology, 32 (5), 401 –416.
Floyd, S. W., & Wooldridge, B. (1997). Middle management ’s strategic in ﬂuence and
organizational performance. Journal of Management Studies, 34 (3), 465 –485.
Follett, M. P. (1924). Creative experience. New York, NY: Longmans, Green .
Foss, K., & Rodgers, W. (2011). Enhancing information usefulness by line managers ’in-
volvement in cross-unit activities. Organization Studies, 32 (5), 683 –703.
Friedman, R. A., & Podolny, J. (1992). Di ﬀerentiation of boundary spanning roles: Labor
negotiations and implications for role con ﬂict.Administrative Science Quarterly, 37 (1),
28–47.
Frink, D. D., & Klimoski, R. J. (1998). Toward a theory of accountability in organizations
and human resources management. In G. R. Ferris (Vol. Ed.), Research in personnel and
human resources management .Vol. 16 .Research in personnel and human resources
management (pp. 1 –51). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press .
Gardner, R. G., Harris, T. B., Li, N., Kirkman, B. L., & Mathieu, J. E. (2017). Understanding
“it depends” in organizational research: A theory-based taxonomy, review, and future
research agenda concerning interactive and quadratic relationships. Organizational
Research Methods, 20 (4), 610 –638.D.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378
16
Garvin, D. A., Edmondson, A. C., & Gino, F. (2008). Is yours a learning organization.
Harvard Business Review, 86 (3), 109 .
Gasson, S. (2005). The dynamics of sensemaking, knowledge and expertise in colla-
borative, boundary-spanning design. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication,
10,2 3–34.
Gerber, D. E., Reimer, T., Williams, E. L., Gill, M., Loudat Priddy, L., Bergestuen, D., ...
Craddock Lee, S. J (2016). Resolving rivalries and realigning goals: Challenges of
clinical and research multiteam systems. Journal of Oncology Practice, 12 (11),
1020 –1028 .
Gersick, C. J. G. (1991). Revolutionary change theories: A multilevel exploration of the
punctuated equilibrium paradigm. Academy of Management Review, 16 (1), 10 –36.
Gil, F., Alcover, C. M., Peiró, J. M., Rico, R., Alcover, C. M., & Barrasa, Á. (2005). Change-
oriented leadership, satisfaction and performance in work groups. Journal of
Managerial Psychology, 20 , 312 –328.
Glaser, L., Fourné, S. P., & Elfring, T. (2015). Achieving strategic renewal: The multi-level
inﬂuences of top and middle managers ’boundary-spanning. Small Business Economics,
45(2), 305 –327.
Gleibs, I. H., & Haslam, S. A. (2016). Do we want a ﬁghter? The in ﬂuence of group status
and the stability of intergroup relations on leader prototypicality and endorsement.The Leadership Quarterly, 27 (4), 557 –573.
Glynn, M. A., Kazanjian, R., & Drazin, R. (2010). Fostering innovation in complex product
development settings: The role of team member identity and interteam inter-
dependence. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 27 (7), 1082 –1095 .
Graen, G. B. (1976). Role-making processes within complex organizations. In M. D.
Dunnette (Ed.). Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology (pp. 1201 –1245).
Chicago, IL: Rand McNally.
Graen, G. B., & Cashman, J. F. (1975). A role-making model of leadership in formal or-
ganisations: A developmental approach. In J. G. Hunt, & L. L. Larson (Eds.).
Leadership frontiers (pp. 143 –165). Kent, OH: Kent State University Press .
Graen, G. B., & Uhl-Bien, M. (1995). Relationship-based approach to leadership:
Development of Leader-Member-Exchange (LMX) Theory of leadership over 25 years:Applying a multi-level multi-domain perspective. The Leadership Quarterly, 6 (2),
219–247.
Gray, S. M., Bunderson, J. S., Boumgarden, P., & Bechara, J. P. (2019). Engineering in-
teraction: Structural change, locus of identi ﬁcation, and the formation and main-
tenance of cross-unit ties. Personnel Psychology, 72 , 599 –622.
Greenleaf, R. K. (1970). The servant as leader. Newton Centre, MA: The Robert K.
Greenleaf Center .
Greenleaf,
R. K. (1977). Servant leadership: A journey into the nature of legitimate power and
greatness. New York, NY: Paulist Press .
Grippa, F., Bucuvalas, J., Booth, A., Alessandrini, E., Fronzetti Colladon, A., & Wade, L. M.
(2018). Measuring information exchange and brokerage capacity of healthcare
teams. Management Decision, 56 (10), 2239 –2251 .
Hackman, J., & Walton, R. (1986). Leading groups in organizations. In P. Goodman (Ed.).
Designing e ﬀective work groups (pp. 72 –117). San Francisco, CA: Jossey- Bass .
Gumusluoglu, L., Karakitapo ğlu-Aygün, Z., & Scandura, T. A. (2017). A multilevel ex-
amination of benevolent leadership and innovative behavior in R&D contexts: A so-
cial identity approach. Journal of Leadership & Organizational Studies, 24 (4), 479 –493.
Hackman, J. R. (2012). From causes to conditions in group research. Journal of
Organizational Behavior, 33 , 428 –444.
Hackman, J. R., & Morris, C. G. (1975). Group tasks, group interaction process, and group
performance e ﬀectiveness: A review and proposed integration. Advances in
Experimental Social Psychology, 8 ,4 5–99.
Hall, A. T., & Ferris, G. R. (2011). Accountability and extra-role behavior. Employee
Responsibilities and Rights Journal, 23 (2), 131 –144.
Hall, A. T., Frink, D. D., & Buckley, M. R. (2017). An accountability account: A review and
synthesis of the theoretical and empirical research on felt accountability. Journal of
Organizational Behavior, 38 (2), 204 –224.
Henttonen, K., Johanson, J. E., & Janhonen, M. (2014). Work-team bonding and bridging
social networks, team identity and performance e ﬀectiveness. Personnel Review,
43(3), 330 –349.
Hewstone, M. E., & Brown, R. E. (1986). Contact and con ﬂict in intergroup encounters.
Oxford, UK: Basil Blackwell .
Hirst, G., & Mann, L. (2004). A model of R&D leadership and team communication: The
relationship with project performance. R&D Management, 34 (2), 147 –160.
Hoegl, M., & Weinkauf, K. (2005). Managing task interdependencies in multi-team pro-
jects: A longitudinal study. Journal of Management Studies, 42 (6), 1287 –1308 .
Hoegl, M., Weinkauf, K., & Gemuenden, H. G. (2014). Interteam coordination, project
commitment, and teamwork in multiteam R&D projects: A longitudinal study.Organization Science, 15 (1), 38 –55.
Hogg, 
M. A., Van Knippenberg, D., & Rast, D. E. (2012). Intergroup leadership in orga-
nizations: Leading across group and organizational boundaries. Academy of
Management Review, 37 (2), 232 –255.
Hollander, E. P., & Julian, J. W. (1969). Contemporary trends in the analysis of leadership
processes. Psychological Bulletin, 71 , 387 –397.
House, R. J. (1971). A path goal theory of leader e ﬀectiveness. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 16 (3), 321 –339.
House, R. J. (1977). A 1976 theory of charismatic leadership. In J. G. Hunt, & L. L. Larson
(Eds.). Leadership: The cutting edge . Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press .
Hu, J., & Judge, T. A. (2017). Leader –team complementarity: Exploring the interactive
eﬀects of leader personality traits and team power distance values on team processes
and performance. Journal of Applied Psychology, 102 (6), 935 –955.
Hurt, K. J. (2016). A theoretical model of training and its transference: The pivotal role of
top management team composition and characteristics. Human Resource Development
International, 19 (1), 44 –66.
Ingvaldsen, J. A., & Rolfsen, M. (2012). Autonomous work groups and the challenge ofinter-group coordination. Human Relations, 65 (7), 861 –881.
Janis, I. L. (1971). Groupthink. Psychology Today, 5 (6), 43 –46.
Johannessen, I. A., McArthur, P. W., & Jonassen, J. R. (2015). Informal leadership re-
dundancy: Balancing structure and ﬂexibility in subsea operations. Scandinavian
Journal of Management, 31 (3), 409 –423.
Joshi, A., Pandey, N., & Han, G. (2009). Bracketing team boundary spanning: An ex-
amination of task-based, team-level, and contextual antecedents. Journal of
Organizational Behavior, 30 (6), 731 –759.
Journal Citation Reports (2018). Clarivate analytics .
Judge, T. A., Piccolo, R. F., & Ilies, R. (2004). The forgotten ones? The validity of con-
sideration and initiating structure in leadership research. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 89 (1), 36 –51.
Jung, D., Yammarino, F. J., & Lee, J. K. (2009). Moderating role of subordinates ’attitudes
on transformational leadership and e ﬀectiveness: A multi-cultural and multi-level
perspective. The Leadership Quarterly, 20 (4), 586 –603.
Kacperczyk,
A., Beckman, C. M., & Moliterno, T. P. (2015). Disentangling risk and change:
Internal and external social comparison in the mutual fund industry. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 60 (2), 228 –262.
Kaiser, R. B., Hogan, R., & Craig, S. B. (2008). Leadership and the fate of organizations.
American Psychologist, 63 (2), 96 –110.
Katz, D., Maccoby, N., Gurin, G., & Floor, L. G. (1951). Productivity, supervision and morale
among railroad workers. Oxford, England: Survey Research Center .
Katz, R., & Allen, T. J. (1982). Investigating the not invented here (NIH) syndrome: A look
at the performance, tenure, and communication patterns of 50 R & D project groups.R&D Management, 12 (1), 7 –20.
Keller, R. T. (2001). Cross-functional project groups in research and new product de-
velopment: Diversity, communications, job stress, and outcomes. Academy of
Management Journal, 44 (3), 547 –555.
Kellogg, K. C., Orlikowski, W. J., & Yates, J. (2006). Life in the trading zone: Structuring
coordination across boundaries in post-bureaucratic organizations. Organization
Science, 17 (1), 22 –44.
Kennedy, D. M., Sommer, S. A., & Nguyen, P. A. (2017). Optimizing multi-team system
behaviors: Insights from modeling team communication. European Journal of
Operational Research, 258 (1), 264 –278.
Kilduﬀ, G. J. (2014). Driven to win: Rivalry, motivation, and performance. Social
Psychological and Personality Science, 5 (8), 944 –952.
Kilduﬀ, G. J., Elfenbein, H. A., & Staw, B. M. (2010). The psychology of rivalry: A re-
lationally dependent analysis of competition. Academy of Management Journal, 53 (5),
943–969.
Kirkman, B. L., & Harris, T. B. (2017). 3D team leadership: A new approach for complex
teams. Stanford University Press .
Klein, K. J., Ziegert, J. C., Knight, A. P., & Xiao, Y. (2006). Dynamic delegation: Shared,
hierarchical, and deindividualized leadership in extreme action teams. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 51 (4), 590 –621.
Knipfer, K., Schreiner, E., Schmid, E., & Peus, C. (2018). The performance of pre-founding
entrepreneurial teams: The importance of learning and leadership. Applied
Psychology, 67 (3), 401 –427.
Kozlowski, S. W., Gully, S. M., McHugh, P. P., Salas, E., & Cannon-Bowers, J. A. (1996). A
dynamic theory of leadership and team e ﬀectiveness: Developmental and task con-
tingent leader roles. Research in Personnel and Human Resources Management, 14 ,
253–306.
Kozlowski, 
S. W., Mak, S., & Chao, G. T. (2016). Team-centric leadership: An integrative
review. Annual Review of Organizational Psychology and Organizational Behavior, 3 ,
21–54.
Kozlowski, S. W. J., & Ilgen, D. R. (2006). Enhancing the e ﬀectiveness of work groups and
teams. Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 7 (3), 77 –124.
Kozlowski, S. W. J., & Klein, K. J. (2000). A multilevel approach to theory and research in
organizations: Contextual, temporal, and emergent processes. In K. J. Klein, & S. W. J.
Kozlowski (Eds.). Multilevel theory, research, and methods in organizations: Foundations,
extensions, and new directions (pp. 3 –90). San Francisco, CA, US: Jossey-Bass .
Kratzer, J., Gemünden, H. G., & Lettl, C. (2008). Balancing creativity and time e ﬃciency
in multi-team R&D projects: The alignment of formal and informal networks. R&D
Management, 38 (5), 538 –549.
Lanaj, K., Foulk, T. A., & Hollenbeck, J. R. (2018). The bene ﬁts of not seeing eye to eye
with leadership: Divergence in risk preferences impacts multiteam system behavior
and performance. Academy of Management Journal, 61 (4), 1554 –1582 .
Lanaj, K., Hollenbeck, J. R., Ilgen, D. R., Barnes, C. M., & Harmon, S. J. (2013). The
double-edged sword of decentralized planning in multiteam systems. Academy of
Management Journal, 56 (3), 735 –757.
Lee, S., & Sawang, S. (2016). Unpacking the impact of attachment to project teams on
boundary-spanning behaviors. International Journal of Project Management, 34 (3),
444–451.
Levitt, S. D., & List, J. A. (2009). Field experiments in economics: The past, the present,
and the future. European Economic Review, 53 (1), 1 –18.
Liden, R. C., Panaccio, A., Hu, J., & Meuser, J. D. (2014). Servant leadership: Antecedents,
consequences, and contextual moderators. In D. V. Day (Ed.). The Oxford handbook of
leadership and organizations (pp. 357 –379). Oxford: Oxford University Press .
Litchﬁeld, R. C., Karakitapo ğlu-Aygün, Z., Gumusluoglu, L., Carter, M., & Hirst, G. (2018).
When team identity helps innovation and when it hurts: Team identity and its re-lationship to team and cross-team innovative behavior. Journal of Product Innovation
Management, 35 (3), 350 –366.
Liu, S., Schuler, R. S., & Zhang, P. (2013). External learning activities and employee
creativity in Chinese R&D teams. Cross Cultural Management: An International Journal,
20(3), 429 –448.
Luciano, M. M., DeChurch, L. A., & Mathieu, J. E. (2018). Multiteam systems: A structural
framework and meso-theory of system functioning. Journal of Management, 44 (3),D.R.
Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378
17
1065 –1096 .
Mackey, J. D., Frieder, R. E., Brees, J. R., & Martinko, M. J. (2017). Abusive supervision: A
meta-analysis and empirical review. Journal of Management, 43 (6), 1940 –1965 .
Malin, J. R., & Hackmann, D. G. (2019). Integrative leadership and cross-sector reforms:
High school career academy implementation in an urban district. Educational
Administration Quarterly, 55 (2), 189 –224.
Markham, S. K., Green, S. G., & Basu, R. (1991). Champions and antagonists:
Relationships with R&D project characteristics and management. Journal of
Engineering and Technology Management, 8 (3–4), 217 –242.
Marks, M. A., DeChurch, L. A., Mathieu, J. E., Panzer, F. J., & Alonso, A. (2005).
Teamwork in multiteam systems. Journal of Applied Psychology, 90 (5), 964 .
Marks, M. A., & Luvison, D. (2012). Product launch and strategic alliance MTSs. In S. J.
Zaccaro, M. A. Marks, & L. A. DeChurch (Eds.). Multiteam systems: An organization
form for dynamic and complex environments (pp. 33 –52). New York, NY: Routledge .
Marks, M. A., Mathieu, J. E., & Zaccaro, S. J. (2001). A temporally based framework and
taxonomy of team processes. Academy of Management Review, 26 (3), 356 –376.
Marrone, J. A. (2010). Team boundary spanning: A multilevel review of past research and
proposals for the future. Journal of Management, 36 (4), 911 –940.
Marrone, J. A., Tesluk, P. E., & Carson, J. B. (2007). A multilevel investigation of ante-
cedents and consequences of team member boundary-spanning behavior. Academy of
Management Journal, 50 (6), 1423 –1439 .
Martin, R., Guillaume, Y., Thomas, G., Lee, A., & Epitropaki, O. (2016). Leader –member
exchange (LMX) and performance: A meta-analytic review. Personnel Psychology,
69(1), 67 –121.
Mathieu, J. E., Hollenbeck, J. R., van Knippenberg, D., & Ilgen, D. R. (2017). A century of
work teams in the journal of applied psychology. Journal of Applied Psychology,
102(3), 452 –467.
Mathieu, J. E., Marks, M. A., & Zaccaro, S. J. (2001). Multi-team systems. In N. Anderson,
D. Ones, H. K. Sinangil, & C. Viswesvaran (Eds.). International handbook of work and
organizational psychology (pp. 289 –313). London: Sage .
McGrath, J. E. (1962). The in ﬂuence of quasi-therapeutic relations on adjustment and
eﬀectiveness in ri ﬂe teams. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 65 , 365 –375.
McGrath,
J. E. (1964). Toward a “theory of method ”for research on organizations. In W.
W. Cooper, L. Leavitt, & M. W. Shelley (Eds.). New perspectives in organization research
(pp. 533 –547). New York: John Wiley .
McGrath, J. E. (1984). Groups: Interaction and performance. Englewood Cli ﬀs, NJ: Prentice-
Hall.
Melo, C. D. O., Cruzes, D. S., Kon, F., & Conradi, R. (2013). Interpretative case studies on
agile team productivity and management. Information and Software Technology, 55 (2),
412–427.
Meth, N. D., Lawless, B., & Hawryluck, L. (2009). Con ﬂicts in the ICU: Perspectives of
administrators and clinicians. Intensive Care Medicine, 35 (12), 2068 –2077 .
Methot, J. R., Rosado-Solomon, E. H., & Allen, D. G. (2018). The network architecture of
human capital: A relational identity perspective. Academy of Management Review,
43(4), 723 –748.
Millikin, J. P., Hom, P. W., & Manz, C. C. (2010). Self-management competencies in self-
managing teams: Their impact on multi-team system productivity. The Leadership
Quarterly, 21 (5), 687 –702.
Morgeson, F. P., DeRue, D. S., & Karam, E. P. (2010). Leadership in teams: A functional
approach to understanding leadership structures and processes. Journal of
Management, 36 (1), 5 –39.
Mumford, M. D., Zaccaro, S. J., Harding, F. D., Jacobs, T. O., & Fleishman, E. A. (2000).
Leadership skills for a changing world: Solving complex social problems. The
Leadership Quarterly, 11 (1), 11 –35.
Murase, T., Carter, D. R., DeChurch, L. A., & Marks, M. A. (2014). Mind the gap: The role
of leadership in multiteam system collective cognition. The Leadership Quarterly,
25(5), 972 –986.
Newell, S., David, G., & Chand, D. (2007). An analysis of trust among globally distributed
work teams in an organizational setting. Knowledge and Process Management, 14 (3),
158–168.
Newell, S., & Swan, J. (2000). Trust and inter-organizational networking. Human
Relations, 53 (10), 1287 –1328 .
Nickerson, J. A., & Zenger, T. R. (2008). Envy, comparison costs, and the economic theory
of the ﬁrm.Strategic Management Journal, 29 (13), 1429 –1449 .
Nicolaides, V. C., LaPort, K. A., Chen, T. R., Tomassetti, A. J., Weis, E. J., Zaccaro, S. J., &
Cortina,
J. M. (2014). The shared leadership of teams: A meta-analysis of proximal,
distal, and moderating relationships. The Leadership Quarterly, 25 (5), 923 –942.
Oh, H., Chung, M. H., & Labianca, G. (2004). Group social capital and group e ﬀectiveness:
The role of informal socializing ties. Academy of Management Journal, 47 (6), 860 –875.
Oh, H., Labianca, G., & Chung, M. H. (2006). A multilevel model of group social capital.
Academy of Management Review, 31 (3), 569 –582.
Park, G., & DeShon, R. P. (2018). E ﬀects of group-discussion integrative complexity on
intergroup relations in a social dilemma. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 146 ,6 2–75.
Pearce, C. L., & Conger, J. A. (2003). All those years ago: The historical underpinnings of
shared leadership. In C. L. Pearce, & J. A. Conger (Eds.). Shared leadership: Reframing
the hows and whys of leadership (pp. 1 –18). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage .
Pedersen, T., Soda, G., & Stea, D. (2019). Globally networked: Intraorganizational
boundary spanning in the global organization. Journal of World Business, 54 (3),
169–180.
Pierce, J. R., & Aguinis, H. (2013). The too-much-of-a-good-thing e ﬀect in management.
Journal of Management, 39 (2), 313 –338.
Pittinsky, T. L. (2009). Crossing the divide: Intergroup leadership in a world of diﬀ erence.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business Press .
Pittinsky, T. L., & Simon, S. (2007). Intergroup leadership. The Leadership Quarterly, 18 (6),
586–605.Podsako ﬀ, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., Lee, J. Y., & Podsako ﬀ, N. P. (2003). Common method
biases in behavioral research: A critical review of the literature and recommended
remedies. Journal of Applied Psychology, 88 (5), 879 –903.
Podsako ﬀ, P. M., MacKenzie, S. B., & Podsako ﬀ, N. P. (2012). Sources of method bias in
social science research and recommendations on how to control it. Annual Review of
Psychology, 63 , 539 –569.
Podsako ﬀ, P. M., & Organ, D. W. (1986). Self-reports in organizational research: Problems
and prospects. Journal of Management, 12 (4), 531 –544.
Porck,
J. P., Matta, F. K., Hollenbeck, J. R., Oh, J. K., Lanaj, K., & Lee, S. M. (2019). Social
identiﬁcation in multiteam systems: The role of depletion and task complexity.
Academy of Management Journal, 62 (4), 1137 –1162 .
Porck, J. P., van Knippenberg, D., Tarakci, M., Ateş , N. Y., Groenen, P. J., & de Haas, M.
(2018). Do group and organizational identi ﬁcation help or hurt intergroup strategic
consensus? Journal of Management Advance online publication .
Power, N., & Alison, L. (2017). O ﬀence or defence? Approach and avoid goals in the
multi-agency emergency response to a simulated terrorism attack. Journal of
Occupational and Organizational Psychology, 90 (1), 51 –76.
Prysor, D., & Henley, A. (2018). Boundary spanning in higher education leadership:
Identifying boundaries and practices in a British university. Studies in Higher
Education, 43 (12), 2210 –2225 .
Purvanova, R. K., & Bono, J. E. (2009). Transformational leadership in context: Face-to-
face and virtual teams. The Leadership Quarterly, 20 (3), 343 –357.
Quiroz, R., Brunson, L., & Bigras, N. (2017). Transforming social regularities in a mul-
ticomponent community-based intervention: A case study of professionals ’adapt-
ability to better support parents to meet their children ’s needs. American Journal of
Community Psychology, 59 (3–4), 316 –332.
Reddy, M. C., Paul, S. A., Abraham, J., McNeese, M., DeFlitch, C., & Yen, J. (2009).
Challenges to e ﬀective crisis management: Using information and communication
technologies to coordinate emergency medical services and emergency department
teams. International Journal of Medical Informatics, 78 (4), 259 –269.
Richter, A. W., West, M. A., van Dick, R., & Dawson, J. F. (2006). Boundary spanners ’
identiﬁcation, intergroup contact, and e ﬀective intergroup relations. Academy of
Management Journal, 49 (6), 1252 –1269 .
Roby, T. B. (1961). The executive function in small groups. In L. Petrullo, & B. M. Bass
(Eds.). Leadership and interpersonal behavior . NewYork: Holt, Reinhart & Winston.
Salazar, M. R., Feitosa, J., & Salas, E. (2017). Diversity and team creativity: Exploring
underlying mechanisms. Group Dynamics: Theory, Research, and Practice, 21 (4),
187–206.
Salk, J. E., & Brannen, M. Y. (2000). National culture, networks, and individual in ﬂuence
in a multinational management team. Academy of Management Journal, 43 (2),
191–202.
Schotter, A., & Beamish, P. W. (2011). Performance e ﬀects of MNC head-
quarters –subsidiary conﬂ ict and the role of boundary spanners: The case of head-
quarter initiative rejection. Journal of International Management, 17 (3), 243 –259.
Shin, Y., Kim, M., & Hur, W. M. (2019). Interteam cooperation and competition and
boundary activities: The cross-level mediation of team goal orientations. International
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 16 (15), 2738 .
Shuﬄer, M. L., Jiménez-Rodŕı guez, M., & Kramer, W. S. (2015). The science of multiteam
systems: A review and future research agenda. Small Group Research, 46 , 659 –699.
Somech, A., & Khalaili, A. (2014). Team boundary activity: Its mediating role in the re-
lationship between structural conditions and team innovation. Group & Organization
Management, 39 (3), 274 –299.
Spreitzer, G. M., De Janasz, S. C., & Quinn, R. E. (1999). Empowered to lead: The role of
psychological empowerment in leadership. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 20 (4),
511–526.
Stogdill, R. (1974). Handbook of leadership. New York: Macmillan .
Stogdill, R. M. (1948). Personal factors associated with leadership: A survey of the lit-
erature. The Journal of Psychology, 25 (1), 35 –71.
Stogdill, R. M., & Coons, A. E. (1957). Leader behavior: Its description and measurement.
Columbus, OH: Ohio State University, Bureau of Business Research .
Stone-Romero, E. F. (2008). The relative validity and usefulness of various empirical
research designs. In S. G. Rogelberg (Ed.). Handbook of research methods in industrial
and organizational psychology (pp. 77 –98). Malden, MA: Blackwell .
Sundstrom, E., DeMeuse, K. P., & Futrell, D. (1990). Work teams: Applications and ef-
fectiveness. American Psychologist, 45 , 120 –133.
Sung, S. Y., & Choi, J. N. (2012). E ﬀects of team knowledge management on the creativity
andﬁnancial performance of organizational teams. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 118 (1), 4 –13.
Susskind, A. M., Odom-Reed, P. R., & Viccari, A. E. (2011). Team leaders and team
members in interorganizational networks: An examination of structural holes andperformance. Communication Research, 38 (5), 613 –633.
Tajfel, 
H., & Turner, J. C. (1979). An integrative theory of intergroup con ﬂict. In W. G.
Austin, & S. Worchel (Eds.). The social psychology of intergroup relations (pp. 33 –47).
Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole .
Takanashi, C., & Lee, K. J. (2019). Boundary spanning leadership, resource mobilisation,
and performance of university-industry R&D projects: A study in a Japanese uni-
versity. Technology Analysis & Strategic Management, 31 (2), 140 –154.
Taneva, S., Grote, G., Easty, A., & Plattner, B. (2010). Decoding the perioperative process
breakdowns: A theoretical model and implications for system design. International
Journal of Medical Informatics, 79 (1), 14 –30.
Tasselli, S., & Caimo, A. (2019). Does it take three to dance the tango? Organizational
design, triadic structures and boundary spanning across subunits. Social Networks, 59 ,
10–22.
Tawse, A., Patrick, V. M., & Vera, D. (2019). Crossing the chasm: Leadership nudges to
help transition from strategy formulation to strategy implementation. Business
Horizons, 62 (2), 249 –257.D.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378
18
Tepper, B. J. (2000). Consequences of abusive supervision. Academy of Management
Journal, 43 , 178 –190.
Tepper, B. J. (2007). Abusive supervision in work organizations: Review, synthesis, and
research agenda. Journal of Management, 33 (3), 261 –289.
Tetlock, P. E. (1999). Accountability theory: Mixing properties of human agents with
properties of social systems. In L. L. Thompson, J. M. Levine, & D. M. Messick (Eds.).
Shared cognition in organizations: The management of knowledge (pp. 117 –137).
Mahwah, NJ, US: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers .
Thaler, R. H., & Sunstein, C. R. (2008). Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth, and
happiness. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press .
Thompson, J. D. (1967). Organizations in action: Social science bases of administrative
theory. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill .
Tippmann, E., Scott, P., & Parker, A. (2017). Boundary capabilities in MNCs: Knowledge
transformation for creative solution development. Journal of Management Studies,
54(4), 455 –482.
Turner, J. C. (1985). Social categorization and the self-concept: A social cognitive theory
of group behavior. In E. J. Lawler (Ed.). Advances of group processes . Greenwich, CT:
JAI.
Tushman, M. L., & Scanlan, T. J. (1981). Boundary spanning individuals: Their role in
information transfer and their antecedents. Academy of Management Journal, 24 (2),
289–305.
Uitdewilligen, S., & Waller, M. J. (2018). Information sharing and decision-making in
multidisciplinary crisis management teams. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 39 (6),
731–748.
van Bunderen, L., Greer, L. L., & van Knippenberg, D. (2018). When interteam con ﬂict
spirals into intrateam power struggles: The pivotal role of team power structures.Academy of Management Journal, 61 (3), 1100 –1130 .
van Knippenberg, D. (2003). Intergroup relations in organizations. In M. West, D.
Tjosvold, & K. G. Smith (Eds.). International handbook of organizational teamwork and
cooperative working (pp. 381 –399). Chichester, UK: Wiley .
Villado, A. J., & Arthur, W., Jr. (2013). The comparative e ﬀect of subjective and objective
after-action reviews on team performance on a complex task. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 98 (3), 514 .
Wageman, R. (2001). How leaders foster self-managing team e ﬀectiveness: Design
choices versus hands-on coaching. Organization Science, 12 (5), 559 –577.
Waldman, D. A., & Atwater, L. E. (1994). The nature of e ﬀective leadership andchampioning processes at di ﬀerent levels in a R&D hierarchy. The
 Journal of High
Technology Management Research, 5 (2), 233 –245.
Wang, D., Waldman, D. A., & Zhang, Z. (2014). A meta-analysis of shared leadership and
team e ﬀectiveness. Journal of Applied Psychology, 99 (2), 181 –198.
Wang, G., Oh, I. S., Courtright, S. H., & Colbert, A. E. (2011). Transformational leadership
and performance across criteria and levels: A meta-analytic review of 25 years ofresearch. Group & Organization Management, 36 (2), 223 –270.
Weber, M. (1947). The theory of social and economic organizations. New York: Free Press .
Widmann, A., & Mulder, R. H. (2018). Team learning behaviours and innovative work
behaviour in work teams. European Journal of Innovation Management, 21 (3),
501–520.
Yan, A., & Louis, M. R. (1999). The migration of organizational functions to the work unit
level: Bu ﬀering, spanning, and bringing up boundaries. Human Relations, 52 (1),
25–47.
Yukl, G. (2006). Leadership in organizations (6th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson
Education .
Yukl, G. (2012). E ﬀective leadership behavior: What we know and what questions need
more attention. Academy of Management Perspectives, 26 (4), 66 –85.
Zaccaro, S. J., & DeChurch, L. A. (2012). Leadership forms and functions in multiteam
systems. In S. J. Zaccaro, M. A. Marks, & L. A. DeChurch (Eds.). Multiteam systems: An
organizational form for dynamic and complex environments (pp. 253 –288). New York,
NY: Taylor & Francis .
Zaccaro, S. J., Heinen, B., & Shuﬄ er, M. (2009). Team leadership and team e ﬀectiveness.
In E. Salas, G. F. Goodwin, & C. S. Burke (Eds.). Team e ﬀectiveness in complex orga-
nizations: Cross-disciplinary perspectives and approaches (pp. 83 –111). New York:
Routledge .
Zaccaro, S. J., Marks, M. A., & DeChurch, L. A. (2012). Multiteam systems: An organiza-
tional form for dynamic and complex environments. New York: Routledge .
Zaccaro, S. J., Rittman, A. L., & Marks, M. A. (2001). Team leadership. The Leadership
Quarterly, 12 (4), 451 –483.
Zhang, C., Wu, F., & Henke, J. W., Jr. (2015). Leveraging boundary spanning capabilities
to encourage supplier investment: A comparative study. Industrial Marketing
Management, 49 ,8 4–94.
Zhu, 
J., Liao, Z., Yam, K. C., & Johnson, R. E. (2018). Shared leadership: A state-of-the-art
review and future research agenda. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 39 (7),
834–852.D.R. Carter, et al. The Leadership Quarterly 31 (2020) 101378
19