The positive association between boundary spanner
ﬂexibility and service climate is moderated by market
orientation such that when market orientation is
greater, the perceived service climate is stronger.
However, we believe that the amount of control given to
boundary-spanning employees by management will inﬂuence
this
association.
Prior
research
indicates
that
boundary-spanning
employees
need
ﬂexibility
to
make
decisions
and
satisfy
the
customer
throughout
their
interaction, but that they also must be empowered with
sufﬁcient control from management to make those decisions
quickly and independently (Hartline and Ferrell, 1996). A
ﬂexible employee does not further a service climate when they
are not allowed to deviate from the directions they have been
given by management. As we discussed earlier, a stronger
perception of service is realized throughout the ﬁrm and the
customer base when more control is granted to boundary
spanners to service their clients. Less control provided to
boundary spanners will limit their ability to service customers
in creative ways (Varca 2001) and constrains their ability to
provide customer value in their offerings.
When given greater control over their activities, a ﬂexible
disposition is utilized to whatever extent the individual
boundary spanner possesses characteristic. Barrick and Mount
(1993) propose that the validity of some personality predictors
is moderated by the degree of control employees have over
their job. Assuming that a ﬂexible disposition is one such
personality
predictor,
its
validity
would
rise
when
the
boundary spanner is given more control over their position
and, speciﬁcally, over time, they interact with the customer.
The combination of inherent ﬂexibility and empowerment
from
management
to
make
decisions
allows
boundary
spanners to more effectively service the needs of their clients.
Therefore, we hypothesize that:
Marketing culture to service climate
Tyler R. Morgan et al.
Journal of Services Marketing
Volume 28 · Number 6 · 2014 · 498–508
501
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsm/article-pdf/28/6/498/1675125/jsm-08-2013-0226.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
H5.
The amount of control a boundary-spanning employee
is
given
intensiﬁes
the
positive
effect
of
market
orientation on the relationship between boundary
spanner ﬂexibility and service climate.
A ﬁgure of our hypothesized relationships is shown in
Figure 1.
Research methodology
The sample
The participants in this study work for a US-based ﬁrm
operating in the hospitality industry. This ﬁrm provides
business-to-business solutions to maintain the facilities of 
30,000 businesses across a broad range of hospitality settings.
They provide equipment, chemicals, training, programs and
certiﬁcation for a number of important areas such as
foodservice and sanitation. The company structure is typical
where managers frequently interact with boundary-spanner
subordinates. As such, managers are fully aware of the
behaviors of subordinates.
Data for the study were collected from two sources:
1
written employee surveys; and
2
written manager surveys.
The boundary-spanning employees are service employees who
interact with customers to provide solutions using company
provided products and programs. The ﬁrm requires all
employees
to
undergo
extensive
training.
The
boundary-spanning employees are compensated by a salary
and bonus structure where individual performance heavily
inﬂuences pay. All ﬁrm boundary-spanning service employees
were solicited for participation in the survey. The total
number of employees surveyed was 428, and 323 provided
usable responses for a 75 per cent response rate.
Managers are responsible for employee selection, training
and on the job development. Managers act as supervisors over
productivity where they are responsible for business results
and manage employee relationships. Customer retention and
satisfaction are also manager responsibilities. Additionally,
managers train employees to follow company processes and
procedures, as well as relevant laws. All ﬁrm managers were
solicited for participation in the survey. Of the 80 managers
surveyed, 75 provided usable responses for a 94 per cent
response rate. Finally, manager and subordinate data were
matched so cross-level relationships could be analyzed.
Demographics
of
the
two
samples,
managers
and
employees, are provided here according to experience, gender
and age. The mean age of managers in the ﬁrm is 42 years,
while the mean employee age is 36 years. Males represent 68
per cent of the managers in the ﬁrm and 61 per cent of
employees in the ﬁrm. Experience varies between managers
and employees. Managers have a mean experience in the
industry of 9.3 years, in sales 9.9 years and with the company
4.0 years. Employees have a mean experience in the industry
of 9.6 years, in sales 11.5 years and with the company 3.2
years. The mean amount of experience for employees with
their current manager is 2.3 years.
Measures
All four scales were Likert-type and adapted, when necessary,
from previous multi-item scales found in the literature.
Reliabilities, correlations and relevant psychometric properties
are reported in Table I.
From
the
boundary-spanning
employee,
we
collected
information on service climate and ﬂexibility. Service climate
was assessed using six items based on the service climate scale
developed by Schneider et al. (1998). A sample item is, “the
job knowledge and skills of employees to deliver superior
customer
service
are
outstanding”.
Boundary-spanning
employee ﬂexibility was assessed using four items based on
Spiro and Weitz’s (1990) ADAPTS scale. Spiro and Weitz’s
study emphasized the importance of boundary-spanning
Figure 1 Hypothesized model
H5
H4
H3
H2
H1
Boundary Spanner Employee Level
Manager Level
Market
Orientaon
Service
Climate
Boundary
Spanner
Control
Flexibility
Marketing culture to service climate
Tyler R. Morgan et al.
Journal of Services Marketing
Volume 28 · Number 6 · 2014 · 498–508
502
Downloaded from http://www.emerald.com/jsm/article-pdf/28/6/498/1675125/jsm-08-2013-0226.pdf by University College London user on 30 May 2026
employee ﬂexibility on their performance, and the items used
from the scale measure employee ﬂexibility. A sample item
includes,
“I
believe
each
customer
requires
a
unique
approach”.
We collected information on the ﬁrm’s market orientation
and the control afforded to boundary-spanning employees at
the manager level. Firm market orientation was measured
using 12 items based on the scale developed by Lam et al.
(2010). A sample item includes, “I am always looking for new
products and services”. The fourth construct, control, was
measured using an adaptation of a scale developed by Noble
(2008). The scale assesses the control provided by the
manager to the employee. A sample item includes, “I allow my
salespeople to decide how best to get the job done”. A list of
the scale items is provided in Table II.
Analysis strategy
Our research model focuses on the interaction of manager
level (e.g. market orientation and boundary-spanner control)
and boundary-spanner employee-level factors (e.g. ﬂexibility),
as they inﬂuence the service climate perceived by the
boundary-spanning
employee.
As
mentioned,
the
data
collected for the model were multilevel. Speciﬁcally, the
independent variable (i.e. market orientation) and one of
the moderating variables (i.e. control) were collected at the
manager level (Level 2). All other variables (i.e. service climate
and ﬂexibility) were collected at the boundary-spanner level
(Level 1). Thus, the most appropriate analytical procedure to
empirically examine the cross-level relationships hypothesized
is hierarchical linear modeling (HLM; Bryk and Raudenbush,
1992; Hofmann, 1997). We used HLM version 7.0, reporting
both generalized least squares standard errors, as well as
robust standard errors.
The HLM method of analysis is a two-stage strategy that
investigates variables residing at two levels. First, Level 1
variables are estimated discretely for each Level 2 unit of
analysis (i.e. each individual manager). The ﬁrst-stage analysis
provides intercept and slope terms estimated separately for
each Level 1 unit (i.e. each boundary spanner). The ﬁrst stage
estimates are used as outcomes in Stage 2 of the analysis,
which considers the degree to which Level 2 factors predict
variance in the Level 1 intercepts and slopes.
As recommended by Enders and Toﬁghi (2007), we group
mean centered our Level 2 variables to provide a more natural
interpretation of the cross-level interaction effects. For our
Level 2 interaction (H2), both terms were mean centered. A
multiplicative term was created for importation into HLM to
be treated as an antecedent to the service climate construct.
Table I Descriptive statistics, reliabilities and correlations of study variables
Serial number