Article
Marketing to Liminal Consumers: Migrant
Workers as an Emerging Segment in
Transitional Economies
Rongwei Chu,1 Jie G. Fowler,2
James W. Gentry,3 and Xin Zhao4
Abstract
Though most acculturation research investigates movement across national boundaries, many other types of boundaries may
exist (e.g. rural to urban migration). Rural migrant workers focus on their adaptive and exploratory consumption practices to
assemble a liquid identity in China. In essence, this research examines the nature of the transitions that the vast group of Chinese
(over 280 million) endures as migrant workers seek to assemble new identities through consumption activities in a liminal space.
We find that family relations and government policy hinder migrants’ adjustments to urban life. Thus, we contribute to macro-
marketing by enriching the theories of liquid identity, boundary work, and acculturation.
Keywords
rural-urban migration, liminality, acculturation, boundary work, migrant workers
Migrant Workers as an Emerging Segment
in the Chinese Political Economy
Macromarketing has a focus on market issues and solutions that
would improve the wellbeing of various stakeholders within
the market system (Layton 2007), and research needs to gen-
erate more understanding of the well-being of individuals and
societies (Shultz 2007). Analysis of subsistence markets
focuses upon vulnerable consumers; the understanding of such
markets is vital to improve the quality of life of those individ-
uals who struggle to survive in difficult living conditions
(Viswanathan, Shultz, and Sridharan 2014). Subsistence mar-
ketplace studies provide unique insights for macromarketing,
as they share the concern of developing a sustainable marketing
system in which prosperity and quality of life are enhanced for
those in the marketplace. Shultz and Holbrook (2009) propose
the relevance of an approach that recognizes the systematic
nature of consumer vulnerability. Public policy and marketing
practice can be employed to create positive influences to
enhance the well-being of the people whose lives have inex-
tricable links with the marketing system (Shultz 2012). Despite
marketers having explored various constraints that vulnerable
consumers may face (e.g., Corus and Ozanne 2012; Weidner,
Rosa, and Viswanathan 2010), many issues of marginalization
– mass migration by human populations in transitioning econo-
mies, for example – present opportunities for fresh and mean-
ingful examination.
China currently experiences a migration transition in the
context of economic and social development. Individuals have
regained the freedom to move to destinations abroad and within
China after decades of migration controls (Pieke and Mallee
1999). However, rural migrants to urban China live predomi-
nantly in subsistence conditions (The Economist 2018; Wang
and Tian 2014). Not only do Chinese migrants face the barrier
of extremely limited social acceptance in their new environ-
ment (which is certainly not unique to this context), but they
also face structural barriers that limit most opportunities to
adjust to urban life. For example, the household registration
system (Hukou) continues to be powerful policy that directly
and indirectly influences the population transfer. The emphasis
placed on family/kinship in China also has significant impact
on Chinese perceptions of migration. Therefore, the current
population mobility in China is more than a variation on a
universal theme, as Chinese migrant workers have their own
characteristics (Pieke and Mallee 1999).
As Viswanathan, Shultz, and Sridharan (2014) note, macro-
marketing perspectives are particularly germane to environ-
ments in which people find themselves in subsistence living
1School of Management, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2Department of Marketing and International Business, Langdale College of
Business Administration, Valdosta State University, Valdosta, GA, USA
3Department of Marketing, College of Business Administration, University of
Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, USA
4Lancaster University Management School, Lancaster, UK
Corresponding Author:
Jie G. Fowler, Department of Marketing and International Business, Langdale
College of Business Administration, Valdosta State University, Valdosta, GA
31698, USA.
Email: jgfowler@valdosta.edu
Journal of Macromarketing
2018, Vol. 38(4) 441-458
ª The Author(s) 2018
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/0276146718802348
journals.sagepub.com/home/jmk

conditions. The special issue editors (Polsa and Zheng 2015) of
the issue on China in the Journal of Macromarketing explicitly
called for more research on migrant well-being and services in
migrant communities. Thus, our contribution to the literature is
one of adding to the understanding of the migrant segment in
urban China beyond what has been presented previously
(Wang and Tian 2014; Wang, Zhou, and Zhang 2015). We will
note many differences between our study and the Wang and
Tian (2014) one (the most similar marketing study to ours). At
the same time, we will contrast the Chinese migrants’ status
with those documented in a study of Turkish rural to urban
migrants (Ustuner and Holt 2007) in order to note cultural
differences in how migrants adjust to their new environments.
We will begin by discussing the general status of Chinese
migrants in urban life.
Subsistence Consumers and Chinese Migrant Workers
In the subsistence marketplace literature, the market is
defined as both physical marketplaces found in most commu-
nities and as a negotiated social milieu (Viswanatha et al.
2009). The stream of research on subsistence marketplaces
examines underlying variables that affect the interaction of
the poor with the marketplace, primarily focusing upon
thinking styles, emotional bondings, and social relations
(Viswanathan, Gajendiran, and Venkatesan 2008). Further,
subsistence consumers are seldom considered full members
of the community in which they reside, giving them a limited
voice in the shaping of goals and means with which they are
expected to comply (Boo 2012). Thus, they face structural
barriers that hinder the adjustment process.
Migrant workers have recently been recognized as an impor-
tant market segment with unique characteristics in many tran-
sitional economies (e.g., Huang, Guo, and Cheng 2018).
Previous research on the migrant segment has mostly examined
workers’ adaptation processes in their new cultural milieus
(Luedicke 2011; Pen˜aloza 1994) and has focused on how immi-
grants are assimilated to a new environment (Askegaard and
Bengtsson 2005; Berry 1997; Luedicke 2011, 2015; Oswald
1999; Pen˜aloza 1994). Such research isoften conducted within
the unique context of the U.S. marketplace and has little
emphasis on the larger population of migrant workers in
transitional economies. For instance, it is estimated that more
than 280 million rural laborers in China have left their villages
to find work in cities with the hope of making a better living
(The Economist 2018). This biggest within-country migration
in human history has provided an unprecedented context to
examine this particular market segment and to contemplate
how marketing systems can improve the quality of life of the
migrants.
At this point, we would like to briefly define some of our
terms. We use the term ‘migration’ to deal with the movement
of groups of peoples to new geographic areas (in this case
from rural to urban China). Although most ‘acculturation’
research has dealt with the adjustment that immigrants make
in a new country, we use the term as did Wang and Tian
(2014) to cover the adjustment process of the domestic
migrants to their new environment.
China’s 280 million migrant workers would constitute the
fourth largest country in the world in terms of population size.
This number of migrant workers continues to rise despite
recent policies that intend to prevent the growth of China’s
urban population. However, this particular market segment
has been ignored and much research on Chinese consumers
has focused on urban elites, missing an opportunity to pro-
blematize existing theories of acculturation and its marketing
implications (Davis 2000; Yusuf and Brooks 2010; Zhang
2012; Zhou et al. 2010).
Although Chinese laborers can move to cities to search for
jobs, government restrictions limit their ability to become
permanent urban residents. The Chinese Hukou system has
produced an unavoidable division among urban areas and
rural spaces. An urban Hukou ensures the privileges of
employment, health insurance, housing, access to loans, and
children’s education (Liang 2016). The “migrant workers”
(nong min gong in Chinese) are those who hold rural Hukou
even though they have moved to cities and work there. These
migrants are characterized by a lack of access to public ser-
vices such as education, the acquisition of bank loans, and
healthcare (Wang and Tian 2014; Zhang, Wu, and Sanders
2007). Table 1 provides a comparison of urban and rural
Hukous. Migrants are socially discriminated by urban resi-
dents (Zhang, Wu, and Sanders 2007) and are represented
as “uncivilized,” “invasive,” “unpredictable,” “defiling,”
Table 1. Hukou Impact on Rural Migrant Worker.
Rural Hukou
Urban Hukou
Employment opportunity

Limited labor contract

Comprehensive labor contract with
social benefits
Social welfare

Little to no social welfare

medical insurance

unemployment insurance

work injury insurance

maternity insurance

housing funds
Housing

Limited rights to purchase apartments/houses in Shanghai

entitled to purchase
School for children

Mostly enrolling in migrant schools in urban cities sponsored by
the local government.

Free enrollment in public schools

International private schools
442
Journal of Macromarketing 38(4)

“dirty,” “dangerous,” and “polluting” (Pow 2007). In the
meantime, they have to leave family behind in the village and
are estranged from loved ones. However, migrant workers are
considered to be well-off in their hometowns and are often the
role models for their rural peers to emulate (see Figure 1).
We have chosen to re-examine existing understandings of
this market segment of within-country migrant workers, which
was also the context of the Wang and Tian (2014), Wang,
Zhou, and Zhang (2015), and Ustuner and Holt (2007) studies.
Our study differs from those studies in important ways. Both
the studies in China investigated financial issues. Wang, Zhou,
and Zhang (2015) investigated how different forms of social
capital (bonding vs. bridging) affect migrant wages, whereas
Wang and Tian (2014) investigated the issues that migrant cab
drivers in Shenzhen faced in getting loans to pay the 200,000
RMB to lease their taxi. The Ustuner and Holt (2007) study
investigated females’ lived experience in households that had
migrated from Eastern Turkey to Ankara.
Unlike in other transitional economies such as Turkey and
India, governmental barriers (the Hukou residency system) are
in place, which limit the migrants’ access to health, loans, and
educational benefits in urban China. This raises important
issues regarding assimilation. Second, the strong tradition of
filial piety in China makes ties to the past (and family back
home) much harder to break. While these ties play roles in all
three of the Chinese studies, there was no mention of such ties
in Ustuner and Holt (2007). Specifically, this latter difference
between the Chinese and Turkish studies is made stronger by
the fact that many Chinese migrants have children left behind
as well as parents, grandparents, and siblings, whereas the
Turkish migrants in Ustuner and Holt’s (2007) study had their
children with them when they migrated to the capital city of
Ankara. Thus, this study extends previous research by includ-
ing social-cultural and political structure barriers to examine
migrant workers’ quality of life, identity transition, and market-
place interactions.
Consumer Acculturation
Consumer acculturation is the process of adaptation to a new
consumer culture (Pen˜aloza 1994). It is believed that given
sufficient time, acculturation results in certain positive end-
states, depending on the path taken by individuals (Berry
1997; Luedicke 2015; Mathur 2012). Moving from a focus
on why consumption patterns of immigrants differ from the
locals and how the differences influence assimilation pro-
cesses, acculturation studies have now emphasized how
immigrants adapt skills and knowledge relevant to consumer
culture in a foreign context (e.g., Luedicke 2011). From a
more macromarketing perspective, cultural adoption is seen
Figure 1. Urban scenes of rural migrants working on the streets of Shanghai.
Chu et al.
443

to derive from a wide variety of factors, including language
differences, education levels, availability of other migrants
from one’s background, and government policies. During the
acculturation process, boundaries and identities are formed,
and identity outcomes are contingent upon context and per-
spectives (Luedicke 2015).
Acculturation was once portrayed as having been an ethno-
centrically linear one-dimensional process. However, it has
been re-conceptualized as a bi-directional process in which the
acculturation of the minority subculture can be measured along
two dimensions: the degree of adoption of the majority culture
and the degree of retention of the culture of origin (Gentry, Jun,
and Tansuhaj 1995). In this process, some individuals may
fully integrate into the new culture and give up their past iden-
tity (assimilation), which once was the expected nature for the
acculturation process. But Berry (1997) also noted alternative
outcomes (integration, separation, and marginalization).
Many migrants have become social neophytes on the border
of China’s urban-rural divides, rather than acculturated
migrants as had been predicted in previous studies of the accul-
turation process. Instead, they dwell in a space of betwixt and
between social categories (Cody and Lawlor 2011), which can
be better conceptualized through the theoretical lens of limin-
ality (Turner 1969).
Liquid Identity and Boundary Work in Liminal Space
In contrast to a relative solid social space, social theorists
argue that the affordability of instantaneous communication,
global travel, and the labor movement have produced a flexible
and fluid social condition (Bauman 2000). Bauman (2000)
extends the “liquid” metaphor to characterize the change of
a solid base to a less determinant but more variable form of
identity. Liquid modernity was used to describe migrants, ref-
ugees, or asylum seekers who are on the move without perma-
nent abode (Bauman 2013). The concept of liquid modernity
emphasizes the flow of capital and labor which reshapes soci-
ety (Bauman 1989). The social change being wrought by the
increase of liquid modernity produces a tendency towards
accepting new consumption patterns and values among indi-
viduals. Migrant workers are detached from their previous
social identities that were tied to farming and village life, as
they move from their homespace to urbanspace to form a new
identity. During the intervening and transitional period, the
individuals face ambiguity and uncertainty, and they pass
through a new cultural realm in the urban space that has few
if any of the attributes of the past. As such, Turner’s (1969)
concept of social liminality provides a theoretical lens to
understand the migrant workers’ transitional experiences from
rural to urban areas.
In Turner’s (1969) original theorization, the phase of the
liminal is transient, and the reintegration signals a more per-
manent change in identity. Liminal space exists between two
identified states and is often experienced as a suspension of
identities that are constituted by previously used consumption
strategies. The liminal stage of transformation can be marked
by three phases: separation, transition, and reintegration. The
first phase comprises symbolic behaviors signifying the
detachment of the individuals from an earlier social structure.
During the second period of liminality, new components of
urban consumption practices are introduced into migrant
workers’ daily lives. Migrants may face symbolic connection
with the past while struggling within the current urban con-
sumer culture. In the third phase, the individual is expected to
behave by certain customary norms binding on their current
social position. However, for migrant workers in our study,
the liminal stage of identity shift seems quite prolonged and
does not appear to have the potential to result in the urban life
equilibrium being sought. This prolonged liminal state is due
in part to the lack of a clearly defined end-state (Barrios,
Piacentini, and Salciuviene 2012). In Bauman’s (2000,
2007) terms, society today has reached a “liquid” era of post-
modernity, in which social norms are changing rapidly. Thus,
the social disembedding from previous institutions, such as
farms and villages, does not lead (at least not smoothly) to re-
embedment into urban life. Rural migrants to urban environ-
ments globally generally are not met with social acceptance,
as they usually have less education, literacy issues, and are
poorer in addition to possible policy barriers limiting their
agency to try to fit in. In other words, they face discrimination
from local residents. Many are often treated as illegal
laborers, which places the workers in a highly vulnerable
position (Chan 2012). That being said, the rural migrant labor
may face high levels of unemployment, further marginaliza-
tion and impoverishment if a financial crisis occurs in urban
China (Chan 2012).
The prolonged liminal space creates a boundary for the
migrants. The concept of boundaries has been developed in
the marketing literature to understand the ways in which peo-
ple construct boundaries through consumption and production
(Weinberger 2015). At its core, this type of research is rooted
in the Durkheim and Mauss ((1963) [1903]) notion of in-
group/out-group categorization. Further, Lamont and Molnar
(2002) state that the boundaries are conceptual distinctions
made by social actors to categorize objects, people, practices,
and even time and space. Thus, the boundaries influence which
people acquire status and monopolize resources. This is con-
sistent with Bourdieu (1986)’s framework in which social
groups create subtle distinction boundaries between in-
groups and out-groups through the exchange of cultural,
social, and economic capital (Weinberger 2015). One aspect
of boundary work focuses upon assimilation and acculturation
to understand how ethnic groups crossing physical boundaries
face a new set of social, cultural, and economic norms and
consumption practices (Luedicke 2011). The boundary-
crossing process is somewhat complicated, as people engage
in a complicated and politicized identity (e.g. Askegaard,
Arnould, and Kjeldgaard 2005). In China, given the complex-
ity of the political economy, it is essential to understand how
the within-country migrant workers construct liquid identities
within the boundary work.
444
Journal of Macromarketing 38(4)

Methods
According to Wong, Fu, and Song (2008), most migrant work-
ers are from Western and Central China and travel to Eastern
coastal locations such as Beijing and Shanghai. The driving
force behind the migration is income disparity (Zhang and
Song 2003). Migrant workers, who are described as a “floating
population,” account for about 40 percent of the population in
Shanghai, one of the largest cities in China with a total popu-
lation of 23 million (Eades 2014). Amid Shanghai’s wealth
and modernity, however, is a growing underclass of poor
migrant workers from the Chinese countryside. That being
said, Shanghai is a most attractive location for researchers to
access the large population of migrant workers with diverse
backgrounds. A total of 36 migrants between the ages of 24
and 51 participated in the study from 2013-2015 in Shanghai
(see Table 2).
We took an ethnographic approach (Arnould and Wallen-
dorf 1994) to understand the life domains of rural migrants in
urban settings. A sample size of 36 obviously cannot general-
ize to 280 million migrants, but the purpose of ethnographic
research is to increase the depth of understanding rather than
generalization. Wang and Tian (2014) used a sample size of
19 migrants to investigate a much more specific context. All
informants are Chinese nationals, and most had resided in the
urban area for more than five years. We used our personal ties
with the local government and companies to recruit infor-
mants. We did not adopt the common snowballing methods
to find our informants because of the fear of reaching very
similar participants.
Table 2. Informants’ Demographics.
No.
Year of
Interview Pseudonym Gender Age
Highest (completed)
Education -Level
Occupation
Monthly
income
(in RMB)
Hukou registration
province
Migration duration
in Shanghai (years)
1
2013
CY Wang
M
38
junior high school
Canteen staff
4000
Shan’xi
22
2
2013
LZ Yang
F
36
junior high school
No job
0
Henan
18
3
2013
LX Yang
M
40
junior high school
Canteen staff
3000
Jiangsu
19
4
2013
Fs Ji
M
37
junior college
Canteen manager
4000
Zhejiang
20
5
2013
S Liu
F
42
elementary school
No job
0
Zhejiang
16
6
2013
XZ Zhou
M
47
junior high school
Sanitation worker
3800
Jiangsu
15
7
2013
Q Lin
M
53
junior college
Construction worker
5000
Jiangsu
26
8
2013
C Wang
M
36
senior high school
Hydroelectric
installation worker
5000
Hubei
16
9
2013
H Hu
M
25
junior high school
Sanitation worker
3800
Henan
8
10
2013
N Li
M
35
junior high school
Construction worker
4500
Jiangxi
8
11
2014
X Han
M
44
elementary school
Cleaning worker
1900
Jiangsu
15
12
2014
N Li
M
24
junior college
Civilian staff
3500
Shandong
2
13
2014
S Sui
M
25
junior high school
Restaurant Waiter
3500
Sichuan
6
14
2014
N Xi
F
30
junior high school
Self employed
5500
Jiangsu
15
15
2014
X Nang
M
26
junior high school
Forklift driver
5000
Yunnan
8
16
2014
C Chen
M
30
senior high school
Factory worker
4000
Anhui
5
17
2014
J Gao
F
25
junior college
Civilian staff
3000
Anhui
9
18
2014
X Wu
M
34
junior high school
Self employed
4000
Anhui
18
19
2014
J Li
M
33
junior college
Factory worker
4000
Hunan
1
20
2014
T Chen
M
29
senior high school
Restaurant Waiter
4000
Gansu
5
21
2014
H Zhu
M
33
senior high school
Kitchen staff
4500
Hunan
18
22
2015
H Hun
M
47
junior high school
Financial staff
6000
Henan
14
23
2015
J Chuan
M
27
junior high school
Factory worker
4000
Liaoning
10
24
2015
J Lin
M
33
senior high school
Factory worker
4500
Sichuan
13
25
2015
S Ji
F
29
nursing school
Nurse
4500
Zhejaing
16
26
2015
J Nang
F
25
junior college
Financial staff
4500
Zhejiang
3
27
2015
Y Yang
F
24
senior high school
Beautician
3000
Anhui
3
28
2015
B Bang
M
32
junior high school
Self employed
4000
Jiangxi
10
29
2015
H Hang
M
32
college
Self employed
5000
Anhui
7
30
2015
I Shi
F
31
junior high school
Laundry worker
3800
Anhui
9
31
2015
H Hai
M
44
elementary school
Factory worker
4000
Henan
12
32
2015
C Yun
F
37
third grade in
elementary school
Restaurant
dishwasher
2700
Henan
8
33
2015
J Gong
M
28
senior high school
Security staff
3000
Fujian
6
34
2015
T Wang
M
51
junior high school
Barber shop logistics
staff
5500
Anhui
15
35
2015
L Zhang
M
46
junior high school
Factory worker
6000
Fujian
19
36
2015
Z Liang
M
52
junior high school
Construction worker
5000
Henan
11
Chu et al.
445

This contrasts with Wang and Tian (2014), who used snow-
ball sampling among migrants from the same geographical area
in Shenzhen. As a result, our informants have much more
diverse backgrounds regarding place of origin, occupation,
gender, and migration history than theirs. Long depth inter-
views (McCracken 1988) were conducted in the informant’s
residences, workplaces, and other “hangout” locations. Each
interview lasted between one to two hours. The use of depth
interviews allowed us to consider more possible determinants
of the migrants’ quality of life to provide a more macro per-
spective of the problems encountered. The conversation was
video recorded and later transcribed in Mandarin or Puton-
ghua. The interviews started with general questions regarding
demographics such as migration history, age, and marital sta-
tus, and were then followed with questions on consumption
habits and practices before and after migration. Questions on
identity formation emerged from the conversation and were
further probed for elaboration. For example, the researchers
asked what “home” means to the migrant workers, and what
bundles of attitudes, interests, and activities in urban areas the
migrant worker have enjoyed. In addition, photographs, field
notes, and archive documents comprise part of the qualitative
data for this research.
Each interview generated between 15 to 40 pages of tran-
scripts in Mandarin Chinese. Since not all authors are Chinese
nationals, the original texts were read by the authors and then
translated into English. All the researchers independently ana-
lyzed the English transcripts and compared the relevant and
important details. Then, the researchers discussed their data
analysis process/findings, and a consensus was reached within
the research team. The transcripts were scrutinized for common
themes and categories and compared for consistency across the
entire data set (Arnould and Wallendorf 1994; Belk, Fischer,
and Kozinets 2013; Spiggle 1994). In essence, the key patterns
were categorized and summarized to draw comparisons and
contrasts in the dataset (Thompson 1997).
All of the authors have been rigorously trained in marketing
and have conducted extensive work in qualitative research. Much
analysis occurred simultaneously with data collection (between
2013 and 2015) and helped to determine the direction of the study.
As new data were collected, they were analyzed for points of
similarity and contrast. The initial coding was analyzed using
NVivo software. For instance, codes such as “outsiders,” “locals,”
“shopping,” “home,” “lifestyle,” “family,” “support,” and
“friends” were used in the software to attempt to seek patterns.
Analysis was an iterative process of coding, categorizing,
and abstracting the data (McCracken 1988). Data of thematic
similarity were identified throughout based on keywords or
phrases. Coded data were compared and contrasted to yield a
few broad categories which, through sorting and clustering,
were reduced to the more fundamental patterns that constitute
the emergent themes. The final analysis integrated the themes
into a unified discussion of the identity reconstruction process
(Schouten 1991). This approach is consistent with grounded
theory procedures (Strauss and Corbin 1990), which are itera-
tive in nature and require continually collecting data,
comparing categories, and revising interpretation until the pro-
cess is understood (Creswell 2013; Sayre 2001). In essence, the
data analysis process and our interpretations follow the gui-
dance prescribed in Belk, Fischer, and Kozinets (2013). In
addition to interview data, media news, as well as government
policy documents, were included to help us understand the
economic and sociocultural background. These observations
facilitated our understanding of the vibrant lives of migrants
in China.
Findings
Three major themes emerged from our analysis: 1) difficulties
breaking with the past; 2) partial urban adjustment; and 3)
migrant aspirations. The migrants’ adjustment is marked by
a wide variety of coping strategies such as finding friends to
help with online shopping (surrogate shoppers) and purchas-
ing used electronic appliances to make it easier for migrant
workers to adjust to urban consumption patterns. The liminal
space entails culturally constructed rituals (e.g., going back to
the hometown for Chinese New Year), cultural narratives
(e.g. luoyeguigen - the falling leaves return to the ground;
youfangcaiyoujia – house makes home possible), institutional
arrangements (e.g., the Hukou system, urbanization, and
social benefits), technology (e.g., TV, Internet, cell phones),
as well as modified consumption activities (e.g., finding sur-
rogate shoppers, choosing designated/ preselected shops,
avoiding fashion items). Public policies play a critical role
in hindering the transition for migrant workers. From a macro-
marketing perspective, the lives of the migrants are affected
by many people and institutions, yet they have been a much-
overlooked set of stakeholders to date.
Failure to break with the past. A person’s social status transition
is often comprised of symbolic behaviors signifying their
detachment from an earlier social structure (Turner 2009). Our
informants believe that their lives have separated from their
materially deprived pasts:
“I feel my living condition now is better than in the past. Shanghai
is much better than my hometown. There are people out there who
still do not have enough food and clothes. By thinking about that, I
feel much better for myself.” (Liu)
Rural consumption patterns in China are characterized by the
lack of consumer goods, and the urban consumption practices
of migrant workers are enriched by the newly incorporated
components of an ascending consumer culture, often experi-
enced as materially better than their past. Many informants feel
better off as they distance themselves from their deprived past.
“Also, when I was a kid, I walked six miles every day to go to
school. Now in the city, you can actually buy a bike, and it only
takes a few minutes to go to the places you need to go.” (Zhang)
446
Journal of Macromarketing 38(4)

Here the rural life is remembered as composed of homes,
schools, the country road that connects them, and the lack of
many material facilities, whereas urban consumption space is
seen as an improvement with the incorporation of consumer
goods such as the bicycle. The addition of the bike destabilizes
the materially deprived rural mindset that still lingers in the
migrant worker’s memory, and it also constitutes an emergent
urban consumption pattern that changes over time. The migra-
tion from the rural to the urban deterritorializes migrant work-
ers from their previous social structure and reterritorializes
them into a new urban lifestyle. This liminal space between
the dissolving rural consumption pattern and the emergent
urban consumption activity is marked by a desire to participate
fully in urban space that is yet to be achieved due to various
constraints. This period of in-between is also a period of con-
fusion for many. According to Baker, Gentry, and Rittenburg
(2005), perceived vulnerability occurs when others believe a
person is vulnerable, whether he or she agrees not. Though
many perceive migrants as the bottom-of-pyramid consumers,
many migrants may not perceive themselves as vulnerable.
Many participants acknowledged the improvement in living
conditions in cities, although their severance from the rural
consumption habits often are never complete. Despite the con-
tinuous incorporation of new components from urban con-
sumer culture, there is a strong sense of attachment to their
kinship ties. As research has indicated, family is important
enterprise central to consumption, and family life interacts with
symbolic marketplace resources (Epp and Price 2008). The
quotes below show such strong ties with families left at home,
which make it difficult for migrant workers to completely sep-
arate from their past. Rather than completely assimilating to an
urban consumer culture (Mathur 2012), many regard the rural
area as a safer social space to which they can always return. Lin
elaborated his feelings about the past:
“Every end of the year, I give money to my parents. I pretty much
leave every dime I have to my parents and hope they can take care
themselves. During the Chinese New Year, they calculated their
living costs and wanted to return the money left to us. I refused to
take it and honestly, they can keep it for themselves. This is sad.
When I first left my parents, I did not even have a cell phone. I used
the public phone to call them for a while. For the first seven or
eight years, I really did not have anything left to give to them. Now,
my financial situation is slightly better and I really want to take
care of them. My Mom and Dad cried when I said I will take care of
them. They told me that it is not easy for me to make a living. I do
not have much money for myself. I should keep it.” (Lin)
“My brother is nice as well. When I left my family, my brother told
me that I should go. I was told if it is not good out there, I still can
come back. He even told me that he will be responsible for my
parents’ living and asked me not to worry about them. Then I left.
The first time I went back to see him, he held me and cried.” (Chen)
Wang and Tian (2014) use the Putnam (2000) social network
dichotomy of bonding versus bridging to investigate how
migrants are able to generate funding to lease their taxi cabs.
Bonding provides social capital through a closed network of
family and friends, whereas bridging generates social capital
through open networks that bridge different cohorts of commu-
nities. Wang and Tian (2014) found that social networks based
on bonding were used primarily to obtain loans (which banks
would not provide based on the Hukou status of the migrants).
They generally got interest free loans from family and close
friends whereas the loans from local acquaintances involved a
reasonably high interest rate. As we will note later, our infor-
mants were primarily sending money back to the home area.
Although urban migrants have strong emotional bonds with
their families in the rural areas, the separation between family
members creates a “marginalized” past. Although rites of pas-
sage highlight the one-way transition from previous status to
the next, here we see the obligation for return to the rural social
sphere created by the long-cherished value of filial piety to
one’s parents. Such forward and backward struggling haunts
the lives of migrant workers. In addition to the “left–behind
Chinese elderly” (i.e. Xiang 2007), there are also the left
behind children, strengthening ties to the past and leading to
emotional struggle for both the children and the parents. Many
married informants expressed concerns for their children left
behind with their grandparents or relatives in rural China. For
example, Zhou told us,
“My daughter is with her grandparents. We live in a small place in
Shanghai. If I ask my parents to bring her here, they will not have a
place to stay. So, we had to leave them behind and often my wife
purchases stuff here and mails it back to them.”
Here we can also see that certain activities from the rural social
sphere cannot be detached and re-territorialized into the emer-
gent urban social practices. Other informants discussed similar
situations:
“I work 12 hours a day. There is no way I can take care of my child
here” (Li).
“You know, they are labeled as ‘left-behind children,’ and their life
is miserable. The TV news talks about them all the time,” (Hun).
Research has shown that due to the labor migration, 25 percent
of all Chinese children have been left behind by one or both
parents and the number of left-behind children reached 23
million in 2000 (Duan and Zhou 2005). Consequently, the
children’s consumption is restrained by their migrant parents’
conditions. Chinese left-behind children are also more likely
to suffer higher stress levels than Western children in single-
parent families (Ren and Treiman 2013). Although much
research has found that urban Chinese children have become a
lucrative market (Davis and Sensenbrenner 2000; Fowler, Gao
(Fowler), and Carlson 2010; Jing 2000), it is unlikely that the
“left-behind children” face similar acquisition opportunities.
Many migrant parents choose to buy products and mail them
to their children, rather than giving the children disposable
Chu et al.
447

income. This spending pattern may be referred to as “Confucian
consumerism,” reflecting the long-standing Chinese values of
families and social relations (Zhao 1997). “Gift-giving” is essen-
tial to link interpersonal relationships or Guanxi in China, and it
is an alternative way to show family values and maintain Mianzi
(Face) (Qian, Razzaque, and Keng 2007).
Due to connections with families, the village, and the past,
the transition becomes blurry and confusing for the workers.
Liang expressed,
“For these years, my kids have never been to Shanghai . . . . Orig-
inally, they were going to come here. But later, we decided not to
take them. My daughter who just finished middle school had to
take care of my younger son back home. This year, my wife finally
went back. I feel very guilty about this. When I call them once in a
while, I can hear my kid crying in the background. I feel so
sad . . . The only time I go back is during Chinese New Year. Well,
unless some relatives passed away, I would have to go back. For
birthdays, we find a time during the New Year holiday to celebrate
it early . . . Also, we spend quite a bit during the holidays back
home, which causes me headaches too. The relationship thing is
complicated. If I give people less (red hong bao envelopes with
cash), I feel ashamed.”
Traditions in Chinese society may become factors that alienate
workers. The financial burden Liang faces when he visits his
hometown can be traced back to the uniqueness of Chinese
society. In Chinese culture, individuals are connected to others
through reciprocity, sentiment, and kinship networks, and gift
exchange remains as an obligation to cultivate various social
bonds or guanxi (Joy 2001; Yan 1996; Yang 1994). The
“shame” Liang feels can be tied to cultural emphasis on “doing
face work” (Hwang 1987, p. 945), as individuals may gain or
lose “face” during gift transactions (Cupach and Metts 1994).
Given their long work hours, migrants had little time to
return home to see loved ones. In most cases, contacts were
limited to Chinese New Year festivities.
“Most of us always go back for holidays. We have friends here. But
they also gather with family during holidays. If you do not go back,
you will feel very lonely. Now, my parents are still there. I need to
go back to see them.” [Ji]
“I cannot break the ties with them. They raised me. I go back
during Chinese New Year. I do not know if I will move back or
not. It seems it is too far to even think about it.” (Nang)
Chinese New Year involves many rituals. For instance, the first
day of the New Year is a time to honor ancestors and elders.
People are supposed to visit senior members of the extended
family. It is customary to visit the paternal family relatives
first, followed by a visit to other relatives on the second day.
The order of visiting reflects the patriarchal nature of Chinese
society and reinforces social relationships and hierarchy
(White and Leung 2015). Such traditional rituals help to stabi-
lize the rural consumption that has been deterritorialized with
the migration. Another informant explained the ties to the past
in a more detailed fashion.
“My parents passed away. We had a very old house back to the
hometown then. It is pretty old and shoddy, so we finally sold it. A
while back, my brother bought a newer house/apartment in a better
area. He lets us to stay when we go back. My other brother also left
the town for work in another city. But anyway, the house is empty
most of time, since no one is permanently living there. I am think-
ing since my brother bought it, I could decorate it a little. We can
all contribute something and maybe get together once in a while.
My wife does not go back often though unless it is Chinese New
Year.” (Hang)
The traditional rite of passage is characterized by a pace and
period of ambiguity or liminality (Turner 1969; Van Gennep
(1960) [1909]). According to our findings, it is clear that many
informants live in a betwixt and between period. In essence, we
uncovered that the tension during the liminal phase can be
multidimensional. The workers simultaneously face tensions
between rural (e.g., language/dialects) and urban culture, con-
flicts between modern (e.g., living apart as a family) and tra-
ditional (e.g., obligations to visit home, Chinese New Year
rituals), lifestyle discrepancies, and struggles between material
life/quality of life (e.g., financial burdens) and social capital
(e.g., gift giving to retain ties). For instance, many workers
have a strong desire to visit their hometowns. On the other
hand, they face financial burdens when they do so. The Chinese
holiday rituals encourage gift giving (e.g., hong bao with cash)
and extended family gatherings, and result in financial burdens
for those who return home. Thus, their desire for return can be
hindered by material consequences.
The ties to family and hometown that were discussed in
much depth in our interviews were not mentioned in Ustuner
and Holt’s (2007) interpretations of their Turkish migrants’
experiences, though they played major roles in the other Chi-
nese studies (Wang and Tian 2014; Wang, Zhou, and Zhang
2015). It may be likely that the greater amount of time spent in
the urban area by the Turkish migrants facilitated the separa-
tion from their families in Eastern Turkey. Additionally, their
informants had their children with them in Ankara, whereas
many Chinese migrants had “left behind children.” Thus, the
Chinese migrants found leaving their pasts behind to be more
challenging. Yet, the nature of the bonding ties varied between
the Wang and Tian (2014) study and ours. The cab drivers got
needed funding from family back home while money would
flow in the opposite direction for our informants, providing
them with financial challenges.
Acculturation is an ongoing process which, along with
movement of material and non-material components, may
reconfigure the workers’ consumption practices in the urban
area. Thus, in the next section, we will describe the current
consumption activities that surfaced during the interviews.
Partial urban adjustment. Many workers suffer from low literacy
levels, low cultural capital (Bourdieu 1986), and low economic
448
Journal of Macromarketing 38(4)

status. In order to cope with the disadvantages, migrants deploy
strategies such as using electronics as a means of coping with
limited socialization experience, finding friends to help with
online shopping (surrogate shoppers), avoiding bargaining and
making purchases in a “known” store, and building identities
through avoiding certain product categories such as makeup.
The emergent urban consumption is hence composed of a het-
erogeneity of imagined and actualized practices.
Previous researchers have identified a number of cognitive
and social vulnerabilities that arise from low consumer literacy
in both developed economies such as the United States (Adkins
and Ozanne 2005; Viswanathan, Rosa, and Harris 2005) and
developing economies such as India (Viswanathan, Gajendiran,
and Venkatesan 2008). Low literacy is responsible for the pres-
ent living conditions for many. Li said,
“I have six siblings, I went to elementary school for two years. That
is it. Now, I try to learn something on the radio and finally reach a
point that I can read some of the Chinese characters. But my mind
is so slow; it is not enough.”
As a result of low literacy, many migrants encountered dif-
ficulties in stabilizing their emergent consumption patterns
and assimilating into urban society, as seen in the following
quote:
“My education is elementary level. My family is very poor and
could not support me to go to school. I do not understand Shanghai-
nese accent. They always see us as outsiders. There is nothing
wrong with us. Just some locals wear colored lens to see us. We
are not one of them.” (Hu)
Here both the inability to understand Shanghai dialects and the
lack of education threaten the stabilization of the nascent
urban social status. In contrast, no mention was made of lan-
guage difficulties among the Turkish migrants’ quotes in
Ustuner and Holt (2007) nor in informants’ quotes in Wang
and Tian (2014). The latter finding is a bit surprising given the
need for cab drivers to communicate with their passengers;
however, the sample came from migrants formerly living in
rural areas where the same dialect is spoken as is used in
Shenzhin. In our study, TV was found to be a major vehicle
for migrant workers to obtain information through the provi-
sion of visual cues for making buying decisions (Adkins and
Ozanne 2005; Wallendorf 2001). As Jae and DelVechio
(2004) suggested, low literate consumers experience substan-
dard product choices because of their overdependence on per-
ipheral cues in product advertising.
“I do not have hobbies; I watch many TV shows.” (Yang)
“I want a computer, I [would] use the computer to watch TV. In
terms of phone, I would buy it as far as it looks pretty to me. But I
want a computer to watch my favorite shows, though I do not
know how to use it still. Lately, I save so hard for a computer
[laughing].” (Liu)
“I have not been to any parks yet. My kid wants to go and I told him
to wait till the school takes them there. For us, it is more important
to buy a TV and a bike. They are the necessities.” (Xi)
Watching TV is an important strategy embraced by migrant
workers to stabilize an emergent urban identity, which helps
to minimize spending in cities. At the same time, watching TV
destabilizes the movement to urban consumption patterns by
being an alternative to going to a movie or a theme park as
urban residents usually do. For instance, Zhou expressed that,
“My wife likes watching TV, but I like movies. She does not
want me to go to the movie theater, as the ticket would cost us
money. TV is cheaper here (we only have basic channels).
Well, just like we do not go to the parks, we do not want to
pay the tickets to get in.”
TV has effects on stimulating unaffordable consumer desire in
India subaltern consumer culture (Varman and Belk 2008);
however, our findings indicate that TV serves not only as a
means to help the workers adapt to urban culture but also as
a conduit to cope with identity transition. Watching TV is thus
a liminal activity that appears to help bridge the transition
from a rural life to a semblance of an urban lifestyle. Through
TV, migrant workers learn about the norms of urban con-
sumption and participate in vicarious consumption of the
same brands and material goods as seen on TV. Television
as a catalyst helps migrant workers to de-territorialize their
previous consumption practices and prepare them for more
participation in urban consumption activities. At the same
time, watching TV helps migrant workers lower the cost of
living in urban areas (as it is a cheaper form of entertainment)
and sustains their transition over the long term, even though it
keeps them from participating in more social urban consump-
tion opportunities such as theme parks and movie theaters.
The following quotes demonstrate how TV watching is inter-
twined with migrant consumption.
“The only products or brands I trust are those I watched on TV. If a
new brand comes out, I have never seen it on TV before, I would
not even think of buying it at all. I would go to the store to try it but
definitely won’t take it home.” (Hu)
“At times, my friends introduce me to some brands. But still I do
not like them, unless I see them on TV before.” (Li)
Thus, watching TV is also an important means through which
migrant workers learn about brands. Many low literate consu-
mers feel responsible for their literacy (Eberle and Robinson
1980). However, illiterate consumers may also reject that label
and negotiate the stigma to construct meanings in the market-
place (Adkins and Ozanne 2005). In this case, TV provides an
adequate alternative with which to negotiate the stigma of low
literacy. On the other hand, television becomes a necessity for
these workers to dwell in their liminal space. They accept the
stigma of low literacy and handle market encounters by
Chu et al.
449

leveraging resources, including creating a zone of comfort in
which they limit their purchase decisions to items seen on TV.
Mobile telecommunication enables low-income households
to leapfrog prior forms of economic inequality and to connect
to resources and information that are becoming an integral part
of the social system (Horst and Miller 2006). As such, cell
phones have become central to establish and maintain relation-
ships. Even in certain parts of rural China, technology allows
people to extend or transform their social relationships and/or
to create new ones through online platforms (McDonald 2016).
Consequently, electronic products such as computers and cell
phones are important components of migrant workers’ urban
consumption. These products have become the “must-haves”
for many migrant workers. This tendency of prioritizing elec-
tronics may be due to their lack of other forms of socialization
in the cities (Bourdieu 1986).
In essence, electronic products have become the connection
between the self and the outside world. The Internet has created
a channel of information flows, word-of-mouth, and technical
advice from user communities and websites in various con-
sumption classes (Achrol and Kotler 2012). Many workers
have relied on technology to cope with their low literacy and
low social capital. Some informants use cell phones to listen to
music or watch TV shows in the urban environment. The
actants of televisions, cell phones, and the Internet have pro-
vided great opportunities for these “alienated consumers” to
avoid the stigma of low literacy and to develop adaptive skills
so that they can manage their social situations. Here technolo-
gies are not passive tools but ones that act to stabilize urban
consumption activities. TVs, cell phones, and the Internet all
help to bridge and transform the rural consumption patterns in
which migrant workers used to be embedded.
“I use a Huawei cell phone. I heard the brand is good. I can actually
watch news on the phone.” (Zhang)
“I spend 268 Yuan per month on cell phone. That’s a lot for me but
I like to talk on the phone.” (Chen)
“Many of us use cell phones to surf the Internet. I play games and
read short stories on the phone. Many people on our construction
site do this. You know some even bought iPhone to surf Internet
[even with low income] because we do not hang out in the evening.
This helps us to kill time.” (Gong)
In contrast to our findings, Ustuner and Holt (2007) mentioned
very little discussion of desires for new technology, nor was
watching TV revealed as central to household entertainment.
Instead of mentioning a desire for a bicycle, the Turkish
migrants expressed desires for cars.
In addition to technological products, other important com-
ponents of migrant workers’ urban consumption include friends
or family members who may provide a surrogate shopping ser-
vice. Buying clothing can be a stressful experience for low lit-
erate individuals. A trusted friend might serve as a surrogate
shopper (Adkins and Ozanne 2005). Needing to find surrogate
shoppers results from a lack of skill in using technology. Though
many workers can use cell phones and certain types of social
media (i.e. WeChat, QQ) to communicate with others, making
online purchases requires more sophisticated knowledge (i.e.
having and using credit cards, setting up emails to place order/
receive receipts, and navigating unfamiliar shopping websites.)
“I love online shopping, it is convenient. However, I do not know
how. Sometimes, I ask for help from a friend. She pays it for me
ahead of time. Later I pay her back.”(Yang)
“I love to buy stuff online. However, my son is the one who
operates the computer system. I do not really know how to use it.”
(Sui)
Making the purchase in the “known store” without bargaining
is another way for the migrant to avoid conflicts, and such a
practice may help to save one’s “face” in the public sphere,
even though bargaining is acceptable in most Chinese stores
(e.g., TravelChinaGuide 2016). A “no bargaining” strategy
may reflect the workers’ social stigma. Their aversion to bar-
gaining keeps them from having agency, which they would
need to demonstrate to assimilate. These coping strategies
may, on other hand, enhance higher levels of self-esteem or
confidence. Urban consumption activities are processes rather
than merely a collection of consumption practices and con-
sumer goods. Seeking help from coworkers and friends and
avoiding direct interaction with sales associates are processes
used to stabilize the emergent urban consumption (Callon
1986; Latour 1988).
Migrant workers also prefer going to the “known” store that
they can trust so that they can purchase without bargaining.
“I also like to shop in the store I know of. You know, most of us do
not like to bargain. So, if you know the store, you would feel more
comfortable to go. Plus, I do not think shopping is leisure. I go to
the store I know and bring the stuff back. I do not like to wander
around in the mall.” (Shi)
Consumption practices are also unexpectedly seen to differ
across genders. We found that female informants have their
ways to minimize social conflicts through avoiding certain
products such as makeup. People in the liminal stage are
normally somewhat disoriented and humble, and they tend
to obey social norms implicitly without complaint. As con-
sumers, they may leverage a wider range of social skills,
including the ability to observe and understand social rules,
so that they can fit in and act as confident consumers (Adkins
and Ozanne 2005). For instance,
“I do not buy makeup. I feel makeup is expensive. Plus, my
employers would not like me to wear it anyway, I think. They want
to hire the down-to-earth person. I am glad that I do not buy or use
makeup.” (Xi)
“I do not wear makeup; you know that you cannot look like the
boss. They may not like us to look in certain ways. For clothes, my
boss may be less concerned. If it fits, and the fabric is good, I am
good. I do not need anything stylish.” (Ji)
450
Journal of Macromarketing 38(4)

Contrary to previous findings that physical appearance may
provide power or confidence in social, occupational, or inti-
mate relationships, especially for those experiencing loss or
rejection (Chang 2009; Schouten 1991), our findings suggest
that a person’s use of appearance-related products may not be
vital to the provision of symbolic meaning and social advan-
tages for transitional people. This finding is also similar to the
notion that product purchase may carry a stigma and con-
sumption activities such as wearing unfashionable clothing
may further lead to consumers feeling stigmatized (Adkins
and Ozanne 2005). That being said, “fashion avoidance” sig-
nifies a limited desire to affiliate with the urban culture and,
thus, further creates an extension of a liminal space among the
workers.
Fashion avoidance was also found among the Turkish adult
female informants in Ustuner and Holt (2007), though not
among their daughters. A bigger difference between the two
studies is that the female Chinese migrants were in the work-
place, while the first-generation Turkish female migrants
were not.
Additionally, as Holt (1998) noted, certain social class
norms involve specific patterns of consumption. In other
words, each status group develops a unique lifestyle and pur-
sues unique consumption activities. Low cultural capital con-
sumers (LCCs) are acculturated in a social milieu in which they
engage the material rigors of everyday life (Holt 1998). From
our interviews, it seems that female migrant workers perceived
aesthetic appearance to widen the gap between them and the
“locals” further. Consequently, many have developed their
self-identity through the lens of others. This may reflect the
“looking-glass self” metaphor which posits that self-concepts
are passively formed as reflections of the responses of others
(Cooley 1902, p. 77). However, the difference may be in the
degree to which it is an active process of adjustment among the
migrant workers versus a passive process of acceptance as
suggested by Cooley (1902). Meeting the expectations of oth-
ers was key for consumption decisions. However, the finding
conflicts with the previous research finding that those with low
cultural capital (LCC) indigenized consumption to narrow the
social class gaps and consistently consumed goods that served
as conspicuous signals (Ustuner and Holt 2010).
As expected, migrant workers preferred items that are dur-
able, functional, branded but low priced. As literature has
shown, the LCCs’ ability to manage material constraints
becomes a primary value (Holt 1998). However, our interviews
uncovered that the workers have deployed subtle strategies
such as finding surrogate shoppers with online skills and using
electronics (TV, internet) as a means of changing the self, and
avoiding certain product categories such as makeup for con-
structing a self-identity through the eyes of others. Surrogate
shoppers and technological tools, on one hand, help to build
their confidence and self-esteem; on the other hand, they may
create a deeper liminal space in which the migrant worker may
dwell. The non-self-reliance situation may extend the liminal
period, which may result in an equilibrium of sorts forming in
the transition stage.
The evidence revealed that the workers found multiple stra-
tegies to avoid the “darkness” in the transition (Turner 2009).
Migrant workers learned to leverage resources despite their
limited capacities. Their capacity for using the Internet to shop
or going shopping in designated stores is contingent upon the
development of social capital. Not wearing makeup is contin-
gent upon the “old” identity and creates possible exclusion
from the new culture. The importance of owning/watching
TV can be a result of lacking social capital and literacy. By
leveraging these resources, the migrants created a comfort zone
for themselves but also limited their access to new cultural
positions and reduced their desires or abilities to obtain cultural
capital in the urban setting.
Migrant aspiration. Migrants transition to urban areas with hopes
for generating a higher quality of life for themselves and their
families. There is a possibility for that to happen and, as MacIn-
nis and DeMello (2005) note, only possibility and not prob-
ability is needed for one to hope. Beyond possibility, though, is
the notion of potentiality, as self-efficacy may lead some
migrants to plan for acquiring full urban status actively. As
some quotations below indicate, many migrants question the
likelihood of their reaching their goals.
Many workers tend to take the path of double marginaliza-
tion (from both the rural and urban cultures), due to cultural
differences and public policies. Various cultural resources are
embraced to attempt to build a future self. Understandings of
urban consumption (and consumption processes themselves)
are also shifting over time, making individual migrant workers’
plans for the future more dynamic. Here we found that the
experiences of living in the city is a progressive process (Arsel
2016). The initial excitement of moving to urban China is
gradually transformed by the continuing links to the rural,
which reinforces the liminal phase the workers experience and
lead to an ambiguous self-identity.
“When I first got here, I felt that I moved from hell to the heaven. I
finally could afford pork for dinner. But, I miss my family.” (Gao)
Instead of separating from his rural past, connecting to family
is critical in this migrant’s daily experiences. Other informants
elaborated similar feelings:
“I do not feel we can be urban people. They look at us differently.
They feel we are dirty anyway. You know we work in the factory.
In the future, if it is possible to save some money, I would like to go
back to the hometown to buy a place to live in the countryside. That
is my dream.” (Lin)
Additionally, the interviews revealed that some workers will
leave the city due to education policies which state that migrant
children without residency status are not supposed to receive
educational benefits (Wong et al. 2007). After the nine years of
obligated education (1st grade–9th grade), many migrant chil-
dren cannot attend high school in Shanghai, and as a result,
they will have to return home to finish their educations. Thus,
Chu et al.
451

government policy regulating educational resources also acts to
limit migrant workers’ consumption options. As Baker, Gentry,
and Rittenburg (2005) state, individual characteristics (e.g.,
state of mind, age, race,), and external factors including the
lack of access to goods and services can lead to stigmatization
and vulnerability.
Home is a complex concept that embraces a place, a set of
feelings, and cultural meanings (Blunt and Dowling 2006;
Fowler and Lipscomb 2010). One’s sense of home is shaped
by childhood memories, along with the present experience and
the dreams for the future (Blunt and Dowling 2006). The feel-
ing of having a home is more than just an expression, but also a
deep-seated human desire to have, use, and enjoy one’s space
(Allen 2015). Migrant parents expressed concern about future
living arrangements and desired a home in Shanghai or one in
rural China. Buying a home is the ultimate goal. Those who have
this dream of buying a home in an urban area have been influ-
enced by observing urban consumers. Those who wish to obtain
a home in rural areas may have failed to actualize a desired and
potentially attainable self, which may be due to the inability to
convert will to action (Schouten 1991). Over time, home own-
ership becomes an important means of territorialization to sta-
bilize the urban identity formation. Owning a permanent home
in the urban area helps to fixate the established urban status. The
hope, imagination, and desire for urban living are abstracted
through a home in the city (DeLanda 2006). For example,
“I save some money for my kid. I also think it would nice to buy a
home. I know, I know, it is not even possible, I could only dream
about it. It is awfully expensive in Shanghai.” (Hun)
“My life goal is to get a larger apartment.” (Bang)
“My goal of living in the city is to buy a place to live. Stability is
the key for us. We save money but do not have a clear plan.” (Li)
“If you want to settle down, first thing you want to do is to buy a
house. Everything else is secondary. I have the expectation, but it
does not mean it will become true.” (Nang)
Owning a home in urban China is an important part of
migrants’ identity projects in the transition from rural to urban.
Although none of our informants as yet had achieved this ulti-
mate goal of urban life, the challenging thoughts of obtaining
an urban living space may be an indication of the desire for a
stable urban identity. Ultimately, urban home ownership is
seen to bridge the urban and the rural. To that end, liminal
consumers may be expected to behave by current customary
norms binding on their new social position, and situated in an
imagined threshold (Lew, Hall, and Williams 2008).
Our findings suggest that the unlikely ownership of a home
along with missing family ties have become factors in destabi-
lizing identity construction in urban China. Some migrant
workers have built or purchased houses in their hometowns
even though nobody is living there. Such a strategy, on the
other hand, stabilizes their rural identity, as the cultural narra-
tive youfangcaiyoujia argues that house makes home possible.
Discussion
Due to the high demand in large cities for cheaper labor on
construction sites, at restaurants, and in other industries,
migrants are grudgingly allowed to stay in urban areas (Eades
2014). Chinese migrant workers are going through (partially at
least) three major phases, and their liminal consumption pat-
terns are associated with new norms and identities. Culturally
speaking, the findings suggest that the workers are unlikely to
separate from previous rural ties due to cultural norms and
government policies, which result in a prolonged liminal stage
and a lack of societal acceptance. We found that migrants are
perceived as being vulnerable, in part, due to the external fac-
tors such as public policies and discrimination. As Hill (1995)
states, stigmatization and discrimination contribute to con-
sumer vulnerability. External factors such as structural and
social problems are beyond the control of the individual (Hill
and Stamey 1990). Though past marketing literature focuses on
the vulnerability of the migrant in general, many of the infor-
mants perceive their quality of life has been improved in the
urban areas, which indicates that vulnerability is a perceived
concept based upon the individuals’ experiences.
In essence, this research takes a bottom up approach (e.g.
Viswanathan, Shultz, and Sridharan 2014) to provide micro-
level insights for macromarkeitng, emphazing the transition
from a subsistence rural living condition to an isolated urban
vulnerable position. It expands macromarketing knowledge by
including economic and social structure in the marketing sys-
tem (Layton 2007). The study also indicates that vulnerability
tends to create its own self-reinforcing cycle (Shultz and Hol-
brook 2009) (e.g., migrant workers seem to willingly isoldate
themselves in the urban eviroment.) As Baker, Gentry, and
Rittenburge (2005, p. 134) note, vulnerability arises from the
interaction of individuals states, individual characteristics, and
external conditions to hinder consumption goals.
Specifically, this research contributes to macromarketing
literature from three major theoretical perspectives. First, it
enriches the literature on the liquid identity of migrant workers
in urban China and extends the theory of liminality. Second, we
found migrant workers face or recreate boundaries, which con-
tributes to the conventional Western notion of acculturation
theory that emphasizes assimilation. As Wang and Tian
(2014) note, migrant workers consistently face structural bar-
riers in a political economy like China. Finally, we believe
Hukou is a political barrier which hinders the adaptation pro-
cess for the migrants. We propose that public policymakers
need to pay further attention to enhance the quality of life for
the rural migrants. Otherwise, there may be unanticipated con-
sequences such as higher rates of crime and unemployment. As
Eades (2014) notes, migrant workers have been relegated to the
worst, lowest paid jobs and are treated by native urbanites as
second-class citizens. Inequality and conditions of migrants in
urban areas need to be understood by public policymakers as
barriers to economic development and a threat to social and
political stability, China’s “Growth at all costs” policies have
thus failed to address such issues.
452
Journal of Macromarketing 38(4)

Liquid identity in liminal space. As noted earlier, Bauman (2000,
2007) criticizes the Weberian notion of a modernization pro-
cess that regards development in modernity as a process of
removing social agents from previous institutions such as farms
and family villages and re-embedding them into new social
structures of factories and urban space. Instead, Bauman offers
the notion of liquid modernity, focusing on the liquidating
process of dis-embedding without re-embedding in late mod-
ernity. Whereas institutional powers are consolidated by resis-
tance in the modernization process, their stability is seen by
Bauman (2000) as an illusion. He argued for a more amorphous
form of modernity or liquid modernity, in which social bonds
are weakened, social relationships become more transient, and
transience replaces durability as an enduring value in today’s
society. Such notions of liquid modernity are embedded within
Western societies in which the flow of people between the rural
and the urban is more fluid. China is marked by a Hukou
system as a structural barrier for the workers, and it has fixed
the social status of most migrants to their home villages even if
they have been attempting to adapt to urban consumption prac-
tices. Our findings resonate with Bauman’s (2000, 2007) notion
of liquid modernity, but the uniqueness of the Hukou system
renders interpretations of Turner’s notion of the liminal and
liminality questionable as reaching the final stage may face
insurmountable barriers.
During the transitional/liminal stage, workers have
deployed many strategies to cope with the stress associated
with transition (e.g., technology adaptation, surrogate shop-
ping, fashion avoidance). Migrant workers may take various
paths to envision a post-assimilation identity. As Mathur
(2012) proposed, post-assimilation may be viewed as a multi-
dimensional stage. Some migrants may fully integrate into the
new culture and give up their past identity (assimilation), while
others maintain their old rituals or identity (separation). How-
ever, our findings suggest that many may dwell in the margin-
alized liminal state for a prolonged period (marginalization), as
it is extremely challenging for migrant workers to integrate into
urban China. The desire for urban homeownership is similar to
the “imaginative capacities” that Epp, Schau, and Price (2014)
noted. Consumers may use imaginative capacity to compensate
for the absence of the resources that are reflective of urban
residents (Epp, Schau, and Price 2014).
This research also reveals that the liminality of Chinese
workers is affected by the uniqueness of Chinese social norms
(e.g., family values, urban housing arrangements) and, more
importantly, public policies (education and industrial develop-
ment policies). Migrant workers’ rural Hukou restricts their
children’s access to education in urban areas and leaves them
not sufficiently protected (Li 2002). Social welfare in China is
also tied to residence status within the Hukou system. There-
fore, migrant workers are largely excluded from social security,
access to bank loans, and medical benefits in urban areas.
These structural issues were not discussed in the context of the
Turkish migrants in Ustuner and Holt (2007), but they were
central to the challenges faced by the Shenzhen cab drivers in
Wang and Tian (2014). For many Chinese migrants, the
completion of the acculturation process, or the liminal transi-
tion, is often outside the realm of possibility. Liminal consump-
tion rituals and practices are shaped and reshaped by individual
resources, literacy, institutional arrangement, capitalism dis-
course, and Chinese filial piety norms. The interface between
the cultural factors and policies impedes progress toward
reaching a final equilibrium phase, thus forming a liquid iden-
tity that shifts between the rural and the urban.
Boundary work and acculturation. Prior acculturation literature
has highlighted an intricate process of cultural adaption to
unfamiliar economic, biological (e.g., health), physical (e.g.,
urbanization), social (e.g., discrimination), and cultural (cloth-
ing, religion, language) conditions that often create psycholo-
gical stress (Berry and Sam 1997). Typically, the acculturation
literature emphasizes border crossings (e.g., legal, or illegal,
immigrants in the U.S.) and how migrants adapt to Western
consumer cultures (Cross 2000). As Regany, Visconti, and
Fosse-Gomez (2012) posited, migrants confront multiple cul-
tural references as they navigate the market structure. As a
result, some migrants might creatively reset the boundaries,
which are theoretically defined as “a distinction that estab-
lished categories of objects, people and activities” (Askegaard
and Bengtsson 2005).
Consistent with previous research, Chinese migrant workers
moved towards establishing coordination across boundaries
(i.e., going home to see family, co-paying for a house in the
hometown). However, unlike previous work which emphasized
“border crossing consumers” (Pen˜aloza 1994; Regany, Vis-
conti, and Fosse-Gomez 2012), this study positions boundary
work by emphasizing “within-country” migration with the
focus on a national-level cultural boundary. We provide insight
on migrants’ lived experiences within a national level, which
differs from international migration studies that have more
focus on language/cultural/religion/ethnicity differences
(Regany, Visconti, and Fosse-Gomez 2012) using the theore-
tical framework of the rites of passage (Van Gennep (1960)
[1909]). Liminal boundaries seem vague, as the migrant work-
ers are free to move back and forth between the urban and rural
areas. Consequently, the acculturation process may be dissim-
ilar to the international phenomenon, which has traditionally
focused upon adaptation as the likely outcome. To that end, we
extend cultural assimilation research that has emphasized
national, ethnic, and religious boundaries (Regany, Visconti,
and Fosse-Gomez 2012).
Public policy implications. We hold the view that governments
should bear primary responsibility for developing public poli-
cies to address the needs of individuals living in subsistence
(Viswanathan et al. 2012). As such, the key question revolves
around what government policymakers can do to empower
migrants. However, China’s Hukou policy limits many aspects
of migrants’ lives in the urban setting. Under such a policy,
rural migrants have limited opportunities to become permanent
urban residents (Wang and Tian 2014). As a result, many face
barriers in accessing public resources/services, such as low-
Chu et al.
453

cost healthcare, retirement funds, and social security. We agree
with Wang and Tian (2014) that a social system may need to
include rural migrants in urban planning. The local government
may need to provide low-cost housing and public education to
the migrants’ children. In rural areas, the local government may
need to take initiative to help with “left behind” elderly or
children, which may include investment in low-cost nursing
homes/home nursing programs and low-cost public education
in rural China.
Previous research suggests that consumer skills such as lit-
eracy and numeracuare needed to make sense of the market-
place, e.g. reading advertising, calculating discounts, and
identifying the value of goods (Wallendorf 2001). Our findings
show that migrants lack formal education, which hinders fur-
ther acculturation. To illustrate, many migrant workers utilize
social capital/connections to navigate online shopping, due to
illiteracy. However, very little attention has been made to cul-
tivate marketplace skills for rural migrants in China. As such, it
may be helpful to develop low-cost or free literacy education to
help these individuals to overcome shortcomings and increase
their capacity to find economic welfare and independence.
Conclusion and Future Research
Urbanization is a global phenomenon; yet the movement of
poor, less educated rural peoples to somewhat hostile urban
environments has received relatively little attention in market-
ing. Adjustment to the new environments requires an interface
with a far different market structure with many offerings of
new and highly desirable products. At the same time, the move-
ment requires separation from family (and not only parents and
grandparents, but increasingly from children as well), which is
a far more painful process in collective cultures than in Western
ones. While migrant workers are needed for manufacturing and
service jobs in urban areas, government policies in some coun-
tries (such as Hukou in China) reflect perspectives that see-
mingly restrict the movements from being permanent.
Theoretically, this study re-examined extant acculturation
literature by analyzing within-border migration. More work is
needed to address the explicit roles of the market in identity
formation and revision in migrant workers’ urban transitions.
Future research may focus on how different markets (i.e. fash-
ion, leisure) influence migrant workers’ identity transition and
consumption. Some migrants may return to their rural homes at
some point of their life, which would seem to be the implicit
intent of the Hukou policy. As such, more work needs to inves-
tigate how the workers re-adapt to the rural home environment
after they have lived in the urban area for years. Family
dynamics among the workers may be another area that needs
to be explored. A better understanding of how relations among
migrants’ parents, children, and grandparents impact family
identity in the current marketplace would directly contribute
to cultural understanding.
Throughout the paper we have compared our findings in
China with those from Wang and Tian (2014), also in a Chinese
context, and from Ustuner and Holt (2007) in a Turkish rural-
to-urban context. There were major differences in the studies,
even within the two Chinese ones. Using a macromarketing
perspective, we find that one large difference in the contexts
of the Chinese studies and the Turkish study is the role of
government policy in China. It is somewhat unfathomable to
consider how a country with more than 1.3 billion people,
approximately half of them living in rural areas, can be directed
so as to provide a good quality of life for its people. The Hukou
system had served to prevent China’s cities from becoming so
large that they might become ungovernable. Allowing rural-to-
urban migration in order to provide labor during its industrial
revolution helped the economy grow rapidly, but maintaining
the Hukou system in terms of not providing medical and edu-
cation benefits to the migrants is having a severe impact on the
country’s family system. This family structure has been a major
factor in Chinese culture, but it is facing unprecedented chal-
lenges that desperately need handling.
Even the two Chinese contexts faced major differences.
The Wang and Tian (2014) study had a much tighter focus
than did our study. Their financial focus led them to discuss
the barriers faced by migrants to Shenzhen in terms of acquir-
ing capital, and their findings lead to the conclusion that
money flows from rural to urban settings. In the broader con-
text of our study, money was seen to flow from urban to rural.
Another difference seems to be due to how the samples of
informants were generated. The migrants to Shenzhen appar-
ently came from the same area of China and apparently used
the same language dialect. Shanghai has attracted migrants
from many regions of China, and many migrants had prob-
lems dealing with the Shanghainese dialect. Further, Wang
and Tian’s informants all came from one particular area of
Shenzhen, composed of migrants from the same area of
China. Nearly 50% of their informants indicated that friends
originally from their home area were helpful in their finding
employment. The informants in our study did not report such
local ties. The point is that there are many different factors
affecting how migrants adjust to their new environment, and
much more research needs to be conducted before general-
izable processes can be identified.
Rural migrants are at the center of China’s urbanization
process. Their social welfare, economic status, and consumer
rights have yet to be improved (Wang and Tian 2014). This
study has focused upon a limited number of migrant workers
in Eastern China; thus, future research should continue to
study the life transition of migrant workers with a larger sam-
ple size in various geographic areas. Additionally, our study
emphasizes public policy, identity transition, and consump-
tion scale in the urban setting. Research may further examine
the well-being of the left behind elderly’s and children’s liv-
ing condition in rural China. Researchers may investigate
various forms of boundaries that migrants may have cre-
ated/faced which impact the quality of life among the work-
ers. Longitudinal analysis will be better suited to understand
the long-term implications of public policy impact on the
workers.
454
Journal of Macromarketing 38(4)

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Russ Belk and Ron Hill for their comments on the
manuscript.
Author Contribution
Jie G. Fowler and James W. Gentry contributed this paper equally.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for
the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article: The authors
acknowledge the financial support from the National Social Science
Foundation of China (13CSH071).
ORCID iD
Jie G. Fowler
http://orcid.org/0000-0001-7457-9295
References
Achrol, R. S. and Phillip Kotler (2012), “Frontiers of the Marketing
Paradigm in the Third Millennium,” Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science, 40 (1), 35-52.
Adkins, Natalie Ross and Julie L. Ozanne (2005), “The Low Literate
Consumer,” Journal of Consumer Research, 32 (1), 93-105.
Allen, John (2015), Home: How Habitat Made Us Human. New York:
Basic Books.
Arsel, Zeynep (2016), “Markets and Values,” in Assembling Con-
sumption: Researching Actors, Networks and Markets, Robin Can-
niford and Domen Bajde, eds. New York: Routledge, 32-44.
Arnould, Eric J. and Melanie Wallendorf (1994), “Market-oriented
Ethnography: Interpretation Building and Marketing Strategy For-
mulation,” Journal of Marketing Research, 31 (4), 484-504.
Askegaard, Soren, Eric J. Arnould, and Dannie Kjeldgaard (2005),
“Post-assimilationist Ethnic Consumer Research: Qualification
and Extensions,” Journal of Consumer Research, 32 (June),
160-70.
Askegaard, Søren and Anders Bengtsson (2005), “When Hershey Met
Betty: Love, Lust and Co-Branding,” Journal of Product & Brand
Management, 14 (5), 322-29.
Baker, Stacey Menzel, James W. Gentry, and Terri L. Rittenburg
(2005), “Building Understanding of the Domain of Consumer
Vulnerability,” Journal of Macromarketing, 25 (2), 128-39.
Barrios, Andres, Maria Piacentini, and Laura Salciuviente (2012),
“Forced Transformations and Consumption Practices in Liquid
Times,” Advances in Consumer Research, 29, 890-91.
Bauman, Zygmunt (1989), Holocaust and Modernity. Cambridge,
MA: Polity Press.
Bauman, Zygmunt (2000), Liquid Modernity. Cambridge, MA: Polity
Press.
Bauman, Zygmunt (2007), Liquid Times: Living in an Age of
Uncertainty. Cambridge, MA: Polity Press.
Bauman, Zygmunt (2013), Liquid Modernity. Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley & Sons.
Belk, Russell, Eileen Fischer, and Robert V. Kozinets (2013),
Qualitative Consumer and Marketing Research. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Berry, John W. (1997), “Immigration, Acculturation, and
Adaptation,” Applied Psychology, 46 (1), 5-68.
Berry, John W. and David L. Sam (1997), “Acculturation and
Adaptation,” Handbook of Cross-cultural Psychology, 3, 291-326.
Blunt, Alison and Robyn Dowling (2006), Home. London, UK:
Routledge.
Boo, Katherine (2012), Behind the Beautiful Forever: Life, Death, and
Hope in a Mumbai Undercity. New York: Random House.
Bourdieu, Pierre (1986), “The Forms of Capital,” in Cultural Theory:
An Anthology, Imre Szeman and Timothy Kaposy, eds. New York:
Wiley Blackwell, 81-93.
Callon, Michel (1986), “Some Elements of Sociology of Translation:
Domestication of the Scallops and the Fishermen of St. Brieue
Bay,” in Power, Activity and Belief: A New Sociology of Knowl-
edge?, J. Law, ed. London: Routledge, 196-223.
Chan, Kam Wing (2012), “Migration and Development in China:
Trends, Geography and Current Issues,” Migration and Develop-
ment, 1 (2), 187-205.
Chang, Leslie T. (2009), Factory Girls: From Village to City in a
Changing China. New York: Random House Digital, Inc.
Cody, Kevina and Katrina Lawlor (2011), “On the Borderline: Explor-
ing Liminal Consumption and the Negotiation of Threshold
Selves,” Marketing Theory, 11 (2), 207-28.
Cooley, Charles Horton (1902), Cooley’s book, Human Nature and the
Social Order. New York: Scribner’s.
Corus, Canan and Julie L. Ozanne (2012), “Stakeholder Engagement:
Building Participatory and Deliberative Spaces in Subsistence
Markets,” Journal of Business Research, 65 (12), 1728-35.
Creswell, John W. (2013), Research Design: Qualitative, Quantita-
tive, and Mixed Methods Approaches. Los Angeles, CA: Sage.
Cross, Gary S. (2000), An All-Consuming Century: Why Commerci-
alism Won in Modern America. New York: Columbia University
Press.
Cupach, William R. and Sandra Metts (1994), Facework. London,
UK: Sage.
Davis, Deborah S. (2000), The Consumer Revolution in Urban China.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Davis,
Deborah
S.
and
Julia
S.
Sensenbrenner
(2000),
“Commercializing Childhood: Parental Purchases for Shanghai’s
Only Child,” in The Consumer Revolution in Urban China,
Deborah Davis, ed. Berkeley: University of California Press,
54-79.
DeLanda, Manuel (2006), A New Philosophy of Society: Assemblage
Theory and Social Complexity. Oxford, UK: A & C Black.
Duan, C. and F. Zhou (2005), “A Study on Children Left Behind,”
Population Research, 29 (1), 29-36.
Durkheim, Emile and Marcel Mauss ((1963) [1903]), Primitive Clas-
sification. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Eades, Mark C. (2014), “Toiling in Shanghai’s Shadows,” US News,
(accessed June 15, 2017), [available at https://www.usnews.com/
opinion/blogs/world-report/2014/06/17/migrant-labor-in-shang
hai-highlights-inequality-in-china.]
Chu et al.
455

Eberle, Anne and Sandra Robinson (1980), “The Adult Illiterate
Speaks Out: Personal Perspectives on Learning to Read and
Write,” National Inst. for Community Development, Washing-
ton, DC.
Epp, Amber M. and Linda L. Price (2008), “Family Identity: A Frame-
work of Identity Interplay in Consumption Practices,” Journal of
Consumer Research, 35 (1), 50-70.
Epp, Amber M., Hope Jensen Schau, and Linda L. Price (2014),
“The Role of Brands and Mediating Technologies in Assembling
Long-Distance Family Practices,” Journal of Marketing, 78 (May),
81-101.
Fowler, Aubrey R., Jie Gao (Fowler), and Les Carlson (2010), “Public
Policy and the Changing Chinese Family in Contemporary China:
The Past and Present as Prologue for the Future,” Journal of
Macromarketing, 30 (4), 342-53.
Fowler, Aubrey R. and Cliff Lipscomb (2010), “Building a Sense of
Home in Rented Spaces,” International Journal of Housing
Markets and Analysis, 3 (2), 100-18.
Gentry, J. W., Sunkyu Jun, and Patriya Tansuhaj (1995), “Consumer
Acculturation Processes and Cultural Conflict: How Generalizable
Is a North American Model for Marketing Globally?” Journal of
Business Research, 32 (1), 129-39.
Hill, Ronald Paul (1995), “Researching Sensitive Topics in Market-
ing: The Special Case of Vulnerable Populations,” Journal of
Public Policy & Marketing, 14 (1), 143-48.
Hill, Ronald Paul, and Mark Stamey (1990), “The Homeless in Amer-
ica: An Examination of Possessions and Consumption Behaviors,”
Journal of Consumer Research, 17 (December), 303-21.
Holt, Douglas B. (1998), “Does Cultural Capital Structure American
Consumption?” Journal of Consumer Research, 25 (1), 1-25.
Horst, Heather and Daniel Miller (2006), The Cell Phone: An Anthro-
pology of Communication. New York: Berg.
Huang, Yeqing, Fei Guo, and Zhiming Cheng (2018), “Market
Mechanisms and Migrant Settlement Intentions in Urban China,”
Asian Population Studies, 14 (1), 22-42.
Hwang, Kwang-kuo (1987), “Face and Favor: The Chinese Power
Game,” American Journal of Sociology, 92 (4), 944-74.
Jae, Haeran and Devon DelVecchi (2004), “Decision Making by Low-
Literacy Consumers in the Presence of Point-of-Purchase
Information,” Journal of Consumer Affairs, 38 (2), 342-54.
Jing, Jun (2000), Feeding China’s Little Emperors: Food, Children,
and Social Change. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Joy, Annamma (2001), ”Gift Giving in Hong Kong and the Continuum
of Social Ties,” Journal of Consumer Research, 28 (2), 239-56.
Lamont, Michelle and Virag Molnar (2002), “The Study of Bound-
aries in the Social Sciences,” Annual Review of Sociology, 28 (1),
167-95.
Latour, Bruno (1988), “The Politics of Explanation: An Alternative,”
in Knowledge and Reflexivity: New Frontiers in the Sociology of
Knowledge, Steve Woogar, ed. London, UK: Sage, 155-77.
Layton, Roger A. (2007), “Marketing Systems—A Core Macromar-
keting Concept,” Journal of Macromarketing, 27 (3), 227-42.
Lew, Alan A., C. Michael Hall, and Allan M. Williams (2008), A
Companion to Tourism. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Li, J. W. (2002), “On Protection of the Labor Rights of Migrant Work-
ers,” Academic Exploration, 5 (1):71-74. [In Chinese]
Liang, Zai (2016), “China’s Great Migration and the Prospects of a
More Integrated Society,” Annual Review of Sociology, 42,
451-71.
Luedicke, Marius K. (2011), “Consumer Acculturation Theory:
(Crossing) Conceptual Boundaries,” Consumption Markets &
Culture, 14 (3), 223-44.
Luedicke, Marius K. (2015), “Indigenes’ Responses to Immigrants’
Consumer Acculturation: A Relational Configuration Analysis,”
Journal of Consumer Research, 42 (1), 109-29.
MacInnis, Deborah J. and Gustavo E. De Mello (2005), “The Concept
of Hope and Its Relevance to Product Evolution and Choice,”
Journal of Marketing, 68 (January), 1-14.
Mathur, Anil (2012), “Consumer Acculturation in the Age of Glo-
balization: A Study of First Generation Indian Immigrants in
the United States,” Journal of International Consumer Market-
ing, 24 (5), 372-84.
McCracken, Grant (1988), The Long Interview. Newbury Park, CA:
Sage.
McDonald, Tom (2016), Social Media in Rural China. London: UlC
press.
Oswald, Laura R. (1999), “Culture Swapping: Consumption and the
Ethnogenesis of Middle-Class Haitian Immigrants,” Journal of
Consumer Research, 25 (4), 303-18.
Pen˜aloza, Lisa N. (1994), “Atravesando Fronteras/Border Crossings:
A Critical Ethnographic Exploration of the Consumer Accultura-
tion of Mexican Immigrants,” Journal of Consumer Research, 21
(June), 32-54.
Pieke, Frank N. and Hein Mallee (1999), Internal and International
Migration: Chinese Perspectives. New York: Routledge.
Polsa, Pia and Qin Qin Zheng (2015), “Introduction to the Special
Issue: China and Chinese Communities,” Journal of Macromarket-
ing, 35 (2), 163-66.
Pow, Choon-Piew (2007), “Securing the ‘Civilised’ Enclaves: Gated
Communities and the Moral Geographies of Exclusion in (Post-)
Socialist Shanghai,” Urban Studies, 44 (8), 1539-58.
Putnam, Robert D. (2000), Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival
of American Community. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Qian, Wang, Mohammed Abdur Razzaque, and Kau Ah Keng (2007),
“Chinese Cultural Values and Gift-Giving Behavior,” Journal of
Consumer Marketing, 24 (4), 214-28.
Regany, Fatima, Luca M. Visconti, and Marie-He´le`ne Fosse-Gomez
(2012), “A Closer Glance at the Notion of Boundaries in Accul-
turation Studies: Typologies, Intergenerational Divergences, and
Consumer Agency,” in Research in Consumer Behavior, Vol. 14,
Russell W. Belk, Søren Askegaard, and Linda Scott, eds. Bingley,
UK: Emerald Group Publishing Limited, 193-211.
Ren, Qiang and Donald Treiman (2013), “The Consequences of
Parental Labor Migration in China for Children’s Emotional
Well-Being,” Population Studies Center, Research Report
13-799, Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan.
Sayre, Shay (2001), Qualitative Methods for Marketplace Research.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Schouten, John W. (1991), “Selves in Transition: Symbolic Consump-
tion in Personal Rites of Passage and Identity Reconstruction,”
Journal of Consumer Research, 17 (March), 412-25.
456
Journal of Macromarketing 38(4)

Shultz, Clifford J. (2007), “Marketing as Constructive Engagement,”
Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, 26 (2), 293-301.
Shultz, Clifford J. (2012), “Vietnam: Political Economy, Marketing
System,” Journal of Macromarketing, 32 (1), 7-17.
Shultz, Clifford J. and Morris B. Holbrook (2009), “The Paradoxical
Relationships between Marketing and Vulnerability,” Journal of
Public Policy & Marketing, 28 (1), 124-27.
Spiggle, Susan (1994), “Analysis and Interpretation of Qualitative
Data in Consumer Research,” Journal of Consumer Research, 21
(3), 491-503.
Strauss, Anselm and Juliet Corbin (1990), Basics of Qualitative
Research. Newbury Park. CA: Sage.
The Economist (2018), “Internal Migrants: The Bitter Generation,”
May 5, 41-43.
Thompson, Craig J. (1997), “Interpreting Consumers: A Hermeneuti-
cal Framework for Deriving Marketing Insights from the Texts of
Consumers’ Consumption Stories,” Journal of Consumer
Research, 34 (November), 438-56.
Turner, Victor (1969), The Ritual Process: Structure and Anti-struc-
ture. Chicago: Aldine Publishing.
Turner, Victor (2009), The Ritual Process: Structure and Anti-
structure, Second Printing. NJ: Rutgers.
TravelChinaGuide (2016), “Bargaining in China,” (accessed June 15,
2017), [available at https://www.travelchinaguide.com/essential/bar
gaining.htm.]
Ustuner, Tuba and Douglas B. Holt (2007), “Dominated Consumer
Acculturation: The Social Construction of Poor Migrant Women’s
Consumer Identity Projects in a Turkish Squatter,” Journal of
Consumer Research, 34 (1), 41-56.
Ustuner, Tuba and Douglas B. Holt (2010), “Toward A Theory of
Status Consumption in Less Industrialized Countries,” Journal of
Consumer Research, 37 (1), 37-56.
Van Gennep, Arnold ((1960) [1909]), Rites of Passage. Chicago: The
University of Chicago Press.
Varman, Rohit and Russell W. Belk (2008), “Weaving A Web: Sub-
altern Consumers, Rising Consumer Culture, and Television,”
Marketing Theory, 8 (3), 227-52.
Viswanathan, Madhubalan, S. Gajendiran, and R. Venkatesan (2008),
“Understanding and Enabling Marketplace Literacy in Subsistence
Contexts: The Development of a Consumer and Entrepreneurial
Literacy Educational Program in South India,” International
Journal of Educational Development, 28 (3), 300-19.
Viswanathan, Madhubalan, Jose Antonio Rosa, and James Edwin
Harris (2005), “Decision Making and Coping of Functionally Illit-
erate Consumers and Some Implications for Marketing Manage-
ment,” Journal of Marketing, 69 (1), 15-31.
Viswanathan, Madhubalan, Anju Seth, Roland Gau, and Avinish Cha-
turvedi (2009), “Ingraining Product-Relevant Social Good into
Business Processes in Subsistence Marketplaces: The Sustainable
Market Orientation,” Journal of Macromarketing, 29 (4), 406-25.
Viswanathan, Madhubalan, Clifford J. Shultz, and Srinivas Sridharan
(2014), “Introduction to the Special Issue on Subsistence Market-
places: From Micro-Level Insights to Macro-Level Impact,”
Journal of Macromarketing, 34 (2), 119-21.
Viswanathan, Madhubalan, Srinivas Sridharan, Robin Ritchie, Srinivas
Venugopal, and Kiju Jung (2012), “Marketing Interactions in
Subsistence Marketplaces: A Bottom-up Approach to Designing
Public Policy,” Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, 31 (2),
159-77.
Wallendorf, Melanie (2001), “Literally Literacy,” Journal of
Consumer Research, 27 (4), 505-11.
Wang, Chunchao, Xianbo Zhou, and Chenglie Zhang (2015),
“The Impact of Social Capital on Wages of Rural Migrants and
Its Gender Difference in China,” Journal of Macromarketing,
35 (2), 202-17.
Wang, Jinfeng and Qian Tian (2014), “Consumer Vulnerability and
Marketplace Exclusion: A Case of Rural Migrants and Financial
Services in China,” Journal of Macromarketing, 34 (1), 45-56.
Weidner, Kelly L., Jose´ Antonio Rosa, and Madhu Viswanathan
(2010), “Marketing to Subsistence Consumers: Lessons from
Practice,” Journal of Business Research, 63 (6), 559-69.
Weinberger, Michelle F. (2015), “Dominant Consumption Rituals and
Intragroup Boundary Work: How Non-Celebrants Manage Con-
flicting Relational and Identity Goals,” Journal of Consumer
Research, 42 (3), 378-400.
White, Leanne and Deniel Leung (2015), “Wishing You Good Health,
Prosperity and Happiness: Exploring the Rituals and Traditions of
Chinese New Year,” in Rituals and Traditional Events in the Mod-
ern World, Leung Laing, Jennifer, and Warwick Frost, eds. New
York: Routledge, 79-89.
Wong, Keung, Daniel Fu, Chang Ying Li, and Xue Song He (2007),
“Rural Migrant Workers in Urban China: Living a Marginalized
Life,” International Journal of Social Welfare, 16 (1), 32-40.
Wong, Keung, Daniel Fu, and He Xue Song (2008), “The Resilience
of Migrant Workers in Shanghai China: The Roles of Migration
Stress and Meaning of Migration,” International Journal of Social
Psychiatry, 54 (2), 131-43.
Xiang, Biao (2007), “How Far Are the Left-Behind Left Behind? A
Preliminary Study in Rural China,” Population, Space and Place,
13 (3), 179-91.
Yan, Yunxiang (1996), The Flow of Gifts: Reciprocity and Social Net-
works in a Chinese Village. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Yang, Mayfair Mei-hui (1994), Gifts, Favors, and Banquets: The Art of
Social Relationships in China. London, UK: Cornell University Press.
Yusuf, Farhart and Gordon Brooks (2010), “Demographics and
Consumption Patterns in Urban China,” Population Research and
Policy Review, 29 (1), 5-17.
Zhang, Heather Xiaoquan, Bin Wu, and Richard Sanders (2007),
Marginalisation in China: Perspectives on Transition and Globa-
lisation. UK: Ashgate Publishing.
Zhang, Li (2012), In Search of Paradise: Middle-Class Living in a
Chinese Metropolis. New York: Cornell University Press.
Zhang, Kevin Honglin and Shunfeng Song (2003), “Rural–Urban
Migration and Urbanization in China: Evidence from Time-
Series and Cross-Section Analyses,” China Economic Review, 14
(4), 386-400.
Zhao, Bin (1997), “Consumerism, Confucianism, and Communism:
Making Sense of China Today,” New Left Review, 43-59.
Zhou, Joyce Xin, Mark J. Arnold, Arun Pereira, and Jun Yu (2010),
“Chinese Consumer” Decision-making Styles: A Comparison
between the Coastal and Inland Regions,” Journal of Business
Research, 63 (1), 45-51.
Chu et al.
457

Author Biographies
Rongwei Chu is an associate professor of Marketing at Fudan Uni-
versity, where he obtained his PhD. His research interests deal with
poverty, consumer well-being, Bottom of the Pyramid, and
migration.
Jie Gao Fowler is an associate professor of Marketing at Valdosta
State University. She obtained her doctorate at the University
of Nebraska-Lincoln. Her research interests include fashion,
gender, and especially cross-cultural issues dealing with Chinese
consumers.
James W. Gentry is the Maurice J. and Alice Hollman Professor of
Marketing at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln. He obtained his
doctorate at Indiana University and has taught at Kansas State Uni-
versity, Oklahoma State University, Wisconsin-Madison, and
Nebraska. His research interests deal with family, gender, aging, and
cross-cultural issues.
Xin Zhao is senior lecturer at Lancaster University. He obtained his
doctorate at the University of Utah, and has taught at the University of
Hawaii, Nebraska, and Lancaster. His research interests are Chinese
consumer culture, business history, market development, and visual
consumption.
458
Journal of Macromarketing 38(4)
