INNOVATION SUCCESS: AN EMPIRICAL STUDY OF SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS IN THE CONTEXT OF THE OPEN SOURCE PARADIGM (Spine title: Software Development Performance) (Thesis format: Monograph) by Jorge A. Colazo Graduate Program in Business Administration A thesis submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy Faculty of Graduate Studies The University of Western Ontario London, Ontario, Canada Jorge A. Colazo 2007
Library and Bibliotheque et Archives Canada Archives Canada Published Heritage Direction du Branch Patrimoine de Iedition 395 Wellington Street 395, rue Wellington Ottawa ON K1A ON4 Ottawa ON K1A ON4 Canada Canada Your file Votre reference ISBN: 978-0-494-36686-8 Our file Notre reference ISBN: 978-0-494-36686-8 NOTICE: AVIS: The author has granted a non- L'auteur a accorde une licence non exclusive exclusive license allowing Library permettant a la Bibliotheque et Archives and Archives Canada to reproduce, Canada de reproduire, publier, archiver, publish, archive, preserve, conserve_ sauvegarder, conserver, transmettre au public communicate to the public by par telecommunication ou par IInternet; preter, telecommunication or on the Internet, distribuer et vendre des theses partout dans loan, distribute and sell theses le monde, a des fins commerciales ou autres, worldwide, for commercial or non- sur support microforme , papier , electronique commercial purposes, in microform, etlou autres formats. paper, electronic andlor any other formats_ The author retains copyright L'auteur conserve la propriete du droit d'auteur ownership and moral rights in et des droits moraux qui protege cette these. this thesis. Neither the thesis Ni la these ni des extraits substantiels de nor substantial extracts it celle-ci ne doivent etre imprimes ou autrement may be printed or otherwise reproduits sans son autorisation: reproduced without the author's permission: In compliance with the Canadian Conformement a la loi canadienne Privacy Act some supporting sur la protection de la vie privee, forms may have been removed quelques formulaires secondaires from this thesis. ont ete enleves de cette these. While these forms may be included Bien que ces formulaires in the document page count; aient inclus dans la pagination, their removal does not represent ilny aura aucun contenu manquant: any loss of content from the thesis_ Canada from
THE UNIVERSITY OF WESTERN ONTARIO FACULTY OF GRADUATE STUDIES CERTIFICATE OF EXAMINATION Supervisor Examiners Dr. Kevin B. Hendricks Dr. Hamid Noori Co-Supervisor Dr. Mark Dr. Robert Klassen Dr: Larry Menor Supervisory Committee Dr: Deborah Compeau Dr_ Menor Dr. Anabel Quan-Haase The thesis by Jorge Adrian Colazo entitled: Innovation Success: An Empirical Study of Software Development Projects in the Context of the Open Source Paradigm is accepted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy Date Chair of the Thesis Examination Board Perry Larry
Abstract New product development (NPD) performance is relevant subject within operations management, particularly in the software industry. Though project managers have tried to improve the software NPD process, a new paradigm has recently attracted their attention: the Open Source Software (OSS) model. OSS is developed collaboratively mainly by dispersed teams of volunteers under licensing terms that make the complete source code publicly available and allow redistribution of modified versions In contrast to prevalent norms, OSS thrives not by enclosing intellectual property (IP) but rather by opening it through the project'$ license. The first research question is therefore: How do OSS licenses impact development performance? Secondly, OSS   enables   the   collaboration of users as co-developers, prompting  the question: How does the community-level structure of an OSS development project impact development performance? Finally, a "core developer team is the locus of decisions for the project; leading to the third question: How does the collaboration structure of the core development team impact development performance? This is an empirical field study of working OSS projects archival data   from electronic sources. NPD performance was measured project productivity, product quality, and product popularity. Social network analysis was used for the measurement of iii long key using using
the collaboration structure of  core developer   teams. The   analysis was   done regression and time series techniques. Besides  improving over extant work from the research design standpoint; this dissertation offers several contributions_ The impact on performance of the project's IP policy in the form of license choice was confirmed and an association between the relative size of the external community and performance was found Also, this study showed that product quality suffers when NPD projects are crowded; but that the amount of boundary spanning activity was positively associated with product quality. This is also the first study to operationalize and test the concept of temporal dispersion in distributed teams Other contributions refer to the practical design of NPD project teams and their task allocation policy. Keywords: New Product Development,  Innovation,  Software  Projects, Open  Source Software,  Productivity,  Quality,  Social  Network   Analysis,  Linear  Regression,  Time Series, Empirical Research, Archival Data Analysis. iv using
