Beating the odds in the innovation arena: The role of market and technology
signals classification and noise
Mark A.A.M. Leendersa,⁎, Corné A.M. Voermansb
aUniversity of Amsterdam, ASCoR, Room B116a, Kloveniersburgwal 48, NL-1012 CX, The Netherlands
bPhilips Lighting B.V ., Mathildelaan 1, 5611 BD Eindhoven, The Netherlands
Received 24 August 2004; received in revised form 4 April 2005; accepted 6 October 2005
Available online 28 February 2006
Abstract
Innovation is a risky business. Notwithstanding the attention in research on the determinants of innovation success, the estimates of the
extremely high failure rates (ranging from 40% to 90%) have not come down. As a result, new approaches have to be found to address the
issues that prevent organizations from reaching innovation success over a longer period of time. In this study, Signal Detection Theory(SDT) is introduced to show that it may be less important to improve innovation practices in companies, than it is to change the nature of
the projects that enter the corporate innovation funnel. In our empirical study of 44 innovation projects in the pharmaceutical and
electronics industry, we show that pursuing more noisy signals (uncertain technological and market opportunities) is currently beneficial forinnovation success. In general, companies allocate too few resources to noisy innovation opportunities. Interestingly, we find a positive, andnot an inverted U-shaped, relationship between noise/signal ratios and innovation success. This indicates that there are almost no companies
that take too much risk in the current competitive environment and that many can gain from increasing their noise tolerance. The
implications from this study are quite counter-intuitive in a sense that ‘risk’is not the cause of the innovation problems, but may be a
solution.
© 2006 Published by Elsevier Inc.
Keywords: Innovation; Success; Signal Detection Theory (SDT); Noise; Blockbusters
1. Introduction
Innovations are the life-blood of most firms ( Shane, 2000;
Wind & Mahajan, 1988 ). Yet, while it appears that many
companies only develop some successful innovations by
accident, a few other firms seem to have a consistent supplyof rewarding innovations ( Crawford & Di Benedetto, 2003 ).
For instance, the Minnesota Mining and ManufacturingCompany (3M) is widely recognized as a truly successful andinnovative company. Today, 3M makes 66,000 products asdiverse as fire hose linings, surgical gowns, bingo supplies andScotch tape (3M Annual Report 2003). The company
consistently ranks in the top 10 of Fortune's list of most
admired companies and makes more than a quarter of its salesfrom products less than 4 years old. In the biotechnology
industry, companies like Amgen have become industry leaderswith a consistent flow of new products such as Epogen , while
other companies in the industry are taken over by others
because they have no new products to replace their older ones,
which are running out of patent protection.
The potential causes for innovation performance differences
have been widely established in earlier research, such as:variations in the quality of market analysis, differences inproduct design capabilities, timing, and marketing efforts(Griffin & Hauser, 1996; Henard & Szymanski, 2001; Ottum
& Moore, 1997 ). From a strategic marketing perspective, many
companies seem to have trouble accumulating and exploiting
scarce innovation resources. Scientists adhering to the resource-based views argue that companies have to acquire andleverage
scarce and difficult to imitate resources and capabilities toestablish a sustainable competitive advantage ( Barney, 1991;
Day, 1994; McEvily, Eisenhardt, & Prescott, 2004 ). Interest-
ingly, while much research is available and knowledge grows
Industrial Marketing Management 36 (2007) 420 –429
⁎Corresponding author. Tel.: +31 20 5256695; fax: +31 20 5253681.
E-mail addresses: M.A.A.M.Leenders@uva.nl (M.A.A.M. Leenders),
Corne.voermans@philips.com (C.A.M. Voermans).
0019-8501/$ - see front matter © 2006 Published by Elsevier Inc.
doi:10.1016/j.indmarman.2005.10.004
on why some firms are more innovative than others, the
difficulties surrounding innovation hardly seem to disappear(Cooper, 1993; Crawford & Di Benedetto, 2003; Montoya-
Weiss & Calantone, 1994 ).
One of the key reasons for failure seems to be inherently
linked to the uncertainties surrounding any new product andservice. That is, before technological and market changes leadto new products and services, organizations have to identify
and prioritize opportunities and allocate resources to develop
them further. Since opportunities are surrounded withdifferent degrees of uncertainty, opportunity identificationand classification are far from trivial ( Shane, 2000 ).
Interestingly, the identification of an opportunity may notcome from active search by an individual or organization. Itmay come from the recognition of the value of newinformation that is received through open channels with the
environment ( Kirzner, 1997 ). Since the recognition is based
on prior knowledge and experiences of the people in theorganization, only a subset of organizations will possess abackground that triggers the opportunity identification ( Shane,
2000 ).
In the present study, we introduce and test a relatively
unknown theory from physics and psychology named SignalDetection Theory (SDT) that can complement current insights
on innovation performance. SDT provides a theoretical
approach to the identification and selection of signals thatare pursued for further action by individuals or organizations.SDT is now emerging as a modeling tool in marketing andother business areas, such as advertisement recognition testing(Cradit, Tashchian, & Hofacker, 1994 ), sales effectiveness
(Knowles, Grove, & Keck, 1994 ), auditing ( Karim & Siegel,
1998 ), and competition ( Lampel & Shapira, 2001 ). This
theory seems to be very valuable in relation to existing
resource-based research on openness and absorptive capacityas it provides a clue as to why companies may, or may not,pursue certain market and technology signals ( Cohen &
Levinthal, 1990 ).
SDT is a model on how humans detect (filter) signals in a
background of interference or noise. Noise blurs the signal andis therefore a burden that needs to be reduced. However, from
a marketing and innovation performance perspective, which is
the focus of this study, noise may not be a burden at all since itmay distract competitors from detecting the same signal. Thismay lead to an early product introduction and probably a betterperformance in the market. However, as will be discussedlater, there are also other stakeholders that often preventorganizations from pursuing noisy signals. All these resultingforces together result in the fact that organizational filters
range from ‘too loose ’(resulting in too many dead ends and
costs) to ‘too rigid ’(resulting in too few unique competitive
breakthroughs).
The next section of this paper discusses the concept and
aspects of learning and SDT. We test our framework with datafrom two industries, namely consumer electronics and pharma-ceuticals ( n=44). After that, we analyze our results and present
our findings. Finally, the managerial implications, and sugges-
tions for further research are presented.2. Theory on learning and SDT
The process of knowledge acquisition and leveraging is often
labelled “organizational learning ”. For example, Slater and
Narver (1995) define the process of learning as a three-stage
process that includes information acquisition, informationdissemination, and shared interpretation. Others conceptualizethe organizational learning process as the acquisition, dissem-
ination, and utilization of information ( Argote, 1999 ). While in
these definitions information is in the core, the purpose of
learning is related to knowledge improvement or knowledge
creation. Nonaka and Takeuchi (1995) state: “learning is
defined as the activities through which group members acquire,share, and combine knowledge into a collective product throughexperience with another ”. As a facilitator, a learning orientation
of the organization consisting of a high commitment to learning,
shared vision, open mindedness, and adequate knowledge
sharing, is needed ( Calantone, Cavusgil & Zhao, 2002 ).
The theory of knowledge creation is anchored to the
assumption that human knowledge is created and expandedthrough the social interaction between tacit and explicitknowledge. Prencipe and Tell (2001) argue that: “the quintes-
sential knowledge creation process takes place when tacitknowledge is converted into explicit knowledge. In other words,
our hunches, perceptions, mental models, beliefs, and experi-
ences are converted to something that can be communicated and
transmitted in formal and systematic language between people ”.
Given the uncertainties and limited data in innovation, thisprocess plays an important role in innovation in general.
From a broader resource-based perspective, the term acquisi-
tion and leveraging refer to distinctive types of activities that canengender competitive advantage from technological and market-
based competencies. Acquisition is the process by which
organizations absorb, develop, and renew competencies. Lever-aging encompasses the transfer of knowledge to differentorganizational units and the exploitation, integration, andrecombination of extant competencies ( McEvily et al., 2004 ).
Learning is therefore a key organizational phenomena that is oftenconceptualized as a sequential or linked process within andbetween functional groups. As a result, understanding how groups
learn, provides the micro foundation for understanding organiza-
tional learning ( Hatch, 1997 ). A group is made up of individuals
who share some identity and whose tasks are interdependent. As aresult, they have to show some level of cooperative behaviour tobe successful. Many different groups exist in organizations andthey can be large or small, temporarily or for a very long time.What is especially important in innovation are functional andcross-functional groups ( Griffin & Hauser, 1996 ). Functional
groups provide ‘depth ’in a certain functional area such as R&D or
Marketing ( Allen, 1977 ). The use of cross-functional groups
facilitates integration and time to market for developing newproducts ( Crawford & Di Benedetto, 2003 ,p .3 0 3 ) .A sar e s u l t ,
innovation performance is to a considerable extent the result of along process of information or knowledge acquisition and sharingwithin and between functional groups. So, successful innovationover a longer period of time has to be facilitated with a learning
process that scores high on a ranges of key metrics or strategic421 M.A.A.M. Leenders, C.A.M. Voermans / Industrial Marketing Management 36 (2007) 420 –429
success factors such as (see Brockhoff, 2003 ): (1) information
acquisition, (2) group learning, and (3) sharing (also with othercompanies and customers).
Before we will identify some key learning/innovation
metrics and develop hypotheses, Signal Detection Theory isintroduced.
2.1. SDT
Signal Detection Theory provides a theoretical approach to
the identification and selection of signals. SDT is a model onhow humans detect signals in a background of interference ornoise. The human observer considers a particular event anddecides whether it is a signal or noise. SDT assumes that there isan overlap between the distributions of signal and noise, so thata particular observation may have come from either distribution.
The observer then has to decide whether to accept or reject the
event as a signal. There are four possibilities in the decisionmatrix of the observer ( Cradit et al., 1994 ):
1. the observer notices a noise when it is a signal (miss)
2. the observer notices a signal when it is a signal (a hit)3. the observer notices a noise when it is a noise (correct
identification)
4. the observer notices a signal when it is a noise (false alarm).
The observer should make a decision concerning the event
and classify it either as a signal or a noise. There are two maincomponents in the decision-making process: informationacquisition and criterion. Th e purpose of acquiring more
information is to increase the likelihood of getting either a hitor a correct identification. The second component is subjective; it
is based upon the own judgement of the observer. This judgement
might be based on existing knowledge capabilities, mentalmodels, and premises. From a corporate perspective, certainsignals can only be detected by adjusting the noise tolerance.
There is a major difference between business and physics: in
physics information has the role of eliminating noise as much aspossible. By eliminating noise in physics, the level of risk indecision-making is decreased. In business, noise is almost a
necessary element as without noise the signal can be detected by
any competitor, which makes it a less attractive new productopportunity. The ability of being able to detect and act upon(weak) signals in an environment with large amounts of noise,before others do, can lead to a competitive advantage becausethe market will be less crowded and/or positions can be betterdefended ( Day, 1994 ). This argument also relates to the
competitive forces approach of Porter (1980) and it puts an
emphasis on the intensity of competition in the industry or
market segment that determines profitability.
2.2. Hypotheses
As mentioned before, information and knowledge leveraging
are considered two key components of the learning process andultimately innovation success. Relevant information flows can
come from a variety of sources, including internal databases,which contain to a certain extent the firm's organizational
memory, and external sources such as journals, reports, andfrom interactions with other firms ( Mascitelli, 2000 ). In an
innovation context, the detection and generation of relevantmarket and technology information is linked to resources suchas absorptive capacity or open relationships with the environ-ment ( Cohen & Levinthal, 1990 ). Organizational openness
relates to the mere availability of relevant information through a
range of channels and this information is later transferred
through face-to-face interactions and through dialogue to otheremployees of groups. Since the core groups in innovation arefunctional (specialized in for example basic science) or cross-
functional (such as a cross functional team), the following
hypotheses are formulated as a starting point:
H1. There is a positive relationship between openness of the
corporate innovation system and innovation success.
H2. There is a positive relationship between knowledge
leveraging within and between functional departments and
innovation success.
Signal detection theory argues that the interpretation of all
(new) information depends on the sensitivity of the observer. Asa result, the availability of information alone and capable
downstream leveraging capabilities are not sufficient; the noise
filter determines whether a piece of information is detected at alland classified as an opportunity. The level of success in filteringsignals in a background of interference of noise is believed to bedependent on what we will call the filter sensitivity (see Fig. 2 ).
Filter sensitivity relates to the firm's degree of sensitivity
with respect to responses to market and technology signals. So,it indicates whether a firm has a low or high threshold level to
respond. This dimension relates to the firm's willingness to take
risk. In cases of high noise levels (upper part of Fig. 2 ), where
signals are really blurred, there can be two types of outcomes:(1) a competitive miss (no action was taken) or (2) a competitivehit (action was taken). In cases of low noise (lower part), acompetitive hit is not likely to be obtained because othercompanies see the same opportunity, resulting in me-toocompetition. If there is no uncertainty and the company decides
not to take action, there was likely no sound business case to
pursue.
Fig. 2 shows the application of SDT in competitive
innovation. If one compares it with Fig. 1 , there are two
miss hitno yes
SignalResponse
false
alarmNoyes
correct
identifi-cation
Fig. 1. The Signal Detection Theory (SDT) model.422 M.A.A.M. Leenders, C.A.M. Voermans / Industrial Marketing Management 36 (2007) 420 –429
major differences. First, there is no signal and noise distinction
because there is always an opportunity (signal) behindinnovation work and as a result there is only more or lessnoise (vertical axe). Second, there is a special cell called“competitive hit ”, which relates to the fact that competitors may
not pursue the signal as well, likely to lead to above averagereturns in the market ( Porter, 1980 ). It is important to note that
more noise is not similar to a more innovative product.
Innovativeness is related to the technologies or products that are
developed to address the opportunity. Innovative or lessinnovative products may be developed for all quadrants.
An interesting question is what happens if a company adopts
more noisy signals? Fig. 2 shows that these types of companies
position themselves in the competitive hit arena (lower figure).A noise neutral innovator will be equally active in all fourquadrants (upper figure). A noise tolerant firm will be biased
towards the upper right cell (competitive hits).
There are many forces that determine the level of signal/
noise sensitivity an organization wants, or can, achieve in itsinnovation efforts. Stakeholder theory ( Freeman, 1984 ) sug-
gests that organizations have to manage many relationships inan unpredictable environment and many stakeholders may notlike the focus on more noisy signals. Investors and credit rating
agencies, for example, may not prefer these initiatives. Others,such as innovative partners and entrepreneurial employees, maywelcome a higher noise tolerance as illustrated by the followingcase description:
Box 1
Epogen of the biotechnology company Amgen
Since its foundation in 1980, the company Amgen
has grown from a handful of employees at its
Thousand Oaks headquarters in California, to a
company employing more than 10,000 people span-
ning the globe in 2002. Amgen discovers, develops,
manufactures and markets human therapeutics
based on advanced cellular and molecular biology.
Its annual revenue is around $ 6 billion in 2003.
The success of Amgen started with Epogen.
Epogen is a recombinant erythropoietin product.
Erythropoietin is a protein hormone that origins from
the kidney and stimulates red blood cell formation.
Patients with impaired kidney function do not
produce sufficient quantities of erythropoietin and,
as a result, develop chronic anemia. Without ade-
quate amounts of erythropoietin, there are too few
red blood cells to deliver oxygen throughout the body.
Amgen was the only company to pursue and
develop a product based on the hormone. It seems
that Amgen's filter sensitivity allowed it to detect
and pursue the signal and to isolate and synthesize
the human erythropoietin gene, which was extre-
mely difficult with no guarantee for success. Other
firms also thought there was no big market.
However, the leading scientists devised a clever
way of isolating the human gene based on a new
method of screening human genomic libraries. After
two years of long days and nights in the laboratory
they succeeded in isolating the human gene and this
placed Amgen in the leadership position worldwide
to develop a therapeutic agent. After that, the
market exploded as tests showed beneficial results
for all types of patients (and illegally for athletes).
Sources: www.Amgen.com ,A m g e np r e s s
releases.
We recognize that at some point, setting the right level of
noise tolerance becomes a delicate balancing act with respect to
all stakeholders.1For example, if filters are too loose, (too)
many signals will be pursued, leading to many dead ends andwasted resources that could paralyze a firm's innovation systemNoise Neutral Innovator 
Noise Tolerant Innovator   No                              High
Low
Level of  Noise 
Firm’s response Yes
 to a signal Competitive 
Hit 
Hit No 
Business case Competitive 
Miss 
Filter Sensitivity
 No                                                 Yes  High 
Low 
Level of  Noise 
Firm’s response 
 to a signal Competitive
Hit 
Filter Sensitivity
Fig. 2. SDT models for two types of organizations.1There are many strategies a firm can follow with respect to secretly hiding
initiatives and signaling that it is, or is not, pursuing certain signals. This is part
of how companies try to protect advantages or try to create a lead-timeadvantage. However, in this study we focus on what is actually pursued in theNPD funnel.423 M.A.A.M. Leenders, C.A.M. Voermans / Industrial Marketing Management 36 (2007) 420 –429
and performance. If filters are too tight, insufficient competitive
hits will occur, leading also to suboptimal performance as well.
However given the low levels of noise tolerance of importantstakeholder such as banks and shareholders, we expect that inthe current environment, accepting more noise is better forperformance. So we expect that:
H3. In the current business environment, there is a positive
relationship between noise/signal (tolerance) and innovationsuccess.
By conducting a comprehensive test of the hypotheses, we
hope to be able to show that SDT's key noise concept can offeradditional explanatory power in explaining innovation success.As such, it can establish SDT in an innovation context.
3. Methodology
3.1. The research population and sampling
The empirical part of this study was conducted in two
industries: pharmaceuticals and electronics. We opted for theseindustries for several reasons. First, innovation plays an importantrole in these industries and relatively many companies areinvolved in innovation activities. Second, these companies pursueprojects with high and low levels of noise around market and
technology signals. Finally, the two industries cover a process
industry and an assembly/manufacturing industry. It seems
interesting to explore whether there are similar mechanismsbehind success. The final data set consists of 24 biotechnologyprojects and 20 electronics projects in the Netherlands andBelgium. The projects range from recombinant human insulin anda HIV test to a large Xenon car light project. The average projectsize is $25 million Euros with the most expensive one being an
estimated $200 million Euros. The sample was developed by
contacting firms in this industry randomly from a large list ofcompanies mentioned in trade journals and identifying projectmanagers that were willing to participate in the interviews. The
final response rate of companies in the sample was 80%.
3.2. Questionnaire
Data were collected by means of semi-structured interviews
of about 1 –1.5 h at the company site. With respect to the open
parts of the interview, notes were taken and they were later send
to the informant to provide feedback. The structured parts were
developed using multi-item scales for the key variables. Theunit of analysis for the questionnaire was the new productdevelopment project and the informant was asked to select themost recent project he/she worked for. We decided to ask for the
most recent instead of successful/unsuccessful to get a morerandom draw of projects and to reduce memory problems.
3.3. Measures
The key measures in this study are: (1) a set of variables
related to “openness of the innovation system ”, (2) a set of
variables related to “knowledge leveraging ”, (3) “noise/signal
ratio ”, and (4) “innovation success ”. We used existing scales as
much as possible and a complete list of the items and their sourceis presented in Appendix 1. We decided not to use measures for
the strength of the signal and noise separately because there was
a strong negative correlation between signal and noise in thedata. As a result, a comprehensive noise/signal measure wasused with higher scores indicating more noise relative to thesignal. Scale analysis was used to make sure that the measuresare uni-dimensional with sufficient reliability. The variable“Resources ”was included as a control variable. The Cronbach α
values of the multi-item scales are acceptable (see Appendix 1).
3.4. The projects in the sample
The response set contains a broad variation of projects,
including breakthrough and incremental innovations (asperceived by the respondent).
Table 1 provides an overview of the level of innovativeness
of the projects that resulted from our sampling approach. The
projects of the sample are relatively important to the companies
concerned: 77% of all the projects are perceived by therespondents to belong to the (future) core of the company.Table 1
Overview of projects in the sample (as perceived by the respondent)
Breakthrough Incremental Total
Pharmaceuticals 14 10 24
Electronics 3 17 20
Total 17 (39%) 27 (61%) 44 (100%)
Table 2Descriptive statistics and inter variable correlations
12 34 56 7 8 9
1 Internal knowledge acquisition 1
2 External knowledge acquisition .022 13 Functional learning .116 .238 1
4 Cross-functional learning .105 .290 .035 1
5 Learning from customers .242 .112 .403 ⁎ .105 1
6 Learning from other firms −.162 .112 .094 .101 .298 ⁎⁎ 1
7 Noise/Signal .101 −.086 −.307 ⁎⁎ .162 .003 .158 1
8 Resources −.003 −.171 .217 −.031 −.186 −.019 −.405 ⁎ 1
9 Innovation Success .273 ⁎⁎ −.160 −.119 −.013 .330 ⁎⁎ .282 .449 ⁎ −.271 1
⁎Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (two-tailed).
⁎⁎Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (two-tailed).424 M.A.A.M. Leenders, C.A.M. Voermans / Industrial Marketing Management 36 (2007) 420 –429
4. Results
Before we test our hypotheses, the inter-variable correlation
matrix is presented in Table 2 .
The correlations matrix reveals that there is a high positive
correlation between functional learning and learning fromcustomers. This is in line with the general trend to use customerfeedback, customer visits, and prototyping in innovation. The
correlation matrix also shows some negative relationships
between variables. A negative correlation is revealed betweennoise/signal and functional learning (intra departmental). Thismay indicate that specialized groups are less interested todevelop new knowledge based on weak signals surrounded byconsiderable amounts of noise. For marketing, it is often the casethat the absence of upfront market potential might negativelyaffect the eagerness of marketers to ‘go for it ’. A negative
relationship is also found between resources and noise ( r=
−.405, pb.01). It is important to note that resources were
measured at the project level and not at the firm level. A negativecorrelation between resources and noise could indicate thatprojects with higher noise levels (competitive hit area of the SDTmodel for innovation) are rewarded with a relatively lower levelof resources. Possibly management is having some reservations(related to risk and uncertainty) when awarding project ideas
with resources that are based upon relatively weak signals. As
such, the low levels of allocated resources could resemble‘probing ’before making definite choices, but it may also be a
sign that the noise tolerance is relatively low on average. Finally,the correlation matrix shows that there is a positive correlation
between ‘innovation success' with ‘learning from customers ’
and ‘noise ’.
As a second step, a multiple-regression model is estimated.
Based on the correlations between the independent variables
(rb.5) multicollinearity is not a major problem. To test for a
non-linear effect of noise, we included the main effect for noiseand (noise×noise). To reduce multicollinearity further, thevariables noise and noise×noise were mean centred ( Jaccard,
Turrisi & Wan, 1990 ).
4.1. Factors that affect innovation success
Four independent variables have a significant effect on
innovation success: internal knowledge acquisition, learningfrom other firms, cross-functional learning, and noise/signal.
4.1.1. Openness
Internal knowledge acquisition is significant ( β=396,
pb.05). It shows that proper and active consultation of up-to-
date, reliable and accessible internal knowledge –that holders
are willing to share –has a positive influence on innovation
success. Earlier research has also stressed the importance oforganizational memory that, among others, is embedded in theorganization's knowledge base ( Argote, 1999 ). External
knowledge acquisition is not significant (the negative signmay indicate that there are counter-productive forces in terms ofprotecting resources if firms depend too much on outside
knowledge). Learning from other firms is significant andpositive with respect to innovation performance ( β=.357,
pb.05). It highlights the importance of outside learning that
results from interactions with other firms and openness. Itreveals that learning from other firms, such as co-developingfirms and also universities or research centres, highly contributeto success. H1 is generally supported.
4.1.2. Leveraging knowledge: functional learning and cross-
functional learning
The table shows a positive but not significant βforfunctional
learning . So, although the direction is in line with our
expectations, it does not significantly explain variance ininnovation performance.
Cross-functional learning is significant, but it has a negative
coefficient ( β=−369, pb
.1). Possibly interface management is
over-emphasized in the projects in the sample. In general, cross-
functional interfaces are considered critical in the new product
development process. It is not unlikely that in their efforts tomanage the critical interfaces between for instance Marketingand R&D, the target has been overshot. To put it differently,possibly there is ‘too much cross-functional talking and
cooperation ’(for instance between departments or in multi-
functional project teams). Souder (1988) for example found that
there were organizations where marketing and R&D were too
good friends. In addition, Leenders and Wierenga (2002) found
that there are some negative performance side-effects of certain(formal) organizational integration mechanisms. H2 is notsupported.
4.1.3. Noise/signal
Noise/signal is significant and the coefficient is in the
expected direction ( β=.326, pb.1). The regression analysis
confirms that noise contributes to innovation success. It may
indicate that noise hides weak signals, which are harder todetect, but if pursued lead to more successful new productsbecause other firms do not follow the same track, resulting inless (me-too) competition and higher market performance. So,
Table 3
Multiple regression analysis including a curvilinear noise effect
Independent variable: β t Significance
Openness
Internal knowledge acquisition .396 2.389 .025
External knowledge acquisition −.074 −.460 .650
Learning from customers .151 .873 .391Learning from other firms .357 2.094 .047
Leveraging
Functional learning .107 .572 .572Cross-functional learning −.369 −1.898 .069
Noise tolerance
Noise/signal (mean centred) .326 1.798 .084
Noise×noise (mean centred) .045 .220 .827
Control variable
Resources −.088 −.421 .678
Dependent variable: innovation success.
R
2=.28.425 M.A.A.M. Leenders, C.A.M. Voermans / Industrial Marketing Management 36 (2007) 420 –429
the drawbacks of a more lenient noise classification system
(e.g., information overload, costs of trying many avenues) do
not seem to outweigh the potential benefits.
4.1.3.1. Exploring possible non-linear relationships between
noise and innovation success. It may be the case that noise/
signal has a non-linear effect on performance. In other words,there may be a curvilinear effect or even an optimum. Table 3 ,
however, does not show a significant coefficient for the
noise×noise variable after controlling for the main effects.
The increase in R
2due to the interaction is also not significant.
So, there does not seem to be an optimal level of noise withrespect to performance (inverted U-shape): Increases of noiseare accompanied by increases in performance and there is noturning point where noise starts to influence innovation successnegatively (see Fig. 3 ). H3 is supported.
The curve estimation reveals that the curve has an almost
linear progression. This is a quite remarkable result because
there is quite some variation in the level of noise in the sample.So, it shows no real limit to the benefits of pursuing noisysignals in the current industry environment. On the contrary, themore noise the better. The curve shows an almost linearrelationship between noise and new product performance. Ofcourse, theoretically it is still possible that the figure is differentfor more extreme levels of noise or no noise at all. However, our
study shows that companies may increase innovation perfor-
mance by selecting signals that are less clear and are surroundedwith more noise. From a stakeholder perspective, the resultsshow that noisy signals may not only be pursued from acompetitor perspective, but also from a financial or shareholderperspective as the benefits outweigh the risk.
Different relationships between noise/signal and performance
may exist beyond the noise level included in this study. Maybe
the most likely relationship is that an optimal noise level occurs
somewhere (after that, it really becomes too risky and involvestoo much costs). Another possibly may be that the curve wouldshow a steep increase beyond a certain level of noise. This couldoccur in such cases where no single competitor pursues thesignal. This was for example the case in the pharmaceuticalindustry when the company AstraZeneca developed the drugLosec . The ethical drug completely blocks the acid production in
the stomach to prevent stomach problems. Because all companiesthought this was too rigid to work (noise), it was not pursued.
However, it created one of the most financially successfulproducts ever developed in the pharmaceutical industry. Finally,the curve could show a drop-off after our signal/noise levels. Thiscould occur in case that the risks and costs are really too high forlarger levels of noise relative to the signal.
Finally, we conducted several sensitivity analyses. First, we
added innovativeness to the regression as an independent
variable. Innovativeness was positively related to innovation
success ( β=.28, pb.10) but did not substantially affect the other
coefficients. The correlation between noise and innovativenessisr=.24, pb.1 supporting the notion that noise and innova-
tiveness are different concepts. To test whether there aresubstantial differences between the two industries, we ranseparate regressions for the two industries. However, we foundsimilar patterns in size of the coefficients and their signs. In
addition, independent samples t-tests were done to see whether
the industries differ on the main variables in this study. Overall,we only found significant differences in the average scores forexternal knowledge acquisition (mean Electronic Indus-try=3.15, mean Biotech=3.76) and for resources (meanElectronic Industry=4.05, mean Biotech=3.29). This indicatesthat the pattern in the data is quite general and robust.
5. Conclusions and discussion
The starting point for organizational learning in new product
innovation is often an opportunity or idea with respect to newtechnologies, emerging needs in the market, or both. In thisresearch we adopted a relatively new approach to explain whysome firms are more successful with their innovation effortsthan others: Signal Detection Theory (SDT).
Bringing successful innovations to the market involves a
long process of information processing and learning. SDTshows that the chances for success are related to the level ofnoise that firms find acceptable (related to market andtechnology risk/uncertainty). Interestingly, noise tolerance hastwo sides. If a lot of uncertainty is accepted (low signal to noiseopportunities are pursued), a lot of investments have to be madeand many dead ends have to be taken for granted. This may not
be in line with the interests of important stakeholders such as
banks or credit rating organizations. If only low levels ofuncertainty are accepted, many missed (not recognized) signalswill also result in low innovation performance. In addition,certain stakeholders such as entrepreneurial employees ornetwork partners will not prefer this approach either. The keyquestion that results from this is where the balance currentlylies: Do companies accept too much or too little noise?
From our empirical research in the pharmaceutical and
electronics industry, we learned that companies may currentlybe a little too conservative with the levels of noise they findacceptable –or, to put it differently, that the corporate filters are
too rigid and that they are missing many interesting opportu-nities. A closer look at the relationship between the level ofnoise around the signal and innovation success even showedthat there is currently a linear positive relationship between
noise and new product success.Innovation Success
5                        
4 3 
2
1
05 3 2 14
Noise/ signal
Fig. 3. Relationship between noise/signal and innovation success.426 M.A.A.M. Leenders, C.A.M. Voermans / Industrial Marketing Management 36 (2007) 420 –429
Noise is a combination of all kinds of surplus and non-
relevant technical and market information that distracts anobserver from identifying a signal that could be pursued –if
detected –and could lead to a successful new product. Noise is
making it more difficult to detect a signal, but, maybe a bitparadoxical, this very nature of noise affects new productperformance. Noise contributes to new product success becausenoise ‘hides ’signals and therefore decreases the likelihood that
competitors pursue the same learning track. Thus, if competitors
do not pursue learning it can create a competitive advantage forothers ( Porter, 1980 ). In environments where successful new
products are, to a large extent, based upon achieving andowning first-to-market intellectual property, noise is even a pre-condition for new product success. This is quite counter-intuitive in a sense that innovation risks are not the cause of theinnovation problems and low success rate, but a competitive
opportunity.
Besides detection of the signal, translating the signal into
appropriate action is important too. Here we believe entrepre-neurship may play an important role. Weak signals often resultin weak business cases, that, if rewarded at all, often lacksufficient resources for action because management might tendto prioritize towards stronger, and less risky business cases. Theentrepreneur, driven by personal belief and commitment, also
plays a major role in this arena through the ability of coalition
forming. The importance of the individual, or a small group ofpeople, in detecting and pursuing the weak signal is striking intheEpogen case presented earlier. Research on entrepreneurs
and opportunity identification strongly supports this notion.Shane (2000) argues that more research is need on why some
entrepreneurs manage to exploit some technologies andmarkets. He argues for example that “entrepreneurs can and
will discover those opportunities without searching for them ”.
This may have a direct link to SDT. Our interviews stronglyshowed that the entrepreneurs were noise tolerant and able tocombine information from the market and from technology,which led to the recognition of the weak signal out of noise.
Most of the time, entrepreneurs followed their personal
belief in pursuing a signal based on his or her prior knowledge(Shane, 2000 ). Personal belief and commitment is an important
driving force, as an entrepreneur has to overcome internal
skepticism (existing filters) that results from noise ( ‘this is not
possible ’,‘there is no market for this ’, and so on) and many
times has to fight for resources. Obtaining resources for the newidea based upon weak signals can be very difficult as weaksignals mostly also lead to weak business cases. Weak businesscases lead to difficulties in getting financial support to start up anew product project. Entrepreneurs however do not let
themselves hinder by this, they are willing to take risks to
find the resources they need. These entrepreneurs, eitherindividuals or small groups of people, have a specific capabilityto get things done, such entrepreneurs can be found in anyorganization. These entrepreneurs are capable of coalitionforming and finding other individuals in pursuing andaccomplishing their goals. So, more research is needed tounderstand this process (see also Daniel, Hempel, and
Srinivasan (2003) for a broader discussion on project selection).Overall, the findings of this research contribute to improving
new product innovation success by increasing the awarenessthat there is a rewarding side to the tolerance for –and the
ability to detect and pursue –noisy signals in the innovation
arena.
Acknowledgements
The authors like to thank the Erasmus Research Institute of
Management (ERIM) and the Erasmus ‘Trustfonds ’for their
financial support. Mark Leenders thanks John Hauser and otherMarketing colleagues at M.I.T. in Boston for their support andcomments on earlier versions during his 6-month visit.
Appendix A. Overview of measurement scales
Internal knowledge acquisition
Items Source1. Information sources inside the firm
were easy to accessMoorman and Miner (1997)
2. Information inside the firm was reliable Moorman and Miner (1997)
3. Information inside the firm was updated Moorman and Miner (1997)
4. Holders of information were willing
to share and cooperateMoorman and Miner (1997)
Cronbach αreliability of 0.7469.
External knowledge acquisition
Items Source5. The knowledge potential of external information
sources (literature, universities, internet) was
known and exploitedKessler, Bierly, and
Gopalakrishnan (2000)
6. External information sources were easy to access Kessler et al. (2000)
7. External firms (customers, suppliers, others)
were an important source of informationKessler et al. (2000)
8. External information was reliable Kessler et al. (2000)
Cronbach αreliability of 0.7162.
Learning from customers
Items Source
9. Feed-back and learning from customers were
actively pursuedLynn, Morone, and
Paulson (1996)
10. Some form of prototyping and/or test projects,
including iterative feed-back loops with customers,
were used in the projectLynn et al. (1996)
11. Customers were/are open and willing to share Lynn et al. (1996)
12. Customers provided both explicit and tacit knowledge Mascitelli (2000)
13. Tacit knowledge from customers was important Mascitelli (2000)
Cronbach αreliability of 0.7597.
Learning from other firms
Items Source14. There was involvement of other firm(s) in the development
of the productTsai (2001)
15. Other firm(s) were developing a complementary product
16. The level of openness of the other firm(s) was appropriate Tsai (2001)
17. The level of trust between the two firms was appropriate Tsai (2001)
Cronbach αreliability of 0.6806.427 M.A.A.M. Leenders, C.A.M. Voermans / Industrial Marketing Management 36 (2007) 420 –429
Functional learning
Items Source18. With this project a lot was
learned within ResearchLynn, Skov,
and Abel (1999)
19. With this project a lot was
learned within DevelopmentLynn et al. (1999)
20. With this project a lot was learned within
MarketingLynn et al. (1999)
21. Problem solving and trial-and-error
(based upon today's technology) within thedepartment were an important source ofknowledge creationLynn et al. (1996)
22. Experiments within the department were an
important source of (new) knowledge creationLynn et al. (1996)
23. Tacit knowledge within the department was
important for learningMascitelli (2000)
Cronbach αreliability of 0.6814.
Crossunctional learning
Items Source24. Knowledge transferred easily from
Research to DevelopmentOttum and Moore (1997)
25. Knowledge transferred easily from
Development to MarketingOttum and Moore (1997)
26. Knowledge transferred easily from
Research to MarketingOttum and Moore (1997)
27. It was possible to by-pass certain
departments to gather new knowledgeOttum and Moore (1997)
Cronbach αreliability of 0.7714.
Noise/Signal (higher scores mean more noise relative to the signal)
Items Source28. The idea for the new product came
from a weak technological signalShane and Venkataraman (2000)
29. The idea for the new product came
from a weak market signalShane and Venkataraman (2000)
30. Competitors clearly missed the signal
that led to this innovationShane and Venkataraman (2000)
Cronbach αreliability of 0.6519.
Noise/Signal Innovation successItems Source37. The project was a success with regard to costs Cooper (1993)
38. The project was a success with regard to time Cooper (1993)
39. The project was a success with regard to
Return On InvestmentCooper (1993)
40. The project was a success with regard to
competitivenessCooper (1993)
Cronbach αreliability of 0.6043.
Resources (single item)Item Source
41. Availability of resources for the project was no issue Argote (1999)
References
Allen, T. J. (1977). Managing the flow of technology. Cambridge: MIT
press.
Argote, L. (1999). Organizational learning: Creating, retaining and transfer-
ring knowledge. Boston: Kluwer Academic Press.
Barney, J. (1991). Firm resources and sustained competitive advantage. Journal
of Management ,17,9 9−120.Brockhoff, K. (2003). Exploring strategic R&D success factors. Technology
Analysis and Strategic Management ,13(3), 333 −348.
Calantone, R. J., Cavusgil, S. T., & Zhao, Y. (2002). Learning orientation, firm
innovation capability, and firm performance. Industrial Marketing Man-
agement ,31, 515−524.
Cohen, W. M., & Levinthal, D. A. (1990). Absorptive capacity: A new
perspective on learning and innovation. Administrative Science Quarterly ,
35, 128−152.
Cooper, R. G. (1993). Winning at new products. Cambridge: Addison-Wesley.
Cradit, J. D., Tashchian, A., & Hofacker, C. F. (1994). Signal detection theory
and single observation designs: Methods and indices for advertising
recognition testing. Journal of Marketing Research ,31,1 1 7−127.
Crawford, M., & Di Benedetto, A. (2003). New products management. Boston:
McGraw-Hill.
Daniel, H. Z., Hempel, D. J., & Srinivasan, N. (2003). Project selection; a
process analysis. Industrial Marketing Management ,32,3 9−54.
Day, G. S. (1994). The capabilities of market-driven organizations. Journal of
Marketing ,58,3 7−52.
Freeman, R. E. (1984). Strategic management: A stakeholder approach. Boston:
Pitman.
Griffin, A., & Hauser, J. R. (1996). Integrating marketing and R&D: A review
and analysis of the literature. Journal of Product Innovation Management ,
13, 191−215.
Hatch, M. J. (1997). Organization theory. New York: Oxford University Press.
Henard, D. H., & Szymanski, D. M. (2001). Why some new products are more
successful than others. Journal of Marketing Research ,38, 362−375.
Jaccard, J., Turrisi, R., & Wan, C. K. (1990). Interaction effects in multiple
regression. Thousand Oaks: Sage University Papers.
Karim, K. E., & Siegel, P. H. (1998). A signal detection theory approach to
analysing the efficiency and effectiveness of auditing to detect management
fraud. Managerial Auditing Journal ,13, 367−375.
Kessler, E. H., Bierly, P. E., & Gopalakrishnan, S. (2000). Internal versus
external learning in new product development: Effects on speed, costs, and
competitive advantage. R&D Management ,30(3), 213 −224.
Kirzner, I. (1997). Entrepreneurial discovery and the competitive market
process: An Austrian approach. Journal of Economic Lit ,35,6 0−85.
Knowles, P. A., Grove, S. J., & Keck, K. (1994). Signal detection theory and
sales effectiveness. Journal of Personal Selling and Sales Management ,14
(2), 1−14.
Lampel, J., & Shapira, Z. (2001). Judgemental errors, interactive norms, and the
difficulty of detecting strategic surprises. Organization Science ,12,
599−611.
Leenders, M. A. A. M., & Wierenga, B. (2002). The effectiveness of different
mechanisms for integrating marketing and R&D. Journal of Product
Innovation Management ,19, 305−317.
Lynn, G. S., Morone, J. G., & Paulson, A. S. (1996). Marketing and
discontinuous innovation: The probe and learn process. California
Management Review ,38(3), 8−37.
Lynn, G. S., Skov, R. B., & Abel, K. D. (1999). Practices that support team
learning and their impact on speed to market and new product success.Journal of Product Innovation Management ,16(5), 439 −454.
Mascitelli, R. (2000). From experience: Harnessing tacit knowledge to achieve
breakthrough innovation. Journal of Product Innovation Management ,17,
179−193.
McEvily, S., Eisenhardt, K. M., & Prescott, J. E. (2004). The global acquisition,
leverage, and protection of technological competencies. Strategic Manage-
ment Journal ,25, 713−722.
Moorman, C., & Miner, A. S. (1997). The impact of organizational memory on
new product performance and creativity. Journal of Marketing Research ,34,
91−106.
Motoya-Weiss, M. M., & Calantone, R. (1994). Determinants of new product
performance: A review and meta-analysis. Journal of Product Innovation
Management ,11, 397
−417.
Nonaka, I., & Takeuchi, H. (1995). The knowledge-creating company. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Ottum, B. D., & Moore, W. L. (1997). The role of market information in new
product success/failure. Journal of Product Innovation Management ,14,
258−273.428 M.A.A.M. Leenders, C.A.M. Voermans / Industrial Marketing Management 36 (2007) 420 –429
Porter, M. (1980). Competitive strategies. New York: The Free Press.
Prencipe, A., & Tell, F. (2001). Inter-project learning: Processes and outcomes
of knowledge codification in project-based firms. Research Policy ,30,
1373−1394.
Slater, S. F., & Narver, J. C. (1995). Market orientation and the learning
organization. Journal of Marketing ,59,6 3−74.
Shane, S. (2000). Prior knowledge and discovery of entrepreneurial opportu-
nities. Organization Science ,11(4), 448 −469.
Shane, S., & Venkataraman, S. (2000). The promise of entrepreneurship as a
field of research. Academy of Management Review ,25(1), 217 −226.
Souder, W. E. (1988). Managing relations between R&D and marketing in new
product development projects. Journal of Product Innovation Management ,
5(1), 6−19.
Tsai, P. (2001). Knowledge transfer in intraorganizational networks: effects of
network position and absorptive capacity on business unit innovation and
performance. Academy of Management Journal ,44, 996−1004.Wind, Y., & Mahajan, V. (1988). New product development process: A
perspective for re-examination. Journal of Product Innovation Management ,
5, 304−310.
Mark A.A.M. Leenders is an Assistant Professor at ASCoR, University of
Amsterdam. He holds an MSc in Management Science from the University ofEindhoven and a Ph.D. in Marketing and Technology Management from the
Rotterdam School of Management. His research interests lie in the area of new
product development in blockbuster industries.
Corné A.M. Voermans is a European Marketing Manager of Retail and
Hospitality, Philips Lighting, Business Unit Professional Lamps Europe,
Eindhoven. He holds an MSc in Business Administration from the RotterdamSchool of Management.429 M.A.A.M. Leenders, C.A.M. Voermans / Industrial Marketing Management 36 (2007) 420 –429