   
     
   
    
   
     
   30 Int. J. Learning and Intellectual Capital, Vol. 8, No. 1, 2011    
 
   Copyright © 2011 Inderscience Enterprises Ltd. 
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 Enabling innovati on in knowledge worker teams 
Aino Kianto  
School of Business, 
Lappeenranta University of Technology, 
P.O. Box 20, FI-53851, Lappeenranta, Finland 
E-mail: aino.kianto@lut.fi 
Abstract: Innovation and knowledge creation are processes, which require 
intensive collaboration of several people.  Nevertheless, the constituents of 
successful collaboration in innovation activities are not well-known, and the 
understanding of the inherently social processes by which new intangibles are created is still in its infancy. This paper examines the key facilitators of 
innovation in knowledge-intensive group-level collaboration based on empirical evidence. The results demonstrate that social factors are highly influential for knowledge worker teams’  ability to produce innovations. Teams 
whose internal processes were characterised by trust, vision, aim for 
excellence, participative safety and support  for innovation were likely to attain 
high levels of innovation. Team diversity based on highly visible attributes was 
found to be negatively related with team innovation. Surprisingly, also external 
collaboration seemed to affect team innovation outcomes negatively, except for 
when it was aimed at general scanning for ideas and information. In addition, 
the differences between the more and the less innovative teams arose mainly 
from differences in their internal interact ion processes, rather than patterns of 
collaboration with people outside the team.  
Keywords: teams; groups; innovation; knowledge creation; knowledge 
workers; networks; collaboration. 
Reference  to this paper shou ld be made as follows: Kianto, A. (2011) 
‘Enabling innovation in knowledge worker teams’, Int. J. Learning and 
Intellectual Capital , Vol. 8, No. 1, pp.30–49. 
Biographical notes: Aino Kianto is a Professor of Knowledge Management in 
the School of Business at Lappeenranta University of Technology, Finland. Her 
teaching and research focus on knowledge management, intellectual capital, 
creativity, innovation and organisational renewal. Her current interests include 
the knowledge-based view of the firm and measurement of knowledge-related 
phenomena in organisations. She has authored and co-authored several 
academic articles, papers, books and book chapters related to knowledge 
management, intellectual capital and innovation. 
 
1 Introduction 
While knowledge has always been at the heart of organisations, it is during the past two 
decades that the significance of knowledge as the most important source of economic value has really been unleashed (Foray, 2004). Knowledge has taken the place of land, 
labour and economic capital as the main source of corporate wealth creation and    
    
   
    
   
    
    Enabling innovation in knowledge worker teams 31    
 
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 innovations have become the principal driver of competitiveness (Drucker, 1993; 
Castells, 1996; Quinn et al., 1997; Stewart, 1997). Knowledge workers are the fastest growing segment in the developed countries (Campion et al., 1996; Janz et al., 1997; 
Drucker, 1999, and they produce most of the value added in companies (Stewart, 1997). 
Drucker (1999) has even argued that increasing the productivity of knowledge workers will be the most important economic challenge of the 21st century. 
Knowledge workers are highly educated employees who apply theoretical and 
analytical knowledge to developing new products, services, processes, and procedures (Drucker, 1999; Janz et al., 1997). The essence of knowledge work lies in the 
manipulation of symbols that convey data, information and ideas into new information 
and knowledge, in contrast to the manipulation of concrete materials (Reich, 1992). Consequently, knowledge workers must master, e.g., information processing, knowledge 
integration, knowledge creation and abstract thinking. Drucker (1997, p.23) proposes that 
knowledge differs from all other kinds of resources in that it constantly changes and develops, with the result that ‘today’s advanced knowledge is tomorrow’s ignorance’. 
This is what makes knowledge workers and their ability to analyse, combine and create 
knowledge so important. Especially in highly turbulent environments, the capacity for producing continuous development through knowledge creation and innovation activities 
is an essential facet of knowledge work (Teece et al., 1997; Eisenhardt and Martin, 2000). 
Knowledge work tends to be organised in teams and most of innovation and 
knowledge creation activities take place in collaboration among multiple actors (Nonaka 
and Takeuchi, 1995; Leonard and Sensiper, 1998). However, there are few studies that 
treat innovation as a group phenomenon (e.g., Guzzo and Shea, 1992; Burningham and West, 1995; Cady and Valentine, 1999). Furthermore, the factors that determine 
performance of knowledge worker teams are different from the preconditions of 
effectiveness in other types of teams (Janz et al., 1997; Drucker, 1999). Consequently, it is of utmost importance to generate knowledge on conditions which improve knowledge 
worker teams’ capacity for innovation. 
The paper at hand examines the antecedents of innovation in knowledge-intensive 
teamwork. As the subject of knowledge worker team innovation has received relatively 
little attention in the earlier literature, the theoretical framework is constructed with the 
intention of covering extensively the group-level factors influential to the phenomenon. Team innovation, team diversity, within-team interaction and external collaboration are 
all studied from several viewpoints. The posited hypotheses are then tested on a sample 
of 20 knowledge worker teams in a large Finnish-based telecommunications corporation, which produces services and enabling technologies. Finally, results are discussed and 
implications for enhancing knowledge-intensive teamwork are presented. The paper 
contributes to the literature on intellectual capital management and organisational learning by providing information on the contextual features which enable innovation and 
knowledge creation in knowledge worker teams. 
2 Antecedents of innovation in knowledge worker teams 
In everyday speech, innovation is often used to signify creativity. The concepts of creativity and innovation are, however, distinct from each other in that creativity is a 
cognitive process that occurs within the mind of a single individual, whereas innovation    
    
   
    
   
    
   32 A. Kianto    
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 is a social process, in which the elements of the process are events that happen between 
people (West and Farr, 1990). Another important difference is that while creativity refers 
to generation of new ideas, innovation is a new idea put to use – which necessarily makes 
it a social phenomenon, because even though ideas can reside in the head of one individual, when they are acted upon, they become a part of social reality. The creativity 
of an individual may be seen as a starting point for innovation, although not all 
innovations are necessarily creative, nor does creativity always lead to innovation. Another concept that is closely related to innovation and is often confused with it, is 
invention. Invention, however, is a much narrower concept than innovation. Invention is 
a legal term that stands for a patentable improvement, which can be produced industrially, while innovation can be any novelty or reform, which can pertain not only to 
a product but also to for example processes, organisational structure, strategy or 
marketing. 
Innovation has been used to denote the process through which something new is 
developed, as well as the end product of this process. Innovations as end products have 
been classified according to various attributes, such as their novelty (from incremental to radical), complexity, successfulness and the aspects of the organisational system that they 
impact (e.g., business concept innovations, managerial innovations) (West and Farr, 
1990). Innovation has also been studied on different levels. King and Anderson (1990) distinguish between literature pertaining to individual, group and organisational 
innovation. Of the three levels of analysis, organisational innovation, and especially its 
antecedents, has received the most attention, whereas group level is by far the least studied. 
West and Farr (1990) have defined innovation exhaustively as follows: ‘Innovation is 
the 
1 intentional 
2 introduction and application 
3 within a role, group, or organisation 
4 of ideas, processes, products or procedures 
5 new to the relevant unit of adoption 
6 designed to significantly benefit 
7 role performance, the group, the organisation, or the wider society.’ 
This definition includes many noteworthy points. First, innovation is restricted to 
intentional attempts to make changes. Second, the definition recognises that there are two 
components in innovation, namely the new idea and its implementation. Third, 
production of innovations can be examined in the level of individual, group or organisation. Fourth, innovations are not restricted to technical advancements or 
products, but can also be advancements in for example administrative practices. Fifth, it 
is not required that innovation be absolutely novel, simply that it is new to the relevant unit of adoption, as in cases where a new employee brings new ideas to an organisation 
from his or her previous job. Sixth, benefits derived from an innovation do not need to be 
financial, they can be, for example, improvements in the job satisfaction of employees. Finally, the definition allows for the introduction of a new idea designed to bring benefits 
not only to the individual, group or organisation, but also to society in general.    
    
   
    
   
    
    Enabling innovation in knowledge worker teams 33    
 
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 Next, we will overview factors which have been suggested to influence the capability 
of work groups to create innovations: team diversity, intrateam interaction and relationships with extra-team actors. 
2.1 Team diversity, conflict and innovation 
According to minority influence research tradition, intragroup conflict is a necessary 
precondition for innovation. In the classical colour perception study by Moscovici et al. 
(1969), innovation is actually defined as ‘social pressure exerted by a minority’. According to this perspective, innovations are produced when a minority of a group’s 
members succeed in inducing the majority to accept their views by acting in a coherent, 
persistent and confident manner (Moscovici et al., 1969; Mugny, 1982). Recently, it has 
been argued that minority opinions are beneficial for innovation not because of their 
better quality or higher truth-value compared with the majority opinion, but because of 
the thought processes that exposure to dissenting views stimulates. Exposure to differentiating views leads individuals to search for more information on the issue, to 
think more unconventionally and more divergently, i.e., to consider the issue from 
various perspectives. That is, minority dissent improves complex thinking, problem 
solving and creativity (Nemeth, 1997). In contrast, excessive conformity, characterised 
by Janis’ (1982) concept of groupthink, undermines creativity and innovation. 
Most of the writers on innovation, no matter what their school of thought, agree with 
the position that the conflict of diverse viewpoints is necessary for the emergence of new 
ideas (e.g., Kanter, 1988; West, 1990; Leonard-Barton, 1995; Nemeth, 1997; Amabile, 1998; Von Krogh, 1998). It is also widely agreed on that conflict has to be balanced with 
some kind of connectedness, lest other interpersonal processes important to innovation 
suffer (West, 1990; Nonaka and Takeuchi, 1995; Leonard and Sensiper, 1998; Brown and Duguid, 1998). The complementarity of cognitive conflict and positive team spirit is 
reflected in West’s (1990) team climate factors of aim for excellence and participative 
safety. Nemeth (1997) talks about the fine balance of creating unity without uniformity. Also, Tjosvold’s (1985) concept of constructive controversy and Leonard-Barton’s 
(1995) creative abrasion comprise the same two-fold idea. 
From the previous arguments, it can be gathered that to be conducive of innovation, 
intragroup conflict should be based on the diversity of intellectual opinions and not on 
personalised disagreements. Pelled (1996) suggests that diversity based on highly visible 
attributes such as race, age or sex is likely to lead to emotion-based disagreements, while diversity based on highly job-related attributes, such as education or organisational tenure 
lead to intellectual conflicts. There is some empirical evidence that diversity in highly 
job-related attributes improves groups’ cognitive task performance and diversity in highly visible attributes impedes it (Pelled et al., 1999). Emotional and task-related conflicts 
were not directly addressed in the current research, but it will be assumed that the impacts 
of different kinds of team diversities on team innovation are congruent with Pelled’s model. 
However, in contrast with this track of thought, Milliken and Martins (1996), who 
conducted an extensive review of empirical studies on diversity published during  1989–1994, conclude that any kind of within-group diversity has negative affective 
consequences. This also applies to diversity based on attributes that are high in  
job-relatedness and low in visibility. In addition, they conclude that diversity in highly    
    
   
    
   
    
   34 A. Kianto    
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 visible attributes has been associated with some positive effects on cognitive group 
performance. Thus, Pelled’s model has not received unequivocal support. 
As there are disparate claims and little empirical research (Cady and Valentine, 1999) 
concerning the impact of team diversity on innovation, their relationship shall be addressed in the present study. This will be done by looking at two highly visible forms 
of diversity, i.e., sex and age, and two highly job-related types of diversity, i.e., 
organisational tenure and educational field.  
Hypothesis 1(a) Team diversity based on highly visible attributes diminishes team 
innovation. 
Hypothesis 1(b) Team diversity based on high ly job-related attributes improves team 
innovation. 
2.2 Intrateam interaction and innovation 
Team climate denotes either the cognitive schema or the shared perception of the 
working environment that is co-constructed in interaction among the team members 
while they are pursuing their common goals (Anderson and West, 1998). West (1990) has 
created a theory of team climate for innovation, which sophisticatedly combines findings of a wide array of earlier studies on group-level innovation and places them in a coherent 
frame of reference. According to him, the climate of innovative groups is characterised 
by four factors: 
1 Vision 
‘Idea of a valued outcome that represents a higher order goal and a motivating force 
at work’. Vision has four components: clarity, visionarity, attainability and 
sharedness. Clarity refers to the degree to which group goals are comprehended, 
visionarity to the extent that they are valued, attainability to the likelihood of their practical achievement and sharedness to the extent to which they are accepted by 
members of the group. Work groups with clearly defined and valued objectives are 
likely to develop new goal-appropriate methods of working because they are motivated and their efforts have focus and direction. 
2 Aim for excellence 
General commitment to produce high-standard work that creates a group 
environment in which practices are questioned in a constructive manner in order to 
find possibilities for improvement, and differing viewpoints are cherished rather than suppressed. 
3 Participative safety: 
Group members are encouraged to take part in decision-making and interpersonal 
relationships within the group are perceived as non-threatening. The more people 
participate in decision-making through interaction and information sharing, the more likely they are to commit to the outcomes of the decisions and to offer new ideas 
about improvements to be made. In addition, as expressing new ideas can be 
perceived as risk-taking, safe interpersonal climate facilitates innovation by minimising the risk of being ridiculed, punished or ignored.    
    
   
    
   
    
    Enabling innovation in knowledge worker teams 35    
 
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 4 Support for innovation 
‘The expectation, approval and practical support of attempts to introduce new and 
improved ways of doing things in the work environment’. For supporting innovation, 
it is not enough that the norms in favour of innovation are merely articulated, they also need to be enacted in form of active helping behaviour. 
West’s theoretical construct and the associated measure, Team Climate Inventory (TCI), 
have received considerable empirical support (e.g., Agrell and Gustafson, 1994; Burningham and West, 1995; West and Anderson, 1996; Kivimäki et al., 1997; Anderson 
and West, 1998; West and Smith, 1998). TCI has been found to reliably predict team 
innovation. In addition, Burningham and West (1995) found that the climate factors were related to team innovation more strongly than attributes of the individual group members, 
such as creativity, or structural characteristic s of the teams, such as team size. However, 
the method has not been tested on knowledge worker teams specifically. 
Hypothesis 2(a) Vision, aim for excellence, participative safety and support for 
innovation facilitate team innovation.
 
There is widespread agreement among organisational researchers that trust is critically 
important to social processes such as cooperation, coordination and knowledge sharing as 
well as for the general functioning of work-related relationships, be they on interpersonal, intra- or interorganisational level (e.g., Kramer and Tyler, 1996; Costigan et al., 1998). 
Furthermore, it has been claimed that interpersonal trust is a significant, if not even a 
necessary precondition of innovation (Nonaka and Takeuchi, 1995; Amabile, 1997; Jones and George, 1998; Nonaka and Konno, 1998; Von Krogh, 1998). However, no studies 
empirically addressing the relationship of trust and (group-level) innovation could be 
located in the literature review. 
Hypothesis 2(b) Trust increases team innovation. 
Cummings and Bromiley (1996) define trust as the belief that others 
a make good-faith efforts to behave in accordance with their commitments 
b are honest in negotiations 
c do not take excessive advantage of others. 
Mishra’s (1996) definition of trust bears great similarities to the Cummings and Bromiley 
model: according to him, trust is willingness to be vulnerable to another party based on 
the belief that the other is 
a reliable, i.e., there is consistency between actions and words 
b open and honest 
c concerned about the trusting subject’s well-being 
d competent. 
Both definitions are multidimensional and encompass cognitive, effective and 
behavioural aspects of trust. The major difference between the two is that Mishra’s 
construct has a fourth dimension lacking from the former conceptualisation, namely competence. As the nature of research targets’ work is highly demanding and complex,    
    
   
    
   
    
   36 A. Kianto    
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 i.e., characterised by uncertainty and low divisibility of activities (Kivimäki et al., 1997, 
p.376), it is likely that beliefs about other team members’ competence influence the 
decision to trust them. 
West’s (1990) construct of team climate for innovation does not encompass the idea 
of interpersonal trust. At first glance, the dimension of participative safety might seem to 
be quite close to the idea of trust. However, when West’s theoretical construct and items 
of TCI are inspected more thoroughly, it becomes evident that participative safety comprises acceptance, mutual influence and information sharing, but not trust per se . 
Interpersonal trust is something distinct from participative safety, even though surely 
related to it in many ways. Thus, it is argued here that interpersonal trust forms a dimension of team climate for innovation, which has been ignored so far in both 
theorising as well as empirical research on the subject.  
2.3 External collaboration and innovation 
It is widely agreed in the literature that collaboration across boundaries within the 
organisation increases innovation markedly. To name a few examples, Rosenfeld and 
Servo (1990) state that the main reason for why companies fail to implement potentially 
successful innovations is communication gaps between different parts of the organisation. According to Eisenhardt and Tabrizi (1995) close and frequent interactions among 
members of different organisational functions and units lead to innovation efficiency. 
Kanter (1988) argues that the most effective way to facilitate innovation is to create an integrative organisational structure based on collaboration, teamwork and multiple 
connections between parts of the organisation. Quinn et al. (1997) note that highly 
innovative organisations are characterised by high interconnectivity among individuals and permeable boundaries across work groups. 
Furthermore, it seems that boundary spanning relationships within organisations are 
especially important for knowledge worker teams in rapidly changing business areas, such as the subjects of the current research. Campion et al. (1996) found that the amount 
of cooperation and communication between groups was more strongly connected to 
effectiveness measures for knowledge worker teams than for teams of other kinds of employees. Based on this, they arrived at the conclusion that knowledge workers have 
more need for integration with other parts of the company than other kinds of workers. 
Also, Tushman (1977) found that project teams with complex information processing requirements had more need for communication across group boundaries than teams 
facing less uncertainty and more stabile environments. Brown and Eisenhardt (1997) sum 
up the results of their case studies on several large-scale information technology companies by stating that those companies which can manage rapid, continuous change 
and innovation are characterised by extensive real-time communication among different 
parts of the organisation. Based on preceding arguments, Hypothesis 3(a) is as follows: 
Hypothesis 3(a) Intra-unit and intra-or ganisational collaboration increase team 
innovation. 
Ancona and Caldwell (1990, 1992) have studied activities and strategies that innovative 
teams adopt for handling external relations. They argue that team performance and 
innovation are not determined by the amount and frequency of external communication as such, but by its contents. Based on empirical results of several studies on research and 
development teams in high-technology organisations, they conclude that high-performing    
    
   
    
   
    
    Enabling innovation in knowledge worker teams 37    
 
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 innovative teams assume the following two sets of activities toward others in the 
organisation outside their team: 
1 Ambassadorial activities 
Protecting the team from outside pressure, persuading others to support the team, 
lobbying for resources, communicating with top management 
2 Task-coordinator activities 
Coordinating and negotiating with external groups, obtaining feedback from others, 
communicating laterally with other functions 
Ancona and Caldwell (1992) also state that engaging in 
3 scouting activities, i.e., general scanning for ideas and information about 
competition, markets or technologies, 
is detrimental to innovation. This is in contrast with the arguments brought up in the 
previous section that uncritically assume that a high quantity of interaction is beneficial for innovation, regardless of its purpose and content. Ancona and Caldwell offer three 
explanations for why scouting is likely to result in low team performance. Firstly, teams 
characterised by a high level of scouting direct their attention constantly to what happens in the environment, and this may make them unable to commit to any specific project and 
deadline. Secondly, concentration on scouting activities may reduce the effort that team 
members put into processes within the team and into external activities that are more directly relevant for high performance. Thirdly, scouting may indicate that the team’s 
task is too general or too demanding, in which case, prolonged scouting demonstrates a 
futile search for an answer to an impossible question. The hypotheses concerning external activities are: 
Hypothesis 3(b) Team innovation is facilitated by externally oriented ambassadorial and 
task-coordinator activities. 
Hypothesis 3(c) Team innovation is diminished by externally oriented scouting 
activities. 
3 Methods 
3.1 Participants and procedure 
Several teams and business units in a large Finnish-based telecommunications 
corporation were contacted and invited to take part in the research. A total of 106 
questionnaires were distributed, and 88 (8 3%) of them were returned. The age of 
respondents ranged from 21 to 53 years ( M = 30, SD = 6.64), and 59 (67%) of them were 
male. Respondents belonged to 20 teams. The team size ranged from 3–14 members  
(M = 5.30, SD = 2.66). On the average, 86% of the members of a team participated in the 
study. 
The teams that participated in the research worked in areas of research and 
development, product management, customer relations management, knowledge 
management and administration. All teams’ tasks required a high level of formal    
    
   
    
   
    
   38 A. Kianto    
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 knowledge and analytical skills, as well as the skill to apply these to changing internal 
and external customer needs and development of new products, services and procedures. 
Thus, they all fit the description of knowledge worker teams. Except for one managerial 
team, the teams were situated on the same level in the organisational hierarchy. Team leaders were included in their respective teams. 
3.2 Independent measures 
Numeric diversity measures.  Within-team diversity in relation to age and organisational 
tenure was computed using the coefficient of variation (standard deviation divided by the mean). 
Categorical diversity measures.  Within-team diversity based on sex, educational field 
and educational degree was measured with an entropy-based formula by Teachman (1980). 
TCI short version.  The shortened 14-item version of the original 38-item TCI was 
used to measure vision, aim for excellence, participative safety and support for innovation (Kivimäki and Elovainio, 1999). All items are worded with the team, not the 
individual, as the referent. The response fo rmat is a 5-point Likert-type scale. The 
coefficient alpha, was .89 for the whole scale, and .74, .74, .80 and .73 for each of the subscales respectively. 
Trust.  To measure the climate of trust in teams, a scale of five questions was 
developed based on Cummings and Bromiley’s (1996) and Mishra’s (1996) definitions. All items were measured on 5-point Likert-type scale. Coefficient alpha for the whole 
scale was .76, demonstrating a sufficient intern al reliability. As with TCI composites, the 
team scores for trust were computed by averaging the individual members’ sum-scores for each team and dividing the score by number of items. 
Amount of external collaboration relationships.  Information about the amount of 
external collaboration relationships was acquired by asking the team members to list the initials of the people working 
a in the same business unit (but not in the same team) with whom they collaborated at 
least once a week 
b in the same organisation (but not in the same business unit) with whom they 
collaborated at least once a month. 
The initials were counted and transformed to figures. Dispersion of the figures was  
quite large, as the amount of intra-unit relationships ranged from 0 to 50 ( M = 8.23,  
SD = 8.65), and intra-organisational relationships from 0 to 150 ( M = 11.66, SD = 21.83). 
Individual relationship figures were not computed into team-level indices simply by 
averaging them. This would not have been suitable because arithmetic mean is vulnerable 
to extreme values. Instead logarithmic transformation was made to individual values to normalise the distributions, so that large outliers would not manipulate the results of 
subsequent analyses. Team means were computed from the log-transformed individual 
scores. 
External activities.  The measure for content of the external relationships was 
developed based on Ancona and Caldwell’s (1990, 1992) 24-item questionnaire. Eight of 
the original items were used for the questionnaire, three of these described ambassadorial, three task-coordinator and two scouting activities. Included items were chosen on the    
    
   
    
   
    
    Enabling innovation in knowledge worker teams 39    
 
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 basis of high factor loadings in Ancona and Caldwell’s study, and their wording was 
slightly modified to suit the tasks and working environment of the participants in the current research. Respondents were asked to report to what extent they felt responsible 
for various activities with outgroup members. Items were rated on a 5-point scale. 
Cronbach’s alpha was .65 for ambassadorial activities and .84 for task-coordinator 
activities. The relatively low score of ambassadorial activities would have risen to .72 if 
the last item, ‘convincing others that my team is doing important work’, had been 
removed. However, the decision was made to maintain this item in the measure, for without it, the scale would not have exhaustively covered the theoretical definition of 
ambassadorial activities. Measure of scouting activities consisted of only two items, so 
calculating composite estimate for this scale was not relevant. Team level scores for the external activities were acquired by averaging individual members’ sum-scores for each 
team and dividing the score by number of items. 
Open-ended questions.  Also, qualitative data was gathered to check on the ecological 
validity of the variables used to predict team innovation, as well as to see how 
exhaustively these variables depicted subjects’ experience of enablers and barriers of 
innovation. The items were open-ended questions, such as: ‘What things in your team facilitate developing and implementing new ideas?’ 
Table 1  Examples and classification of the re sponses to the open-ended questions 
Classification 
category Current facilitators of 
innovativeness Current barriers to 
innovativeness Innovativeness could be 
improved by 
Vision • Clear responsibilities 
• Realistic and 
coherent goals • Continuous change 
and chaos in the 
organisation 
• Lack of direction • More realistic  
goal-setting 
• More efficient planning 
and organising 
Aim for 
excellence • Drive for success, 
enthusiasm 
• Pioneering spirit • Pressure to make 
financial profit 
regardless of quality • Increasing open 
criticism and 
questioning 
Participative 
safety • Team spirit, relaxed 
atmosphere 
• Informal and open 
communication • Lack of authority in 
things concerning one’s own work 
• Personality conflicts • Taking every one’s 
views into account 
• Possibility to participate 
in decision-making 
Support for 
innovation • Good processes for 
dealing with 
innovations (patent 
engineers, etc.) • Lack of time, too 
tight schedules 
• Under resourcing • Systematically 
collecting ideas 
• Having support and 
follow-up for the 
implementation of ideas 
Trust • Mutual sense of 
responsibility, 
diligence • Power struggles, 
mandate grabbing • Ensuring every one 
takes care of their share 
of the work 
External 
collaboration • Cross-functional 
gatherings and 
networks 
• Knowledge sharing 
across borders • Lack of 
communication and 
collaboration between teams, 
projects, units 
•
 Not Invented Here – 
phenomenon • Increasing 
collaboration, 
minimising competition within the company    
    
   
    
   
    
   40 A. Kianto    
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 Responses were first tentatively classified to five categories. The categories employed 
were vision, aim for excellence, participative safety, support for innovation, and trust. 
After the first classification round, there were many statements left that did not fit into 
these categories. Most of them clearly dealt with collaboration with people external to the team. Thus, a sixth category was formed, which was called ‘external collaboration’. 
Practically, all of the responses to the open-ended questions could be classified in the six 
categories. Only two comments did not match any of the categories, both of them dealing with inconveniences in the physical working conditions. Thus, it can be concluded that 
the questionnaire is ecologically valid and covers comprehensively the factors that the 
teams perceived to influence innovation. Examples of the comments and their classification are given in the Table 1. 
3.3 Dependent measures 
Self-reports of team innovation.  Team members were asked to rate the innovativeness of 
their team on a 5-point scale. Innovativeness was defined as the ability to develop new applicable ideas that profit the company. Team level scores were calculated by averaging 
the individual evaluations. 
External ratings of team innovation.  As the main purpose of the current study was to 
identify factors facilitating innovation, it was of utmost importance that the assessment of 
team innovation would be as accurate as possible. To gain a more objective assessment of 
teams’ innovative output than self-reports could provide, Team Innovation Evaluation Form was constructed. Following Agrell and Gustafson’s (1994) model, semantic 
opposites linked to innovative, quantitative and qualitative aspects of team output  
were generated. Seven of the semantic opposites were related to team creativity  (e.g., risk-taking – security-s eeking), three to the quantity (e.g., efficient – inefficient), 
and three to the quality (e.g., high-quality – low-quality) of team production. The 
measurement was done on a 7-point semantic differential scale. 
As noted earlier when discussing the concept of innovation, innovation consists not 
only of the ability to produce new ideas, but also of the capability to put the new ideas 
into practice, and to do this in a way that is useful or profitable. For this reason, it was 
important that in addition to items concerning the ability to generate new ideas, the 
measure of team innovation also included items that dealt with the quantity and quality of 
the team product. 
For all teams except for one, the form was filled in by a person external to the team 
but knowledgeable enough about the team to be able to evaluate its performance. In most 
cases, evaluator was the team leader’s s upervisor, whose job description included 
reporting about the team to higher hierarchical levels. For one of the teams, the only 
available evaluator was the team leader. 
Coefficient alphas were .88 for team creativity, .79 for quantity and .94 for quality 
scales. For the whole 13-item composite me asure, labelled simply Team innovation, 
alpha was .93. 
4 Results 
The purpose of this research was to find out how team diversity, within-team interaction 
and external collaboration influence team innovation outcomes. Answers to the    
    
   
    
   
    
    Enabling innovation in knowledge worker teams 41    
 
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 hypotheses were sought by using correlation analysis and analysis of variance. For 
analysis of variance, the teams were classified to three groups according to evaluations of their performance. Where the condition of homogeneity of variances was not fulfilled, the 
non-parametric Kruskall-Wallis’ test was used instead of analysis of variance. The 
relative importance of internal versus external team processes was assessed with regression analysis. 
Table 2  Pearson correlations among team innovation outcomes and other variables  
Variable Self-rated 
team 
innovation Team 
creativity* Quantity of 
team product*Quality of 
team product*Team 
innovation 
composite* 
Age diversity r = –.13 
p = .30 r = –.25 
p = .14 r = –.45 
p = .02 r = –.33 
p = .08 r = –.34 
p = .07 
Sex diversity r = –.42 
p = .03 r = –.25 
p = .14 r = –.32 
p = .08 r = –.31 
p = .09 r = –.31 
p = .10 
Organisational 
tenure div. r = –.09 
p = .36 r = .03 
p = .45 r = .19 
p = .21 r = .09 
p = .36 r = .09 
p = .36 
Educational field 
diversity r = –.33 
p = .08 r = –.20 
p = .20 r = –.44 
p = .03 r = –.51 
p = .01 r = –.36 
p = .06 
Vision r = .31 
p = .09 r = .48 
p = .02 r = .27 
p = .13 r = .48 
p = .02 r = .47 
p = .02 
Aim for 
excellence r = .41 
p = .04 r = .21 
p = .19 r = .16 
p = .25 r = .39 
p = .04 r = .27 
p = .13 
Participative 
safety r = .78 
p = .00 r = .35 
p = .07 r = .21 
p = .18 r = .33 
p = .08 r = .34 
p = .07 
Support for 
innovation r = .75 
p = .00 r = .27 
p = .13 r = .17 
p = .23 r = .42 
p = .03 r = .31 
p = .09 
Trust r = .60 
p = .00 r = .35 
p = .06 r = .21 
p = .19 r = .45 
p = .02 r = .38 
p = .05 
Intra-unit 
relationships r = –.38 
p = .05 r = –.36 
p = .06 r = –.32 
p = .08 r = –.41 
p = .04 r = –.40 
p = .04 
Intra-
organisational 
relationships r = .01 
p = .48 r = –.16 
p = .25 r = –.40 
p = .04 r = –.33 
p = .08 r = –.27 
p = .12 
Ambassadorial 
activities r = –.09 
p = .36 r = –.01 
p = .48 r = –.11 
p = .32 r = –.16 
p = .26 r = –.08 
p = .38 
Task-coordinator 
activities r = .24 
p = .16 r = .23 
p = .17 r = .14 
p = .28 r = .15 
p = .26 r = .21 
p = .19 
Scouting activities r = .56 
p = .01 r = .54 
p = .01 r = .15 
p = .26 r = .43 
p = .03 r = .47 
p = .02 
Notes: 1-tailed tests of significance. 
*Based on external ratings. 
Hypothesis 1(a)  posited a negative relationship between team innovation and diversity 
based on differences in age and sex. Correlations between age diversity and quantity of 
team product as well as between sex dive rsity and self-rated te am innovation were 
statistically significant at p < .05 ( r = –.45 and r = –.42). For both age and sex diversity, 
all correlations with team product variables were negative. Mean differences in age    
    
   
    
   
    
   42 A. Kianto    
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 diversity were significant among groups rated low, moderate or high on team creativity 
(F = 8.91, p = .002), quantity of output ( F = 6.69, p = .007), and quality of output  
(chi-square = 7.21, p = .03). Significant mean differences in sex diversity were detected 
between the different groups of output quality (chi-square = 5.63, p = .06),  
team innovation (chi-square = 6.76, p = .03), and self-rated team innovation  
(chi-square = 7.19, p = .03). All these findings were in line with the Hypothesis 1(a). 
Hypothesis 1(b) posited a positive relationship between team innovation and team 
diversity based on educational field and organisational tenure. Correlational analysis 
showed that educational field diversity was negatively related with all performance 
measures, although only relationships with quantity and quality of team product were significant ( r = –.44, p = .03 and r = –.51, p = .01). Furthermore, Kruskall-Wallis test 
showed that educational field diversity was significantly larger in teams that produced 
lower quality output than in teams that produced high-quality output (chi-square = 6.26,  p = .04). Also, teams high on team innovation were more homogenous in relation to their 
members’ educational field than teams rated low on team innovation (chi-square = 5.96, 
p = .05). These results are in fact directly opposed to Hypothesis 1(b). Organisational 
tenure diversity had no significant relations to any of the performance measures. Thus, it 
can be concluded that Hypothesis 1(b) received no support. 
Hypothesis 2(a) predicted positive relationship between the four team climate 
variables and innovation outcome measures. In line with the hypothesis, all of the 
correlations were positive. Relations of team climate variables and innovation outcome 
measures were further explored by conducting one-way analyses of variance. The pattern of mean differences was clear: in all cases, means of the low innovation outcome groups 
were lower than means of high innovation outcome groups. Differences in the group 
means reached a significant level at p ≤ .05 in five of the 20 explored cases (five 
innovation outcome scales × four team climate variables), and approached significance at 
p < .1 in six cases. In summary, Hypothesis 2(a) was supported. 
Hypothesis 2(b) posited a positive relationship between trust and innovation 
outcomes. All correlations between trust and innovation outcomes were positive, and 
most of them reached a significant level. Mean differences of innovation outcome groups 
displayed a similar pattern to that found for team climate variables: the mean of trust was higher for all high innovation outcome groups than for low innovation outcome groups. 
The mean difference was significant for team creativity ( F = 4.11, p = .04), quantity of 
output ( F = 4.1, p = .04) and self-rated team innovation ( F = 5.26, p = .02). In addition, it 
approached significance for both quality of team product ( F = 2.67, p = .1) and team 
innovation ( F = 2.67, p = .1). 
Hypothesis 3(a) postulated positive relations between intra-unit and intra-
organisational collaboration and innovation outcomes. Counter to the hypothesis, all of 
the correlations were negative, except for the association of intra-organisational 
collaboration and self-rated team innovation which approached zero ( r = .01). The 
negative relations were significant for intra-unit collaboration with quality of team 
product ( r = –.40, p = .04), team innovation ( r = –.40, p = .04) as well as with self-rated 
team innovation ( r 
= –.38, p = .05). Intra-organisational collaboration was significantly 
related with quantity of team product ( r = –.40, p = .04). 
Hypothesis 3(b) posited that ambassadorial and task-coordinator activities are 
positively related to innovation outcomes. Ambassadorial activities were negatively and non-significantly correlated to all innovation outcomes. Task-coordinator activities had    
    
   
    
   
    
    Enabling innovation in knowledge worker teams 43    
 
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 positive relation to all outcome measures, but none of the correlation coefficients 
approached statistical significance. Thus, the Hypothesis 3(b) was rejected. 
Hypothesis 3(c) predicted that scouting activities are negatively related to team 
innovation. Based on the results, it seems that the relationship was in fact directly 
opposite to that hypothesised. Scouting activities had the biggest number of significant 
correlations (four out of five) with innovation outcomes of all the independent variables, 
and all of them were positive. One-way analysis of variance showed that teams that rated 
themselves as more highly innovative engaged more in scouting activities than teams that 
rated themselves as low or moderate on team creativity ( F = 17.9, p < .001). The mean 
difference was nearly significant for team innovation ( F = 2.94, p= .08). In addition, the 
mean of scouting activities was higher for groups rated high than for groups rated low 
also in all other innovation outcome scales. Thus, Hypothesis 3(c) was rejected. 
In addition to the posited hypotheses, multiple regression analyses were conducted to 
examine the relative impact of within-team interaction and external collaboration on team 
innovation outcomes. As the sample size was small ( N = 20), it was necessary to combine 
independent variables into composites to avoid the risk of an overfit model. The 
composite of within-team interaction was constructed of the team climate and trust 
scores, and the composite of external relationships included task-coordinator and scouting activities, as all of these were positively related with team outcomes. 
To inspect the relative importance of within-team interaction and external processes, 
the two composites were regressed onto team innovation outcome variables. Assumptions for regression analyses were evaluated from graphs. The regression residuals were 
distributed normally, and no heteroscedasticity or outliers were detected. The relative 
importance of predictor variables was assessed on the basis of standardised regression coefficients. The regression results are presented in Table 3. 
The full regression equations, which included both within-team interaction and 
external relationships, accounted for a significant proportion of all innovation outcome variables, except for the quantity of team product. As sample size influences to a great 
extent the probability of finding significant relationships in regression analysis, it was 
decided to use significance level of p ≤.1 as criterion for acceptable predictive power. 
The relationship was particularly strong for self-rated team innovation: the model accounted for 56% of its variation. Based on these results, it seems like team creativity, quality of team product and team innovation, be it externally or self-rated, can all be quite well predicted by scores on within-team interaction and external relationship scales. 
Examination of the individual impacts of the predictor variables showed that external 
relationships did not contribute significantly to the prediction of any team innovation outcomes. Within-team interaction scores were substantially related with self-ratings of 
team innovation, and they were also connected with quality of team product to a 
significant degree. Out of the five independent variables examined, only externally rated 
team creativity was better predicted by external relationships than by within-team 
interaction, and even in this case the difference between standardised regression 
coefficients was marginal. As with small samp les, only very strong relationships can be 
detected with any degree of certainty, it is safe to say that within-team interaction is very 
highly related with self-rated innovation and quality of team  product. One can speculate 
that had the sample been larger, also other patterns of connections might have emerged.    
    
   
    
   
    
   44 A. Kianto    
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 Table 3  Multiple regressions of within-team interaction and external relationship composites on 
innovation outcome measures ( N = 20) 
Dependent variable Independent variable β R² 
  .53*** 
Within-team interaction .61***  Self-rated team innovation 
External relationships .24  
  .25* Team creativity (externally 
rated) Within-team interaction .29  
 External relationships .32  
  .06 
Within-team interaction .21  Quantity of team product 
(externally rated) 
External relationships .09  
  .26* 
Within-team interaction .43*  Quality of team product 
(externally rated) 
External relationships .18  
  .23* 
Within-team interaction .34  Team innovation composite 
(externally rated) 
External relationships .26  
Notes: * p ≤ .10, ** p ≤ .05, *** p ≤ .01 
5 Discussion 
This study examined antecedents of innovation in knowledge worker teams. Overall, the 
results demonstrated that social factors are highly influential for knowledge worker 
teams’ ability to produce innovations. As this research was among the first to empirically 
examine the significance of trust to team innovation, the most important single result was that interpersonal trust was related with high levels of team innovation. Also team climate 
was connected with high team innovation. Team diversity based on highly visible 
attributes was negatively related with team innovation. Surprisingly, also external collaboration had negative associations with team innovation, except for when it was 
aimed at general scanning for ideas and information. In addition, internal team processes 
were found to be more significant for team innovation than external processes. Next, the results concerning all facilitators and inhibitors of team innovation will be gone through 
in more detail. 
The impact of team diversity on innovation 
Surprisingly, the results of the current research speak for the superiority of homogenous 
teams, composed of individuals of same sex and age group, as well as similar educational 
background. The finding that educational diversity impedes innovation is somewhat 
surprising in the light of all the theoretical claims made for the necessity of divergent viewpoints for innovation.    
    
   
    
   
    
    Enabling innovation in knowledge worker teams 45    
 
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 Inspection of the descriptive demographic data of the seven teams rated externally as 
the most innovative showed that they were all highly homogenous: all of them consisted of males under 31 years of age with a technical education. Based on this, one is led to 
suspect that one reason for the finding that educational homogeneity leads to high 
innovativeness might lie in the target organisation’s basic values. As the organisation was a telecommunications company, and most of the teams worked in business units or 
subsidiaries that were involved in developing enabling technologies, it may be that only 
technical advancements were perceived as innovative work by both the external evaluators and the team members themselves. 
The impact of within-team interaction on innovation 
The results clearly showed that highly innovative teams were characterised by vision, aim for excellence, participative safety, support for innovation and interpersonal trust. The fact that these same dimensions were constantly brought up in answers to the open-ended 
questions yields further credence in the role of these factors as facilitators of innovation 
in knowledge worker teams. 
Unlike all other team innovation outcome measures, quantity of team product had no 
significant connections with any of the team interaction variables. This leads one to 
speculate that quality and innovativeness are more important indicators of knowledge worker productivity than quantity. Drucker (1999) among others takes this stance by 
arguing that continuing innovation forms an integral part of knowledge work, and that 
quality, rather than quantity is the essence of the output of knowledge work. 
The impact of external relationships on innovation 
The finding that numerous external relationships were related to low levels of team innovation outcomes was quite unexpected, for it directly contradicts much of the earlier 
theory and research referred to  earlier. It may be that there is an optimum number of 
external connections, which some of the teams in the sample grandly exceeded. Unfortunately, this interpretation is impossible to validate with the current sample 
because of its small size. 
Another possible explanation might lie in the teams’ identities. Campion et al. (1996) 
found that knowledge worker teams with higher single-team identity, i.e., teams that 
perceived themselves as ‘a group of members all working together as a single team’ were 
higher on many effectiveness measures than teams which perceived themselves as ‘a collection of individual employees doing their own work’. It might be that those teams in 
the current sample whose members had many external collaboration partners had weaker 
team identities, which in turn diminished their performance. As multiple group memberships, weakening of team boundaries and pressure to form networks are 
increasingly pervasive features of working life, the connection between team identity and 
external relationships would form an acute and interesting topic for another research. 
Ancona and Caldwell (1990,; 1992) have argued that it is not the amount of outgroup 
interaction per se  that influences team performance, but rather the content of these 
interactions. However, the content of external relationships had an opposite relationship with team outcomes than what Ancona and Caldwell found in their studies. In the studied 
sample, ambassadorial and task-coordinator did not enhance team innovation. The    
    
   
    
   
    
   46 A. Kianto    
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 significance of scouting activities, on the other hand, was marked. This finding is in line 
with e.g., Nonaka and Takeuchi (1995) and Von Krogh (1998) who emphasise the 
significance of information flow across borders for innovation. Also, for example, 
Drucker (1997) states that gathering and analysing outside information is highly important, because it is the only means by which organisations can stay forerunners in the 
sudden shifts and rapid changes that increasingly characterise the global economy. 
The most likely reason why the role of scouting emerged to be different in this 
research than in Ancona and Caldwell’s (1992) study is that they studied new-product 
teams that were on late phases of product development cycle. Therefore, Ancona and 
Caldwell interpreted general scanning for external information and ideas to signify prolonged scouting, which no longer is appropriate once the final design is nearly closed 
down. In the research at hand, on the contrary, no data was gathered on work phase the 
teams were in, and indeed this could have posed serious difficulties because the sample consisted of teams with such various tasks. Nevertheless, it can be speculated that most of 
the teams were not in any strictly defined final phase of the innovation process, and 
therefore, that scouting was not inappropriate for their task performance. On the whole, this example serves as a reminder of the process nature of innovation: the facilitators of 
innovation are likely to be contingent on the phase of the innovation process. 
Internal versus external processes and innovation 
When the relative importance of within-team interaction and external relationships was 
compared, within-team interaction was found to be a more significant predictor of all 
team innovation outcomes except for externally rated innovativeness. This implies that 
for facilitating team innovation, the look should be first directed to what happens inside the team and only then to the team’s connections with external partners, whether in the 
organisation or outside of it. Especially the team’s self-assessment of its own 
innovativeness was substantially predicted by the way in which the team members perceived its internal processes. These re sults should serve as a warning against an 
unquestioning acceptance of the fashionable claims that networking is the best way to 
increase innovation. On the contrast, it seems like improving networks should be of little use for facilitating team innovation, if it is not done in parallel with developing the team 
internally. 
Managerial recommendations 
Based on the results, some practical recommendations can be given about the ways to 
facilitate team innovation. Firstly, differences between the more and the less innovative teams arise mainly from differences in their internal interaction processes. Thus, the 
attempts to improve team innovation should take the development of teams’ internal 
functioning as their starting point. Teams whose internal processes are characterised by trust, vision, aim for excellence, participative safety, and support for innovation are likely 
to attain high levels of innovation. Secondly, networking with external partners is likely 
to be beneficial to innovation only if it is incorporated with the actual task that the team is striving to perform and does not threaten the team’s internal processes. In any case, it 
seems like improving networks should be of little use for facilitating team innovation, if 
it is not done in parallel with developing the team internally. Thirdly, more diversity does not necessarily mean more new ideas: sometimes teams composed of members of same    
    
   
    
   
    
    Enabling innovation in knowledge worker teams 47    
 
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 sex, age group and similar educational background produce more innovative results than 
heterogeneous teams. 
References 
Agrell, A. and Gustafson, R. (1994) ‘The Team Climate Inventory (TCI) and group innovation: a 
psychometric test on a Swedis h sample of work groups’, Journal of Occupational and 
Organizational Psychology,  Vol. 67, pp.143–51. 
Amabile, T. (1997) ‘Motivating creativity in organizations: on doing what you love and loving 
what you do’, California Management Review , Vol. 40, No. 1, pp.39–58. 
Amabile, T. (1998) ‘How  to kill creativity’, Harvard Business Review , Vol. 76, No. 5, pp.76–88. 
Ancona, D. and Caldwell, D. (1990) ‘Beyond boundary spanning: managing external dependence 
in product development teams’, The Journal of High Technology Management Research ,  
Vol. 1, No. 2, pp.119–135. 
Ancona, D. and Caldwell, D. (1992) ‘Bridging the boundary: external activity and performance in 
organizational teams’, Administrative Science Quarterly , Vol. 37, No. 4, pp.634–666. 
Anderson, N.R. and West, M.A. (1998) ‘Meas uring climate for work group innovation: 
development and validation of the team climate inventory’, Journal of Organizational 
Behavior , Vol. 19, pp.235–258. 
Brown, J.S. and Duguid, P. (1998) ‘Organizing knowledge’, California Management Review ,  
Vol. 40, No. 3. 
Brown, S.L. and Eisenhardt, K.M. (1997) ‘The art of continuous change: linking complexity theory 
and time-paced evolution in relentlessly shifting organizations’, Administrative Science 
Quarterly , Vol. 42, No. 1, pp.1–35. 
Burningham, C. and West, M.A. (1995) ‘Individual,  climate, and group interaction processes as 
predictors of work team innovation’, Small Group Research , Vol. 26, No. 1, pp.106–118. 
Cady, S. and Valentine, J. (1999) ‘Team innovation and perceptions of consideration’, Small Group 
Research , Vol. 30, No. 6, pp.730–752. 
Campion, M.A., Papper, E.M. and Medsker, G.J. (1996) ‘Relations between work team 
characteristics and effectiveness: a replication and extension’, Personnel Psychology , Vol. 49, 
No. 2, pp.429–440. 
Castells, M. (1996) Rise of the Network Society , Blackwell, Cambridge. 
Costigan, R., Ilter, S. and Berman, J. (1998) ’A multi-dimensional study of trust in organizations’, 
Journal of Managerial Issues , Vol. 10, No. 3, pp.303–317. 
Cummings, L. and Bromiley, P. (1996) ‘The Organizational Trust Inventory (OTI): development 
and validation’, in R. Kramer and T. Tyler (Eds.): Trust in Organizations: Frontiers of Theory 
and Research , Sage, London. 
Drucker, P.F. (1993) Post-capitalist Society , Harper, New York. 
Drucker, P.F. (1997) ‘The futu re that has already happened’, Harvard Business Review , 
September–October, Vol. 20. 
Drucker, P.F. (1999) ‘Knowledge-worker productivity: the biggest challenge’, California 
Management Review , Vol. 41, No. 2, pp.79–95. 
Eisenhardt, K. and Martin, J. (2000) ‘Dynamic capabilities: what are they?’, Strategic Management 
Journal , Vol. 21, Nos. 10–11, pp.1105–1121. 
Eisenhardt, K. and Tabrizi, B. (1995) ‘Accelerat ing adaptive processes: product innovation in the 
global computer industry’, Administrative Science Quarterly , Vol. 40, pp.84–110. 
Foray, D. (2004) Economics of Knowledge , MIT Press, Cambridge. 
Guzzo, R.A. and Shea, G.P. (1992) ‘Group performance and intergroup relations in organizations’, 
in M.D. Dunnette and L.M. Hough (Eds.): Handbook of Industrial and Organizational 
Psychology , 2nd ed., Vol. 3.    
    
   
    
   
    
   48 A. Kianto    
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 Janis, I. (1982) Groupthink: Psychological Studies of Policy Decisions and Fiascos , Houghton 
Mifflin, Boston. 
Janz, B.D., Colquitt, J.A. and Noe, R.A. (1997) ‘Kno wledge worker team effectiveness: the role of 
autonomy, interdependence, team development, and contextual support variables’, Personnel 
Psychology , Vol. 50, No. 4. 
Jones, G.R. and George, J.M. (1998) ‘The experience and evolution of trust: implications for 
cooperation and teamwork’, Academy of Management Review , Vol. 23, No. 3, pp.531–546. 
Kanter, R. (1988) ‘When a thousand flowers bloom:  structural, collective and social conditions for 
innovation in organization’, in B.  Staw and L. Cummings (Eds.): Research in Organizational 
Behavior , Vol. 10, pp.169–211, JAI Press, Greenwich, Connecticut. 
King, N. and Anderson, N. (1990) ‘Innovation and cr eativity in working groups’, in M.A. West and 
J.L. Farr (Eds.): Innovation and Creativity at Work. Psychological and Organizational 
Strategies , Wiley, Chichester. 
Kivimäki, M. and Elovainio, M. (1999) ‘A sh ort version of the team climate inventory: 
development and psychometric properties’, Journal of Occupational and Organizational 
Psychology , Vol. 72, pp.241–246. 
Kivimäki, M., Kuk, G., Elovainio, M., Thomson,  L., Kalliomäki-Levanto, T. and Heikkilä, A. 
(1997) ‘The Team Climate Inventory (TCI) – four or five factors? Testing the structure of TCI in samples of low and high complexity jobs’, Journal of Occupational and Organizational 
Psychology , Vol. 70, pp.375–389. 
Kramer, R. and Tyler, T. (Eds.) (1996) Trust in Organizations: Frontiers of Theory and Research , 
Sage, London. 
Leonard, D. and Sensiper, S. (1998) ‘The role of tacit knowledge in group innovation’, California 
Management Review , Vol. 40, No. 3, pp.112–132. 
Leonard-Barton, D. (1995) Wellsprings of Knowledge , Harvard Business School Press, Cambridge. 
Milliken, F.J. and Martins, L.L. (1996) ‘Searching for common threads: unde rstanding the multiple 
effects of diversity in organizational groups’, Academy of Management Review , Vol. 21,  
No. 2, pp.402–433. 
Mishra, A. (1996) ‘Organizational responses to crisis: the centrality of trust’, in R. Kramer and  
T. Tyler (Eds.): Trust in Organizations: Frontiers of Theory and Research , Sage, London. 
Moscovici, S., Lage, E. and Naffrechoux, M. (1969) ‘Influence of a consistent minority on the 
responses of a majority in a colour perception task’, Sociometry , Vol. 32, pp.365–379. 
Mugny, G. (1982) The Power of Minorities , Academic Press, London. 
Nemeth, C. (1997) ‘Managing innov ation: when less is more’, California Management Review , 
Vol. 40, No. 1, pp.59–74. 
Nonaka, I. and Konno, N. (1998) ‘The concept of ‘Ba’: building a foundation for knowledge 
creation’, California Management Review , Vol. 40, No. 3, pp.40–54. 
Nonaka, I. and Takeuchi, H. (1995) The Knowledge Creating Company , Oxford University Press, 
New York. 
Pelled, L.H. (1996) ‘Demographic diversity, conf lict, and work group outcomes: an intervening 
process theory’, Organization Science , Vol. 7, No. 6, pp.615–631. 
Pelled, L.H., Eisenhardt, K.M. and Xin, K.R. (199 9) ‘Exploring the black box: an analysis of work 
group diversity, conflict, and performance’, Administrative Science Quarterly , Vol. 44, No. 1. 
Quinn, J., Baruch, J. and Zien, K. (1997) ‘Innovation explosion’, Using Intellect and Software to 
Revolutionize Growth Strategies , Free Press, New York. 
Reich, R. (1992) The Work of Nations
, Random House, New York. 
Rosenfeld, R. and Servo, J. (1990) ‘Facilitating in novation in large organizations’, in M.A. West 
and J.L. Farr (Eds.): Innovation and Creativity at Work. Psychological and Organizational 
Strategies , Wiley, Chichester. 
Stewart, T. (1997) Intellectual Capital: The New Wealth of Organizations , Doubleday, New York.    
    
   
    
   
    
    Enabling innovation in knowledge worker teams 49    
 
 
    
 
    
   
    
   
    
       
 Teachman, J.D. (1980) ‘Analysis of population di versity. Measures of qualitative variation’, 
Sociological Methods and Research , Vol. 8, No. 3, pp.341–362. 
Teece, D.J., Pisano, G. and Schuen, A. (1997) ‘Dynamic capabilities and strategic management’, 
Strategic Management Journal , Vol. 18, pp.509–533. 
Tjosvold, D. (1985) ‘Implications of controversy research on management’, Journal of 
Management , Vol. 11, pp.21–37. 
Tushman, M.L. (1977) ‘Special boundary roles in the innovation process’, Administrative Science 
Quarterly , Vol. 22, pp.587–605. 
Von Krogh, G. (1998) ‘Care in knowledge creation’, California Management Review , Vol. 40,  
No. 3, pp.133–153. 
West, M.A. (1990) ‘The social psychology of inno vation in groups’, in M.A. West and J.L. Farr 
(Eds.): Innovation and Creativity at Work. Psychological and Organizational Strategies , 
Wiley, Chichester. 
West, M.A. and Anderson, N.R. (1996) ‘Innovation in top management teams’, Journal of Applied 
Psychology , Vol. 81, No. 6, pp.680–693. 
West, M.A. and Farr, J.L (Eds.) (1990) ‘Introduction’, Innovation and Creativity at Work. 
Psychological and Organizational Strategies , Wiley, Chichester. 
West, M.A. and Smith, H. (1998) ‘Research ex cellence and departmental climate in British 
universities’, Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology , Vol. 713, No. 3, 
pp.261–282. 