Journal of Retailing 81 (2, 2005) 141–157
Customer-oriented boundary-spanning behaviors: Test of a social
exchange model of antecedents
Lance A. Bettencourta,∗, Stephen W. Brownb,1, Scott B. MacKenziec,2
aStrategyn, Inc., 617 Glen Arbor Way, Bloomington, IN 47403, USA
bDepartment ofMarketing, W. P. Carey School ofBusiness, Box 874106, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287-4106, USA
cDepartment ofMarketing, Kelley School ofBusiness, Indiana University, 1309 E. 10th Street, Bloomington, IN 47405, USA
Abstract
Usingasampleof281frontlineserviceemployeesofanationalretailbank,wetestasocialexchangemodelofantecedentsofthreedimensions
of customer-oriented boundary-spanning behaviors suggested by prior boundary-spanning and services marketing/management literatures:external representation, internal inﬂuence, and service delivery. In support of our hypotheses, we identify fully mediated relationships fromprocedural, interactional, and distributive justice to external representation and internal inﬂuence via job satisfaction and organizationalcommitment. Our results generally support our expectation that the indirect effects of procedural justice on external representation andinternal inﬂuence are stronger than the indirect effects of distributive or interactional justice on these behaviors. Also, our results reveal nosigniﬁcantindirecteffectsofproceduralanddistributivejusticeonservicedeliverybehaviors.However,weﬁndanunexpecteddirectpositivepath from interactional justice to service delivery behaviors. We interpret this latter ﬁnding in light of the normative value of interactionaljustice as a source of role modeling or managerial legitimacy.© 2005 New York University. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Boundary-spanning behavior; Social exchange model; Customer-oriented; Prosocial; Citizenship
Overthepasttwodecades,bothacademicsandpractition-
ershaveasserteda“spillover”effectbetweenemployeeatti-tudessuchasjusticeperceptions,jobsatisfaction,andorgani-zationalcommitmentandcustomers’satisfactionandservicequality perceptions (cf. Bowen, Gilliland, & Folger 1999 ).
Empirical research has generally provided support for theseassertions across service industries (cf. Bernhardt, Donthu,
& Kennett 2000 ;Hartline & Ferrell 1996 ), and ﬁrms have
adopted slogans such as “People-Service-Proﬁts” to expresstheirconﬁdenceintheselinkages.Otherresearchrevealsthatprosocial behaviors of frontline service employees (FSEs),includingdiscretionaryservice-orcustomer-orientedbehav-iors,helptoexplainthespillovereffectsofemployeeattitudesoncustomeroutcomes( Bell&Menguc2002 ;Bettencourt&
Brown 1997 ).
∗Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 812 330 0460.
E-mail addresses: lbettencourt@strategyn.com (L.A. Bettencourt),
stephen.brown@asu.edu (S.W. Brown), mackenz@indiana.edu (S.B.MacKenzie).
1Tel.: +1 480 965 6201.
2Tel.: +1 812 855 1101.Despitetheneedforstudiestobetterunderstandhowand
why distinct employee attitudes are related to various FSEprosocial behaviors, at least three important concerns withpriorresearchlimitourunderstanding.First,despiterepeatedcalls for consideration of prosocial behaviors tailored to theunique job demands and work context of customer serviceemployees (cf. Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Paine, & Bachrach
2000),mostresearchonboundary-spanningserviceemploy-
ees has only investigated prosocial behaviors such as tra-ditional organizational citizenship behaviors (OCBs) thatare equally applicable across jobs and contexts (cf. Bell &
Menguc 2002 ). Second, although past research provides a
clearindicationoftherelevanceofapplyingsocialexchangetheory to the study of relationships among employee atti-tudes and prosocial behaviors (cf. MacKenzie, Podsakoff,
& Ahearne 1998 ), this research has not generally investi-
gated the range of employee attitudes we consider. For ex-ample, studies of prosocial behavior antecedents have oftennot included distributive, procedural, and interactional jus-ticeperceptionssimultaneouslyorhavenotincludedbothjobsatisfactionandorganizationalcommitmentwithjusticeper-
0022-4359/$ – see front matter © 2005 New York University. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jretai.2005.03.004142 L.A. Bettencourt et al. / Journal ofRetailing 81 (2, 2005) 141–157
ceptions(cf. Netemeyer,Boles,McKee,&McMurrian1997 ;
Moorman,Blakely,&Niehoff1998 ).Third,pastresearchhas
not provided a thorough theoretical or empirical considera-tionofhowdistinctFSEattitudesmaybe differentially related
to distinct customer-oriented behaviors. Yet, recent researchdemonstrates that differences among the justice dimensionsmay affect the strength of their relationships with customer-oriented prosocial behaviors ( Masterson 2001 ), and differ-
ences among dimensions of customer-oriented behaviorsmayaffectthestrengthoftheirrelationshipswithantecedents(Bettencourt & Brown 2003 ).
The objective of this paper is to address these impor-
tantconcernswithpriorresearchbydevelopingatheoreticalmodelpredictinghowdistinctemployeeattitudesarerelatedto distinct dimensions of customer-oriented behaviors, andtesting this model using a sample of FSEs employed in re-tail banking. Speciﬁcally, the paper: (a) develops a socialexchange-basedmodeloftheattitudinalantecedentsofthreeconceptually distinct forms of customer-oriented boundary-spanning behaviors, (b) tests the hypothesized differentialeffects of three dimensions of organizational justice percep-tionsonthethreeformsofcustomer-orientedbehaviors,and(c) investigates the extent to which these relationships aremediatedbyjobsatisfactionandorganizationalcommitmentas social exchange theory would predict.
Theoretically, the paper contributes to past literature by
taking a multi-dimensional view of customer-oriented be-haviorsthatprovidesdeeperinsightintowhichbehaviorsaremoststronglyrelatedtodistinctemployeeattitudes.Thepa-per also offers theoretical insight into which attitude con-structs are most strongly related to distinct dimensions ofcustomer-oriented boundary-spanning behaviors, includingconsideration of the distinct effects of three theoretical di-mensions of organizational justice (cf. Colquitt, Conlon,
Wesson,Porter,&Ng2001 ).Finally,thepaperadvancesthe-
oretical understanding concerning the reasons why distinctorganizational justice dimensions are related to customer-orientedboundary-spanningbehaviorsbytestingbothdirectand mediated effects of the justice constructs on customer-oriented behaviors.
Managerially,theresultshighlighttheinsufﬁciencyoftry-
ing to establish a customer-oriented climate on the frontlineof service organizations through reliance on more formal,control-oriented management practices. Rather, the resultspointtothenecessityofdevelopingsocialexchangerelation-shipswithserviceemployeesasafoundationforacustomer-oriented climate. Further, the results suggest that managersshouldpayspecialattentiontoissuesofproceduralandinter-actional justice in seeking to develop the types of social ex-changerelationshipsthatfostercustomer-orientedbehaviors.However, the identiﬁcation of fully mediated effects fromprocedural and distributive justice to the customer-orientedbehaviors suggests that increasing perceptions of these twotypes of justice is simply one possible means of motivat-ing these behaviors. Rather, the results suggest that any ac-tionstakentoimproveeitherjobsatisfactionororganizationalcommitment(suchasincreasesintaskvariety)willalsopro-
vide the desired foundation for a customer-oriented climate.
Following a brief consideration of the meaning of
customer-oriented boundary-spanning behaviors and orga-nizational justice, we introduce our theoretical model anddevelop our hypotheses. We then present an empirical ﬁeldstudywithasampleof281customerserviceemployeesfroman entire region of a national bank designed to test our pro-posed model and hypotheses. We conclude the paper with adiscussion of the implications of the ﬁndings.
Conceptual background
Customer-oriented boundary-spanning behaviors
The services marketing/management and boundary-
spanning literatures both suggest three key dimensions ofcustomer-linking behaviors of FSEs that contribute to thedevelopmentofmarket-drivencapabilitiesandresources(cf.Bettencourt&Brown2003 ;Bettencourt,Gwinner,&Meuter
2001).First,FSEsplayanimportantpartinrepresentingthe
organization to outsiders (including customers) and enhanc-ing the ﬁrm’s image and legitimacy through their advocacyof the ﬁrm and its products and services ( Aldrich & Herker
1977;Bowen & Schneider 1985 ). Second, the boundary-
spanning position of FSEs provides them many opportuni-ties to share information internally about evolving customerneedsandpossibleimprovementsinservicedelivery( Aldrich
&Herker1977 ;Schneider&Bowen1984 ;Zeithaml,Berry,
&Parasuraman1988 ).Third,servicequalityperceptionsand
customer satisfaction are largely dependent on FSE servicedelivery behaviors such as courtesy, personal attentiveness,responsiveness, and keeping promises ( Aldrich & Herker
1977;Parasuraman, Zeithaml, & Berry 1988 ).
Drawing from this research, we investigate three types
of behaviors the FSE may perform that are associated withlinking the organization to its potential or actual customers(cf.Bettencourt&Brown2003 ;Bettencourtetal.2001 ):(1)
external representation , being vocal advocates to outsiders
of the organization’s image, goods, and services (cf. Bowen
& Schneider 1985 ), (2)internal inﬂuence , taking individual
initiative in communications to the ﬁrm and co-workers toimproveservicedeliverybytheorganization,co-workers,andoneself(cf. Schneider&Bowen1984 ;Zeithamletal.1988 ),
and(3)servicedelivery ,servingcustomersinaconscientious,
responsive,ﬂexible,andcourteousmanner(cf. Parasuraman
et al. 1988 ).
Included among our three dimensions are customer-
oriented boundary-spanning behaviors (COBSBs) that arelikely to be considered relatively more role-prescribed andthose that are likely to be considered relatively more extra-role.ForthemajorityofFSEs,servicedeliverybehaviorsarelikely to be relatively more role-prescribed due to their fre-quentspeciﬁcationinjobdescriptions,trainingmaterials,andperformance evaluation forms whereas external representa-L.A. Bettencourt et al. / Journal ofRetailing 81 (2, 2005) 141–157 143
tionandinternalinﬂuencebehaviorsarelikelytoberelatively
morediscretionary(i.e.,relativelymoreextra-role;cf. Organ
1988a).Thisassertionisreinforcedintheservicecontextwe
studybythepresenceofservicedeliverybehaviorsininternaldocuments such as job descriptions, training materials, andperformanceevaluationforms.Further,recentreviewsofthecitizenship literature include behaviors such as external rep-resentationandinternalinﬂuenceamonganexpandedlistofextra-role behaviors (cf. Podsakoff et al. 2000 ).
Still, we emphasize the relativedegree to which each
customer-oriented behavior is role-prescribed versus extra-role because recent research suggests that it may be moreappropriate to view a variety of prosocial organizational be-haviors,includingtraditionalcitizenshipbehaviors,asexist-ing on a discretion continuum from entirely role-prescribedto entirely extra-role with the majority of behaviors lyingsomewhere between the two extremes ( Tepper, Lockhart, &
Hoobler 2001 ). Further, the role-prescribed/extra-role dis-
tinction is likely to be especially fuzzy in customer servicecontextsduetothedifﬁcultyinpreciselyspecifyingFSEbe-haviors as they interface with customers (cf. Zeithaml et al.
1988).
Organizational justice
“In organizations, justice is about the rules and social
norms governing how outcomes (e.g., rewards and punish-ments)shouldbedistributed,theproceduresusedformakingsuch distribution decisions (as well as other types of deci-sions), and how people are treated interpersonally” ( Folger
& Cropanzano 1998 , p. xiii). In keeping with a wealth of
scholarly research and the deﬁnition offered by Folger and
Cropanzano(1998) ,weconsiderthreedimensionsoforgani-
zational justice (alternatively, fairness): (1)procedural jus-
tice, the perceived fairness of the formal decision-making
procedures used in an organization (cf. Lind & Tyler 1988 ),(2)interactional justice , the perceived fairness of interper-
sonaltreatmentbymanagersinmakingdecisionsthatimpactthe employee (cf. Bies & Moag 1986 ), and (3) distributive
justice, the perceived fairness of outcomes or rewards that
an employee receives from the ﬁrm ( Folger & Cropanzano
1998;Price & Mueller 1986 ).
Procedural and interactional justice are often viewed by
researchers as distinct aspects of the fairness of the decisionprocesswithinanorganization,reﬂectingthefairnessoffor-malorstructuraldecision-makingproceduresandthefairnessofsocialorinterpersonalaspectsofdecision-making,respec-tively(cf. Folger&Cropanzano1998 ).Researchonprocedu-
ral justice ﬁnds that a fair decision process is characterizedby formal decision-making procedures that are representa-tive,consistent,impartial,accurate,andsubjecttoappeal(cf.Folger&Cropanzano1998 ;Leventhal,Karuza,&Fry1980 ).
Studies of interactional justice ﬁnd that a fair decision pro-cessischaracterizedbyamanagerwhomakesdecisionswithinterpersonal sensitivity (e.g., considerate, respectful, with-outbias)andwithadequateexplanationandjustiﬁcation(cf.Bies & Moag 1986 ;Folger & Cropanzano 1998 ).
Hypothesized relationships
Fig. 1presents our proposed mediation model of an-
tecedents of COBSBs. As illustrated and argued subse-quently, we hypothesize that the three dimensions of orga-nizational justice are positively related to each of the threedimensions of COBSBs indirectly through their effects on
jobsatisfactionand/ororganizationalcommitment.Althoughnot illustrated, we further hypothesize that procedural jus-tice is more strongly related to each dimension of COBSBsthan are distributive or interactional justice because of itsstronger relationship with job satisfaction and/or organiza-tional commitment. Finally, we contend that the indirect ef-fectsoforganizationaljusticeonCOBSBsthroughjobsatis-
Fig.1. Completemediationstructuralmodel.Note:Covariancesamongthethreeexogenousjusticeconstructsandamongthestructuralerrortermsof thethree
endogenous COBSB constructs are not shown for clarity of the model.144 L.A. Bettencourt et al. / Journal ofRetailing 81 (2, 2005) 141–157
factionand/ororganizationalcommitmentwillbestrongerfor
externalrepresentationandinternalinﬂuencethanforservicedelivery.
Theoretical foundation
Social exchange provides the theoretical foundation for
our hypotheses. Social exchange theory contends that em-ployee actions and attitudes toward the organization existon a continuum anchored by contractual (alternatively, eco-
nomic) exchange on the one end and social exchange on the
other(Blau1964,1968 ;Organ1988b,1990 ).Althoughboth
types of exchange rely on the expectation that exchange re-lationswillberewarding,contractualexchangerelationshipsrelyonformalagreementstospecifyandrewardwell-deﬁnedrole expectations that are devoid of any social or relationalmeaning whereas social exchange relationships are charac-terizedbydiffuseandopen-endedroleexpectationsthatrelyonreciprocityandnormsof justiceastheirfoundation( Blau
1964, 1968 ;Organ 1990 ).
Hypotheses
Wecontendthatperceptionsoforganizationaljusticelead
employees to deﬁne their relationship with the organizationinopen-endedsocialexchangetermsasreﬂectedinjobsatis-factionandorganizationalcommitment,whichthenleadem-ployeestoengageinCOBSBs( Blau1964,1968 ;Netemeyer
etal.1997 ).Morespeciﬁcally,weexpectthatorganizational
justice perceptions will be related to COBSBs only to theextent that they lead to the development of social exchangebonds with the organization in the form of job satisfactionand/or organizational commitment as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Theoretically, Blau (1964, 1968) , argued that norms of
justiceandreciprocitywereonlystartingmechanismsforso-cial exchange. Continued exchange of social gestures in theformofprosocialbehaviorssuchasCOBSBs,heargued,de-pends on an individual’s satisfaction with prior exchangesand on his/her commitment to the relationship that developsovertime.Similarly, Organ(1990,1988a,1988b) contended
thatthereasonthatorganizationaljusticeperceptionsshouldberelatedtoavarietyofdiscretionaryemployeebehaviorsisbecause(un)fairnessleadstothedevelopment(deterioration)
ofaperceivedsocialexchangerelationshipbetweentheem-ployee and the organization, as reﬂected in global exchangeevaluations such as job satisfaction and organizational com-mitment.
Asarguedby Blau(1964,1968) ,repeatedsocialexchange
gestures by an employee depend upon the favorableness ofhis/herevaluationoftheintrinsicandextrinsicrewardsoftherelationship.Thiswouldexplainwhyjobsatisfaction,whichreﬂects an employee’s evaluation of the extrinsic and intrin-sicrewardsreceived from the ﬁrm, has been found to be
positively related to prosocial organizational behaviors likeOCBs (cf. MacKenzie et al. 1998 ;Netemeyer et al. 1997 ;
Organ & Ryan 1995 ), and would suggest that it should alsoberelatedtootherformsofprosocialorganizationalbehavior
likeCOBSBs( Bettencourt&Brown2003 ).Further,as Blau
(1964,1968) argued,repeatedsocialexchangegesturesbyan
employee depend upon his/her commitment to a social ex-changerelationshipwiththeorganization.Thiswouldexplainwhyorganizationalcommitment,whichreﬂectsapsycholog-ical attachment between an employee and the ﬁrm and anemployee’s belief that the relationship extends beyond con-tractual obligations ( Mowday, Porter, & Steers 1982 ), has
been found to be positively related to prosocial organiza-tionalbehaviorslikeOCBs( MacKenzieetal.1998 ;O’Reilly
& Chatman 1986) and customer-directed effort and behav-iors(Bettencourt&Brown2003 ;Masterson,2001 ).(Thefact
thatthejusticedimensionshavebeenshowntoleadtothede-velopment of a social exchange relationship with the ﬁrm inthe form of job satisfaction and organizational commitmentreinforcesourmediationhypothesis[cf. Aryee,Budhwar,&
Chen2002 ;Colquittetal.2001 ;McFarlin&Sweeney1992 ;
Wayne, Tetrick, Shore, & Bommer 2002 ].)
Although other social exchange constructs might be con-
sidered as possible mediators of the relationships among or-ganizationaljusticeandCOBSBs(e.g.,trust,perceivedorga-nizational support), we focus exclusively on job satisfactionand organizational commitment for several reasons. First,as discussed, the social bonds of job satisfaction and orga-nizational commitment are implicit in Blau’s (1964, 1968)conceptual discussion of social exchange from which manyscholars (e.g., Menguc 2000 ;Netemeyer et al. 1997 )h a v e
subsequentlydrawntheirtheoreticalrationaleforarelation-shipbetweenjusticeandprosocialorganizationalbehaviors.Second,becauseofthissolidconceptualfoundation,jobsat-isfaction and organizational commitment (along with jus-tice) are the most widely studied attitudinal antecedents ofprosocial organizational behaviors (cf. Organ & Ryan 1995 ;
Podsakoff et al. 2000 ). Third, both trust and perceived or-
ganizational support might be considered alternative socialexchangeinitiatorsthatleadtothedevelopmentofthesocialexchange bonds of job satisfaction and organizational com-mitment (cf. Aryee et al. 2002 ;Wayne et al. 2002 ). How-
ever,becausetrustandorganizationalsupportconstructsareconceptuallyverysimilartoproceduralandinteractionaljus-ticeperceptions,respectively,andbecauseempiricalresearchconﬁrms very high correlations among these constructs (cf.Aryee et al. 2002 ;Wayne et al. 2002 ), reﬂecting possible
discriminant validity problems, we do not include them inour theoretical model. Finally, our research focuses on themediating effects of bothjob satisfaction and organizational
commitment,notonlybecausethereisreasontobelievethateachofthemindividuallymightmediatetheeffectsofjusticeon COBSBs, but also because they are known to be relatedto each other. Job satisfaction is generally believed to causeorganizational commitment in part because it is more spe-ciﬁc, less stable and more rapidly formed, and the empiri-cal evidence overwhelmingly supports this view (cf. Brown
& Peterson 1993 ;Williams & Hazer 1986 ). This suggests
that the mediating effects of these two constructs will be in-L.A. Bettencourt et al. / Journal ofRetailing 81 (2, 2005) 141–157 145
tertwined, and Fig. 1illustrates this expectation. Thus, we
contend that any empirical relationships among the justiceand COBSB dimensions will be indirect via job satisfactionand/or organizational commitment. This discussion leads tothe following hypotheses:
H1A.Procedural justice will be positively related to exter-
nalrepresentationduetoitseffectsonjobsatisfactionand/ororganizational commitment.
H1B.Proceduraljusticewillbepositivelyrelatedtointernal
inﬂuence due to its effects on job satisfaction and/or organi-zational commitment.
H1C.Proceduraljusticewillbepositivelyrelatedtoservice
delivery due to its effects on job satisfaction and/or organi-zational commitment.
H2A.Interactionaljusticewillbepositivelyrelatedtoexter-
nalrepresentationduetoitseffectsonjobsatisfactionand/ororganizational commitment.
H2B.Interactional justice will be positively related to in-
ternal inﬂuence due to its effects on job satisfaction and/ororganizational commitment.
H2C.Interactional justice will be positively related to ser-
vice delivery due to its effects on job satisfaction and/or or-ganizational commitment.
H3A.Distributivejusticewillbepositivelyrelatedtoexter-
nalrepresentationduetoitseffectsonjobsatisfactionand/ororganizational commitment.
H3B.Distributive justice will be positively related to in-
ternal inﬂuence due to its effects on job satisfaction and/ororganizational commitment.
H3C.Distributive justice will be positively related to ser-
vice delivery due to its effects on job satisfaction and/or or-ganizational commitment.
Although all three justice dimensions are expected to be
positivelyrelatedtoCOBSBsindirectlythroughjobsatisfac-tionand/ororganizationalcommitment,wefurtherhypothe-size that procedural justice will be more strongly related toCOBSBs becauseof itsstrongerrelationshipswithjobsatis-
factionand/ororganizationalcommitment.Becausewehavealready argued that the effects of the justice constructs onCOBSBswillbemediatedbyjobsatisfactionand/ororgani-zationalcommitment,itfollowsthatanydifferentialstrengthof effects of procedural justice to COBSBs will also be me-diated.Asdiscussedsubsequently,boththeoryandempiricalresearch support the expectation that procedural justice (incomparison to distributive and interactional justice) shouldbe more strongly related to both (1) social exchange atti-tudessuchasjobsatisfactionandorganizationalcommitment
Fig.2. Theoreticaldistinctionsamongtheorganizationaljusticedimensions.
and(2)prosocialbehaviorssuchasCOBSBs,supportingthehypothesized pattern of mediation effects across the justiceconstructs.
AsFig. 2illustrates, there are two important distinctions
amongthejusticedimensionsthatimpacttheextenttowhichthey are likely to be related to job satisfaction and organiza-tionalcommitment(andthereforeCOBSBsindirectly).First,the justice dimensions differ in the extent to which they areviewed as controllable, intentional, and enduring, with theprocess justice evaluations theoretically argued to be higheronthisdimension( Folger&Cropanzano1998 ;Tyler&Lind
1992).Utne and Kidd (1980) argued that bothattitudes and
behaviorsaremorelikelytobeaffectedwhenorganizationaljustice evaluations are seen as a result of something con-trollable, intentional, and enduring. Second, the justice di-mensions differ in the extent to which they reﬂect fairnessevaluations of organizational rewards and processes versus
managerial actions, with procedural justice and distributive
justice being more organizational in focus ( Bies & Moag
1986;Folger & Cropanzano 1998 ). Theoretically, this is an
important distinction because we have argued that COBSBsreﬂect the quality of social exchange bonds with the organi-
zationandouruseofjobsatisfactionandorganizationalcom-
mitmentassocialexchangemediatorsisconsistentwiththisperspective.Empiricalevidencethatreducedperformanceofprosocialbehaviorsprecedesorganizationalwithdrawal(i.e.,turnover) reinforces this perspective (cf. MacKenzie et al.
1998).
Based on the distinctions in Fig. 2, we argue that proce-
dural justice (in comparison to distributive and interactionaljustice)willbemorestronglyrelatedtoCOBSBsasmediatedby job satisfaction and/or organizational commitment. First,fairorganizational processes are especially likely to lead to
thedevelopmentofasocialexchangerelationship(whetherinattitudesorbehavior)withtheorganizationbecausetheyaremorelikelytobeviewedasunderthe control(i.e.,discretion)
oftheorganization (Folger&Cropanzano1998 ;Masterson,
Kyle,Goldman,&Taylor2000 ).Second,becauseoutcomes
aremoredifﬁculttoassessandattributetoasinglesourcethanprocedures(thatis,theaccountabilityfor[un]fairrewardsis146 L.A. Bettencourt et al. / Journal ofRetailing 81 (2, 2005) 141–157
relatively uncertain), procedural justice is more likely to be
used as a source of inference concerning organizational in-
tentandcaringthandistributivejustice( Folger&Cropanzano
1998;Tyler & Lind 1992 ), which will likely be reﬂected in
socialexchangeevaluationsofthejobandorganization.Fur-ther, although the interpersonal interactions that form inter-actional justice evaluations are highly controllable and in-tentional, they are a more likely source of inferences con-cerningmanagerial intent and caring than organizational
intent and caring (cf. Bies & Moag 1986 ;Masterson et al.
2000). Finally, procedural justice gives employees conﬁ-
dence in the value of future open-ended interactions withthe organization given their more enduring nature in com-
parison to either distributive or interactional justice ( Lind
& Tyler 1988 ). Thus, procedural justice is especially rele-
vanttoglobalevaluationsofthejobandorganizationsuchasjobsatisfactionandorganizationalcommitment(cf. Colquitt
etal.2001 ;Lind&Tyler1988 ;McFarlin&Sweeney1992 ).
Results of a recent meta-analysis of the organizational jus-tice literature by Colquitt et al. (2001) provide evidence in
support of our theoretical reasoning.
We do not hypothesize differential strength of mediation
effects for interactional versus distributive justice to COB-SBs. Although interactional justice evaluations are likelyto be viewed as more highly controllable and intentionalthan distributive justice evaluations, they reﬂect an evalua-tionofmanagerialfairnesswhereasdistributivejusticeeval-uations reﬂect the perceived fairness of rewards providedby the organization. Thus, it is not possible to hypothesizewhether the mediated paths from interactional or distribu-tive justice to COBSBs will be similar or different from oneanother. Based on this discussion, we offer the followinghypotheses.
H4A.The indirect effect of procedural justice on external
representation(mediatedbyjobsatisfactionand/ororganiza-tional commitment) will be stronger than the indirect effectof distributive justice on external representation.
H4B.The indirect effect of procedural justice on internal
inﬂuence(mediatedbyjobsatisfactionand/ororganizationalcommitment) will be stronger than the indirect effect of dis-tributive justice on internal inﬂuence.
H4C.The indirect effect of procedural justice on service
delivery (mediated by job satisfaction and/or organizationalcommitment) will be stronger than the indirect effect of dis-tributive justice on service delivery.
H5A.The indirect effect of procedural justice on external
representation(mediatedbyjobsatisfactionand/ororganiza-tional commitment) will be stronger than the indirect effectof interactional justice on external representation.
H5B.The indirect effect of procedural justice on internal
inﬂuence(mediatedbyjobsatisfactionand/ororganizationalcommitment) will be stronger than the indirect effect of in-
teractional justice on internal inﬂuence.
H5C.The indirect effect of procedural justice on service
delivery (mediated by job satisfaction and/or organizationalcommitment) will be stronger than the indirect effect of in-teractional justice on service delivery.
Finally, we hypothesize that the indirect effects of orga-
nizational justice perceptions on external representation andinternal inﬂuence behaviors will be stronger than their indi-recteffectsonservicedeliverybehaviors.Consistentwiththeprecedingdiscussion,weexpectthatthedifferentialstrengthofrelationshipsamongorganizationaljusticeperceptionsanddistinctdimensionsofCOBSBswillbemediatedbyjobsatis-faction and/or organizational commitment. Social exchangetheory provides the basis for expecting both that (1) justiceevaluations will be more strongly related to more discre-tionaryformsofCOBSBsand(2)thereasonforsuchdiffer-entialstrengthofrelationshipsisbecausejusticeperceptionslead to the development of a social exchange relationship inthe form of job satisfaction and/or organizational commit-ment.
First, asOrgan (1990, 1988a, 1988b) contended over a
decadeago,onthecontinuumfrommoretolessdiscretionarybehaviors,itisthemorediscretionarybehaviorsthatarelikelyto be offered as a relationship becomes deﬁned in social ex-changetermsandalsolikelytobewithheldasarelationshipbecomesdeﬁnedinmorecontractualexchangeterms.Aspre-viouslydiscussed,organizationaljusticeevaluationsprovideacriticalfoundationforthedevelopmentordeteriorationofasocialexchangerelationship(cf. Folger&Cropanzano1998 ;
Lind&Tyler1988 ).Withcomplementaryreasoning,psycho-
logical contract theorists argue that injusticeresulting from
a company not meeting an employee’s expectations moti-vates the employee to redeﬁne his/her relationship with theﬁrmfromsocialexchangetooneofastrictlycontractualna-ture(i.e.,voluntarycontributionsanddiscretionaryeffortareseverelycurtailed;cf. Robinson,Kraatz,&Rousseau1994 ).
In support of Organ’s social exchange reasoning, a recentstudy byTepper et al. (2001) found that the relationship be-
tweenproceduraljusticeandOCBswasstrongeramongem-ployees who deﬁned OCBs as more extra-role (i.e., morediscretionary).
In the organizational context we study, service delivery
behaviorsareincludedinFSEjobdescriptions,performanceevaluation forms, and training documents, making them rel-ativelylessdiscretionarythanexternalrepresentationandin-ternal inﬂuence behaviors ( Organ 1988a ). Further, service
delivery behaviors are the most visible of the three types ofCOBSBs,makingthemlesslikelytobewithheldinthefaceofinjustice(cf. Organ1988b ).Assuch,weproposethatpro-
cedural, interactional, and distributive justice will be morestronglyrelatedtoexternalrepresentationandinternalinﬂu-ence behaviors due to the relatively discretionary nature ofthese two forms of COBSBs in comparison to service deliv-ery behaviors.L.A. Bettencourt et al. / Journal ofRetailing 81 (2, 2005) 141–157 147
Second,socialexchangetheoryalsoprovidesthetheoret-
ical foundation to hypothesize that the differential relation-ships from organizational justice to external representationandinternalinﬂuencebehaviorswillbemediatedbyjobsat-isfaction and organizational commitment. In keeping withsocial exchange theory, organizational commitment and jobsatisfactionarealsolikelytohavestrongerrelationshipswithmorediscretionaryformsofCOBSBsbecausetheseformsofCOBSBs are more likely to be viewed as social exchangegestures and, therefore, as more appropriate forms of re-ciprocation ( Blau 1964, 1968 ;Organ, 1988a, 1988b, 1990 ).
This accounts for why a meta-analysis by Organ and Ryan
(1995)revealed a stronger relationship between job satis-
faction and OCBs than previous meta-analytic studies hadidentiﬁed between job satisfaction and traditional measuresof employee performance. We might also expect organiza-tional commitment to be more strongly related to externalrepresentationandinternalinﬂuencebehaviorsbecausetheyare more clearly intended to beneﬁt the organization ratherthan speciﬁc customers (cf. Masterson et al. 2000 ).
Thus, prior research suggests that organizational justice
perceptions may be more strongly related to external repre-sentation and internal inﬂuence COBSBs due to their moreextra-role nature, and it suggests that any differential effectswill be mediated by job satisfaction and/or organizationalcommitment. Based on this discussion, we offer the follow-ing hypotheses.
H1D.The indirect effect of procedural justice on external
representation(mediatedbyjobsatisfactionand/ororganiza-tional commitment) will be stronger than the indirect effectof procedural justice on service delivery.
H1E.The indirect effect of procedural justice on internal
inﬂuence(mediatedbyjobsatisfactionand/ororganizationalcommitment)willbestrongerthantheindirecteffectofpro-cedural justice on service delivery.
H2D.Theindirecteffectofinteractionaljusticeonexternal
representation(mediatedbyjobsatisfactionand/ororganiza-tional commitment) will be stronger than the indirect effectof interactional justice on service delivery.
H2E.Theindirecteffectofinteractionaljusticeoninternal
inﬂuence(mediatedbyjobsatisfactionand/ororganizationalcommitment) will be stronger than the indirect effect of in-teractional justice on service delivery.
H3D.The indirect effect of distributive justice on external
representation(mediatedbyjobsatisfactionand/ororganiza-tional commitment) will be stronger than the indirect effectof distributive justice on service delivery.
H3E.The indirect effect of distributive justice on internal
inﬂuence(mediatedbyjobsatisfactionand/ororganizationalcommitment) will be stronger than the indirect effect of dis-tributive justice on service delivery.Research methodology
Sample and procedure
A sample of FSEs of a major, multi-state retail bank was
used to test the hypotheses. Retail banking employees tendto be young, low paid, predominantly female, and have lowaverage organizational tenure, and, as such, they are typi-cal of customer service employees of many companies (cf.Singh 2000 ). Further, FSEs in retail banking have respon-
sibilities and work in a job environment that is similar toother customer service positions. They satisfy customers’needs primarily on a transaction basis, fulﬁll customer re-quests for product information, and work within a closelysupervised work environment that is remote from corporateofﬁces.
Materials for the study were distributed in packets to
branch managers who were then responsible for: (a) dis-tributingindividualpacketscontainingasurvey,anintroduc-toryletterassuringconﬁdentiality,andapostage-paidreturnenvelope to all nonmanagement customer service employ-ees in each branch, and (b) responding to a manager sur-vey asking them to rate COBSBs of each of their individ-ual customer service employees. We took several steps toensure that the employee packets were not distributed se-lectively by managers, including providing written instruc-tions to branch managers on how to introduce the studyand distribute the packets to employees at a branch meet-ing. Managers were also requested to provide surveys evento employees who were ill or on vacation during the branchmeeting.
The employee survey contained measures of organiza-
tional justice, job satisfaction and organizational commit-ment along with self-report measures of the COBSBs. ThemanagersurveycontainedmeasuresoftheCOBSBsofeachFSE.Inordertolinktheinformationfromthesetwosources,employees were asked to write in their names on their sur-veys,andmanagerswereaskedtowritethenameoftheFSEbeing evaluated on each survey that they completed.
To improve our ability to accurately capture the COBSB
constructs, we combined data from two independent rat-ing sources—self-ratings and manager ratings. Both self-and manager ratings have their advantages and disadvan-tages. Although some research suggests that self-ratings areleast biased ( Scullen, Mount, & Goff 2000 ), other research
shows that common method variance attributable to sourcessuch as consistency, acquiescence, and positive affectivitycanbiasresultsconsiderablywhenonlyself-ratingsareused(Podsakoff,MacKenzie,Podsakoff,&Lee2003 ).Duetopo-
tentialcommonmethodbias, Podsakoffetal.(2003) recom-
mend gathering predictor and criterion variables from sepa-rate rating sources whenever possible. However, use of onlymanager ratings of COBSBs would have been ill-advised inthis research due to the nature of these behaviors. Managersare limited in their knowledge of the extent to which an em-ployeeengagesinthesebehaviors,becausesomeinstancesof148 L.A. Bettencourt et al. / Journal ofRetailing 81 (2, 2005) 141–157
COBSBsmaynotoccurinthepresenceofthemanagerorany
otherbranchemployees.Forexample,themanagermayhavesomeknowledgeoftheextenttowhichanemployeeisavo-caladvocatetooutsidersoftheorganization’simage,goods,and services (i.e., external representation) through observa-tions in the workplace and the manager’s own contact withcustomersandotherpeopleinthecommunity,butthatknowl-edgeisnotcomplete.Theserviceemployeeisreallytheonlypersonwithcompleteknowledge,eventhoughshe/hemaybebiasedwhencommunicatingthatinformationtoothers.Thismayalsobetruetosomedegreeforevenaninternallydirectedbehaviorlikeinternalinﬂuence.Further,managerratingsaresubjecttotheirownsetofbiases,includingliking,halo,andleniency.
Due to the potential for bias in each rating source, the
COBSB measures were administered to both the FSEs andtheir managers, and the average of these responses on anitem by item basis was used to represent the three COBSBconstructs in the hypothesis tests. Averaging across multi-ple raters avoids confounds in method and trait variance. Assuch,itispreferredtomodelingtheratingsourcesseparatelybecauseitplacesfocusontheconstructofinterestratherthanidiosyncraticratingsourceperspectiveorbias.AsshownbyScullenetal.(2000) inamajorempiricalcomparisonofmeth-
ods for assessing job performance, convergence across self-and supervisor ratings is often modest due primarily to id-iosyncratic error variance in each rating source. However,ratherthanprecludingtheaveragingofdistinctperformanceratings,Scullenetal.(2000,p.967) argued,basedongener-
alizability theory, that “the larger the error components are,thegreateristheadvantageofusingmultipleraters.”Averag-ing distinct ratings reduces error variance while “effectivelyincreas[ing] the proportion of true variance” ( Scullen et al.
2000, p. 967 ).
In total, 656 customer service employees were surveyed
across40branches,representinganentireregionofthebank.Completedsurveyswerereceivedfrom344customerserviceemployeesforaresponserateof52percent.Oftheemployeeresponses,itwaspossibletomatch281withamanagerratingofCOBSBs.Thus,thematchedresponseratewas43percent.We compared the responses of the matched and unmatchedemployees and found that there were no differences on any
of the variables examined in this study.
Approximately 83 percent of the customer service em-
ployee sample was female. The median age was 25. Themajority of the sample (55 percent) reported “some col-lege” as their highest level of education. The median lengthof employment was 24 months. A check for nonresponsebias in which the date in which a survey was received bythe researchers was regressed upon each of the model vari-ables (e.g., job satisfaction) and selected demographic vari-ables(e.g.,tenure,age)producedasigniﬁcantoverallmodel(p<.05) that revealed that later respondents were younger,
morehighlyeducated,andhadlongercompanytenure.How-ever, the signiﬁcant demographic variables explained justfour percent of the variance in the date variable.Measures
Organizational justice
We measured procedural and interactional justice using
scales developed by Moorman (1991) . Theprocedural jus-
ticemeasure consisted of eight items that reﬂect employee
opinionsthatdecisionsaboutemployeesaremadewithcon-sistency, opportunity for appeal, complete information, andrepresentation of all parties. The interactional justice mea-
sure consisted of ten items that reﬂect employee opinionsthat their managers treat them with respect, without bias,and in a sensitive and honest manner when making deci-sionsthataffectthem.Bothofthesescaleshavebeenshownto possess adequate psychometric properties in prior em-pirical research (e.g., Moorman 1991 ;Niehoff & Moorman
1993).Wemeasured distributivejustice usingﬁveitemsfrom
Price and Mueller’s (1986) distributive justice measure thatwere adapted to focus on the perceived fairness of compen-sation outcomes, as requested by executives of the coop-erating organization. The distributive justice items ask em-ployees to indicate how fairly they are compensated giventheirexperience,effort,stresses,responsibilities,andeduca-tion and training. Prior empirical research has demonstratedthatthismeasurepossessesadequatepsychometricproperties(Price & Mueller 1986 ), including high internal consistency
among items (cf. Moorman 1991 ), and this scale has been
previously used in the marketing literature (e.g., Netemeyer
et al. 1997 ). Cronbach alphas for the procedural, interac-
tional,anddistributivejusticemeasureswere.94,.96,and.95,respectively.
Job satisfaction
We measured job satisfaction using the Minnesota Sat-
isfaction Questionnaire ( Weiss, Davis, England, & Lofquist
1967),whichconsistsoftwentypositivelywordeditemsmea-
suring extrinsic (seven items), intrinsic (eleven items), andglobal (two items) job satisfaction. This multi-dimensionalmeasurehasbeenshowntopossessgoodpsychometricprop-erties(Weissetal.,1967 )andhasbeenwidelyusedintheﬁeld
ofmarketing(e.g., Brown&Peterson1993 ).Cronbachalpha
for the job satisfaction measure was .89.
Organizational commitment
Wemeasuredorganizationalcommitmentusingasix-item
version of the scale developed by Mowday et al. (1982) .
Mowday et al.’s complete scale taps behavioral and affec-tive commitment to an organization. This scale (and modi-ﬁcations of it) has been used frequently in prior marketingresearch (cf. MacKenzie et al., 1998 ), and found to possess
adequatepsychometricproperties.Thesixitemsusedinthisresearch were selected to reﬂect only affective commitmentoftheemployeetotheorganizationbecausethisisthoughttobe the part of organizational commitment that drives proso-cial behavior. A factor analysis indicated that these itemswere unidimensional and had a Cronbach alpha of .85.L.A. Bettencourt et al. / Journal ofRetailing 81 (2, 2005) 141–157 149
COBSBs
We developed the COBSB measures based on their con-
ceptualdeﬁnitionsandpriorresearchinvolvingthemeasure-mentofrelatedprosocialbehaviorand/orservicequalitycon-structs (e.g., Parasuraman et al. 1988 ;Van Dyne, Graham,
&Dienesch1994 ).Wealsoconductedgroupinterviewswith
branch managers of the cooperating organization to conﬁrmthe value of COBSBs in this ﬁrm and to identify relevantbehaviors for each COBSB dimension. Managers were en-couragedtoidentifyFSEbehaviorseitherduringinteractionswith customers or behind-the-scenes “that contribute to theability of [XYZ] to provide exceptional customer service.”Exemplar behaviors from these interviews are reﬂected inthe COBSB items.
External representation was measured using a four-item
scaledesignedtotaptheextenttowhichanemployeeisavo-caladvocatetooutsidersoftheorganization’simage,goods,and services. Internal inﬂuence was measured with a four-
item scale intended to capture the extent to which a persontakes individual initiative in communicating to the ﬁrm andco-workers about ways to improve service delivery by theorganization, co-workers, and oneself. Service delivery was
measured with a ﬁve-item scale that reﬂects the extent towhichtheemployeeservescustomersinaconscientious,re-sponsive, ﬂexible, and courteous manner. Cronbach alphasfor external representation, internal inﬂuence, and servicedeliverywere.90,.94,and.91,respectively.Theitemword-ing and additional information concerning the psychometricproperties of these scales is provided in Tables 1 and 2 and
will be discussed in the next section.
Results
Model speciﬁcation
The model shown in Fig. 1was tested with the matched
sampleofFSEsusingAMOS4.0( Arbuckle&Wothke1999 ).
Inspecifyingthestructuralmodel,thethreejusticeconstructsand the three COBSB constructs were each represented bylatentconstructswithmultiple,reﬂectiveindicators.Jobsat-isfaction and organizational commitment were each repre-sented by a single scale score. This was done for severalreasons: (a) this is the conventional way these widely usedconstructshavebeenempiricallyrepresentedintheresearchliterature;(b)theMSQismulti-dimensional;and(c)thetotalnumber of measured variables (62) is very large. An impor-tantdisadvantageofrepresentingtheseconstructswithscalesscores is that this ignores measurement error. We compen-satedforthisbyﬁxingthemeasurementerrortermsforthesetwo constructs at (1 −α) times the variance of their individ-
ualscalescores(e.g., J¨oreskog&S ¨orbom1982 ).Thescaleof
measurementforthelatentconstructswassetbyconstrainingthe variance for each exogenous construct and the varianceforeachstructuralerrortermforendogenousconstructstobeequal to one.Assessment ofconstruct reliability and validity
The ﬁrst step in the analysis was to test the hypothe-
sized measurement relationships and evaluate the reliabil-ity and discriminant validity of the constructs. To do this,an eight-construct conﬁrmatory factor model was estimatedusing the measure covariances as input. Overall, the conﬁr-matory factor model ﬁt the data very well. The chi-square(df) was 1099.50 (633), the comparative ﬁt index (CFI) was
.954, and the root mean squared error approximation (RM-SEA) was .051. These goodness-of-ﬁt indices were selectedbecause Monte Carlo simulations by Hu and Bentler (1999)
have shown that using a combination of indices such as CFIand RMSEA achieves a good balance between Type I andType II error rates when assessing model ﬁt. According totheir simulations, a CFI greater than or equal to .95 and anRMSEA less than or equal to .06 are indicative of a goodﬁtting model and these requirements were met by the hy-pothesizedconﬁrmatoryfactormodel.Inaddition,asshowninTable 1, the hypothesized factor loadings were all statis-
tically signiﬁcant at the .01 level, and the completely stan-dardized factor loadings were all quite high and well abovethe recommended level of .50.
Table 2reports Cronbach alpha internal consistency reli-
abilities, average shared variance estimates, and latent con-structintercorrelations.Asindicatedin Table2,theCronbach
alpha reliability estimates were all well above Nunnally’s
(1978)recommended level of .70. Fornell and Larcker’s
(1981)index of the average amount of variance each latent
factor accounted for in its indicators ( ρ
vc(η)) was well above
the recommended level of .50 for all of the constructs. Evi-denceofdiscriminantvalidityisprovidedbythefactthatallof the construct intercorrelations were signiﬁcantly ( p<.05)
lessthan1.00;andthevariancesharedbyanytwoconstructs(i.e.,thesquareoftheirintercorrelation)wasalwayslessthantheρ
vc(η)’s for the constructs. Thus, taken together, the αs,
ρvc(η)s, and tests of the construct intercorrelations, provided
strong evidence of the convergent and discriminant validityof the constructs.
1
Becauseallofthedatawasobtainedatleastpartiallyfrom
FSEs, common method variance (cf. Podsakoff et al. 2003 )
providesapotentialrivalexplanationfortheobservedpatternof correlations among constructs. Thus, we reﬁt the conﬁr-matoryfactormodelwiththeadditionofaﬁrst-ordermethodfactor.Thisextrafactorwasdeﬁnedasloadingonallofthein-dicatorsofthemultiplymeasuredlatentconstructs,andthuscapturesanyadditionalsystematicmethodvariancecommon
1We also estimated a conﬁrmatory measurement model of the COBSB
ratingswitheachratingsourcemodeledseparately.Thechi-square( df)was
611.89 (282), CFI was .943, and RMSEA was .065. The loadings were allhighlysigniﬁcant(minimum t-value>10.0),thestandardizedloadingswere
allquitelarge(>.50),andtheaverageamountofvarianceeachlatentfactoraccountedforinitsindicatorswaswellabovetherecommendedlevelof.50forallthreeCOBSBconstructsforeachratingsource.Theseresultssuggestthat the COBSB measures for each rating source are quite good.150 L.A. Bettencourt et al. / Journal ofRetailing 81 (2, 2005) 141–157
Table 1
Means, standard deviations, and standardized loadings for the measures
Measures Mean Standard deviation Standardized estimate
Procedural justice (when decisions about employees are made ...)
The concerns of all persons affected by the decisions are heard 3.61 1 .69 .82
Requests for clariﬁcation and additional information about the decisions are allowed 4.44 1 .48 .76
All the sides affected by the decisions are represented 4.06 1 .57 .87
The decisions are applied with consistency to all the parties affected 4.25 1 .49 .75
Accurate information is collected for making the decisions 4.40 1 .43 .84
Complete information is collected for making the decisions 4.38 1 .42 .85
Opportunities are provided to appeal or challenge the decisions 4.00 1 .54 .81
Useful feedback about the decisions and their implementation is provided 4.26 1 .50 .86
Interactional justice (when decisions are made about me, my managers ...)
Consider my viewpoint 5.06 1 .51 .79
Are able to suppress personal biases 5.10 1 .40 .66
provide me with timely feedback about decisions and their implications 5.09 1 .40 .76
Treat me with kindness and consideration 5.77 1 .29 .86
Show concern for my rights as an employee 5.55 1 .39 .92
Take steps to deal with me in a truthful manner 5.68 1 .33 .88
Treat me with respect and dignity 5.78 1 .32 .89
Are sensitive to my personal needs 5.51 1 .53 .86
Offer adequate justiﬁcation for their decisions 5.28 1 .48 .83
Clearly explain their decisions to me 5.33 1 .56 .84
Distributive justice
I am fairly compensated considering the responsibilities that I have 4.06 1 .87 .92
I am fairly compensated taking into account the amount of education and training that I have 4.04 1 .83 .88
I am fairly compensated in view of the amount of experience that I have 3.99 1 .89 .86
I am fairly compensated for the amount of effort that I put forth 3.84 1 .92 .92
I am fairly compensated for the stresses and strains of my job 3.67 1 .85 .83
Job Satisfaction (20 item MSQ scale score)a3.66 .57 .94
Organizational Commitment (6 item scale score)b4.98 1 .12 .92
External representation (slightly reworded for employee self-report items)
Tells outsiders this is a great place to work 4.69 1 .22 .76
Generates favorable goodwill for XYZ 5.12 .96 .83
Says good things about XYZ to others 5.09 .96 .93
Encourages friends and family to use XYZ’s products and services 5.18 1 .09 .83
Internal inﬂuence (slightly reworded for employee self-report items)
Makes constructive suggestions for service improvement 4.55 1 .17 .87
Contributes many ideas for customer promotions and communications 4.02 1 .27 .92
Shares creative solutions to customer problems with other team members 4.44 1 .18 .92
Encourages co-workers to contribute ideas and suggestions for service improvement 4.07 1 .23 .84
Service delivery (slightly reworded for employee self-report items)
Follows customer service guidelines with extreme care 5.73 .83 .80
Follows up in a timely manner to customer requests and problems 5.74 .81 .77
Regardless of circumstances, exceptionally courteous and respectful to customers 6.01 .81 .73
Follows through in a conscientious manner on promises to customers 5.76 .81 .85
Takes time to understand customer needs on an individual basis 5.72 .79 .90
Note. All loadings are signiﬁcant ( p<.01). The goodness of ﬁt indices were: χ2(df)=1099.50 (633), CFI=.95, RMSEA=.05.
aEmployeeswereaskedtoratetheirlevelofsatisfactionwitheachofthefollowing20aspectsoftheirjob:Beingabletokeepbusyallthetime;Thechan ce
toworkaloneonthejob;Thechancetododifferentthingsfromtimetotime;Thechancetobe“somebody”inthecommunity;Thewaymymanagershandletheiremployees;Thecompetenceofmymanagersinmakingdecisions;Beingabletodothingsthatdon’tgoagainstmyconscience;Thewaymyjobprovidesfor steady employment; The chance to do things for other people; The chance to tell people what to do; The chance to do something that makes use of myabilities;Thewaycompanypoliciesareputintopractice;Mypayandbeneﬁts;Thechancesforadvancementonthisjob;Thefreedomtousemyownjudgmen t;
The chance to try my own methods of doing the job; The working conditions; The way my co-workers get along with each other; The praise I get for doing agood job; The feeling of accomplishment I get from the job.
bThe six organizational commitment items are: I am willing to put forth a great deal of effort beyond that normally expected in order to help XYZ be
successful;IwouldacceptalmostanytypeofjobassignmentinordertokeepworkingforXYZ;IﬁndthatmyvaluesandXYZ’svaluesareverysimilar;XYZreally inspires the best in me in the way of job performance; I really care about the fate of XYZ; For me, XYZ is the best of all possible companies for whichto work.L.A. Bettencourt et al. / Journal ofRetailing 81 (2, 2005) 141–157 151
Table 2
Latent construct intercorrelations and reliability estimates
123 4 5 6 7 8
1. Procedural justice (.68, .94) .67 .51 .71 .58 .48 .22 .39
2. Interactional justice .61 (.69, .96) .38 .66 .47 .40 .21 .46
3. Distributive justice .54 .31 ( .78, .95) .58 .37 .32 .07*.23
4. Job satisfaction .70 .65 .56 (–, .89) .69 .51 .24 .39
5. Organizational commitment .59 .45 .39 .69 (–, .85) .65 .37 .34
6. External representation .43 .41 .24 .49 .61 ( .70, .90) .54 .69
7. Internal inﬂuence .07*.24 −.12*.17 .26 .54 ( .79, .94) .45
8. Service delivery .10*.40 −.11*.22 .14 .59 .62 ( .66, .91)
Note.Subdiagonalentriesarethelatentconstructintercorrelationsnotcorrectedforcommonmethodvariance.Entriesabovethediagonalarethelatent construct
intercorrelations corrected for common method variance. Nonsigniﬁcant ( p>.05) correlations are indicated by an asterisk (*). The ﬁrst entry on the diagonal
is the estimate of the average variance extracted ( ρvc(η)) from the measurement model without a method factor and the second entry on the diagonal is the
Cronbach alpha ( α) internal consistency reliability.
to these measures (e.g., common rater bias, social desirabil-
ity).
Overall,thegoodness-of-ﬁtindices( χ2=976.31with597
df,CFI=.962,RMSEA=.048)forthismodelsuggestedthat
itﬁtthedatasigniﬁcantlybetterthanthemeasurementmodelwithoutthemethodfactor,duetothefactthatthemethodfac-tor was signiﬁcantly related to 28 of the self-report items.Of importance, the results indicated that: (a) the additionof the method factor did not cause anyof the hypothesized
measurement loadings to become nonsigniﬁcant and (b) thehypothesized factor loadings were consistently much bigger(e.g.,threeorfourtimesbigger)thanthemethodfactorload-ings. Still, because common method variance can have un-known effects on structural relationships among constructs,estimation of the structural models for testing the hypothe-
ses included a method factor. Latent construct intercorre-lations corrected for method variance are also provided inTable 2.
Estimation ofstructural models
Thenextstepintheanalysiswastoestimatethecomplete
mediationstructuralmodelshownin Fig.1.Theoverallﬁtof
this model was good. The chi-square ( df) was 986.94 (606),
CFIwas.962,andRMSEAwas.047.Thestructuralestimatesofthismodelareshownin Table3.Asshown,althoughsome
individualpathestimatesof Fig.1arenotsigniﬁcant,eachof
thejusticeconstructsisrelatedtoeachofthethreeCOBSBdi-
Table 3
Standardized estimates of the structural relationships
Structural relationships Complete mediation modelaSaturated modelbTrimmed modelc
Procedural justice →job satisfaction .33**.35**.35**
Interactional justice →job satisfaction .36**.32**.32**
Distributive justice →job satisfaction .25**.28**.28**
Procedural justice →organizational commitment .24**.22*.23**
Interactional justice →organizational commitment −.06 −.06 –
Distributive justice →organizational commitment −.07 −.07 –
Job satisfaction →organizational commitment .61**.62**.54**
Job satisfaction →external representation .15 .00 –
Job satisfaction →internal inﬂuence −.02 −.04 –
Job satisfaction →service delivery .38**.04 –
Organizational commitment →external representation .54**.54**.62**
Organizational commitment →internal inﬂuence .40**.38**.39**
Organizational commitment →service delivery .09 .10 –
Procedural justice →external representation – .10 –
Procedural justice →internal inﬂuence – .02 –
Procedural justice →service delivery – .08 –
Interactional justice →external representation – .06 –
Interactional justice →internal inﬂuence – .07 –
Interactional justice →service delivery – .33*.38**
Distributive justice →external representation – .04 –
Distributive justice →internal inﬂuence – −.09 –
Distributive justice →service delivery – .00 –
aχ2(df)=986.94 (606), CFI=.962, RMSEA=.047.
bχ2(df)=976.31 (597), CFI=.962, RMSEA=.048.
cχ2(df)=990.58 (611), CFI=.962, RMSEA=.047.
∗p<.05.
∗∗p<.01.152 L.A. Bettencourt et al. / Journal ofRetailing 81 (2, 2005) 141–157
Table 4
Indirect and direct effects of organizational justice on customer-oriented boundary-spanning behaviors
Hypothesized indirect relationships Standardized
estimatesUnstandardized
estimatesZ-value Conclusions
Indirect effect of procedural justice on external representation .26 .33a4.92 Complete mediation H1A supported
Indirect effect of interactional justice on external representation .11 .14b2.95 Complete mediation H2A supported
Indirect effect of distributive justice on external representation .09 .12b3.87 Complete mediation H3A supported
Indirect effect of procedural justice on internal inﬂuence .16 .18c2.56 Complete mediation H1B supported
Indirect effect of interactional justice on internal inﬂuence .07 .07c2.41 Complete mediation H2B supported
Indirect effect of distributive justice on internal inﬂuence .06 .06c2.66 Complete mediation H3B supported
Indirect effect of procedural justice on service delivery – – – No mediation H1C notsupported
Indirect effect of interactional justice on service delivery – – – No mediation H2C notsupported
Indirect effect of distributive justice on service delivery – – – No mediation H3C notsupported
Direct effect of interactional justice on service delivery .38 .41 5.44 Direct effect –
Note.Estimateswithcommonsuperscriptsare notsigniﬁcantlydifferent( p<.05)fromeachotherusingone-taildirectionaltests.Theindirecteffectofprocedural
justice on internal inﬂuence is signiﬁcantly different from the indirect effect of distributive justice on internal inﬂuence at p<.10.
mensionsindirectlyviajobsatisfactionand/ororganizational
commitment as hypothesized.
Becausemediationrequiresthattheindirectrelationships
are signiﬁcant even in the presence of the nine direct struc-turalrelationshipsamongthethreejusticeconstructsandthethreeCOBSBconstructs(cf. Kenny,Kashy,&Bolger1998 ),
wenextestimatedasaturatedstructuralmodelwiththeseninepathsaddedtothemodelshownin Fig.1.Thechi-squareﬁt
forthismodel( df)was976.31(597),CFIwas.962,andRM-
SEA was .048. A comparison of the chi-square ﬁt betweenthe complete mediation model of Fig. 1and the saturated
structural model indicates that, taken together, the nine ad-ditional paths do notsigniﬁcantly improve the ﬁt of the full
mediation model ( χ
2
DIFF[df=9]=10.63; p>.10). However,
it is apparent from review of the structural path estimates ofTable 3that mediation is not supported among the justice
constructs and service delivery in the presence of the ninedirect paths because neither job satisfaction nor organiza-tional commitment has a signiﬁcant direct effect on servicedelivery in the saturated structural model. In fact, it appearsthattherelationshipbetweenjobsatisfactionandservicede-livery is spurious and based on their common relationshipwith interactional justice. Thus, a trimmed structural modelwas estimated with the nonsigniﬁcant paths of the saturatedstructural model removed.
Thechi-squareﬁtforthetrimmedmodel( df)was990.58
(611), CFI was .962, and RMSEA was .047. A comparisonof the various goodness-of-ﬁt indices between the trimmedand saturated structural models indicates that the trimmedmodel provides an equally good ﬁt to the data ( χ
2
DIFF
[df=14]=14.27; p>.10). Therefore, the indirect path esti-
mates from the trimmed structural model provide the basisfor testing the hypotheses.
2,3
2The addition of role conﬂict and role ambiguity as covariates to each
of the ﬁve endogenous constructs in our complete mediation and trimmedstructuralmodelsdoesnotaffecteitherthepatternorsigniﬁcanceof anyof
the direct or indirect path estimates.
3The trimmed structural model was also investigated with each rating
sourceindividually.ForFSEratings,thechi-square( df)was1161.61(647),
CFI was .943, and RMSEA was .053. For manager ratings (MGR), theTests ofthe hypothesized relationships among the
constructs
To test the hypotheses, the indirect effects of the organi-
zational justice constructs on the COBSBs must be tested.Asshownin Table4,thehypothesizedindirecteffectsofthe
justice constructs on external representation and internal in-ﬂuence were all signiﬁcant, thus supporting H1A ( z=4.92,
p<.001), H2A ( z=2.95,p<.01), H3A ( z=3.87,p<.001),
H1B (z=2.56,p<.05), H2B ( z=2.41,p<.05), and H3B
(z=2.66,p<.01). However, because the direct relationships
frombothjobsatisfactionandorganizationalcommitmenttoservice delivery were notsigniﬁcant in the trimmed struc-
tural model, the indirect effects of the justice constructs onservice delivery (H1C, H2C, and H3C) were notsupported
bythedata.Instead,adirecteffectofinteractionaljusticeonservice delivery was observed ( z=5.44,p<.001).
Hypotheses H4A, H4B, H4C, H5A, H5B, and H5C in-
volvepredictionsabouttherelativemagnitudesoftheindirecteffects of the organizational justice constructs on the COB-SBs.Thesepredictionsweretestedusingthemethodrecom-mended by Cohen and Cohen (1983) for testing differences
between partial regression coefﬁcients from the same sam-ple. Hypotheses H4A and H5A predicted, respectively, thattheindirecteffectofproceduraljusticeonexternalrepresen-tation ( β
unstd=.33) would be greater than the indirect effect
ofdistributivejusticeonexternalrepresentation( βunstd=.12)
and the indirect effect of interactional justice on external
chi-square ( df) was 1066.99 (647), CFI was .960, and RMSEA was .048.
The standardized path estimates are: procedural justice →job satisfac-
tion (FSE: β=.34;p<.01; MGR: β=.34;p<.01); interactional justice →
job satisfaction (FSE: β=.36;p<.01; MGR: β=.35;p<.01); distributive
justice→job satisfaction (FSE: β=.26;p<.01; MGR: β=.27;p<.01);
procedural justice →organizational commitment (FSE: β=.23;p<.01;
MGR: β=.22;p<.01);jobsatisfaction →organizationalcommitment(FSE:
β=.54;p<.01; MGR: β=.54;p<.01); organizational commitment →ex-
ternal representation (FSE: β=.71;p<.01; MGR: β=.29;p<.01); organi-
zational commitment →internal inﬂuence (FSE: β=.40;p<.01; MGR:
β=.06;p>.10); interactional justice →service delivery (FSE: β=.40;
p<.01; MGR: β=.16;p<.01). Addition of a method factor does not af-
fect the results.L.A. Bettencourt et al. / Journal ofRetailing 81 (2, 2005) 141–157 153
representation( βunstd=.14).Usingone-tailcomparisonsbe-
cause of the conservative nature of these tests, both of thesedifferences were signiﬁcant consistent with the hypotheses(z=2.65,p<.01;z=2.07,p<.05).H4BandH5Bpredicted,
respectively, that the indirect effect of procedural justice oninternal inﬂuence ( β
unstd=.18) would be greater than the
indirect effect of distributive justice on internal inﬂuence(β
unstd=.06) and the indirect effect of interactional justice
on internal inﬂuence ( βunstd=.07). Although both of these
differencesareinthedirectionhypothesized,onlythediffer-ence between the indirect effects of procedural justice anddistributive justice is signiﬁcant ( z=1.45,p<.10), offering
support for H4B, but not H5B. Finally, H4C and H5C pre-dicted, respectively, that the indirect effects of proceduraljusticeonservicedeliverywouldbegreaterthantheindirecteffects of distributive justice or interactional justice on ser-vicedelivery,butthesehypotheseswerenotsupportedbytheﬁndings due to the fact that there were no indirect effects ofthe organizational justice constructs on service delivery.
Theﬁnalsetofhypothesesinvolvedpredictionsaboutthe
relative magnitudes of the indirect effects of a speciﬁc formoforganizationaljusticeoneachofthethreedifferentformsof COBSB. It was expected that the indirect effects of eachjusticeconstructonexternalrepresentationandinternalinﬂu-encewouldbestrongerthanthecorrespondingindirecteffecton service delivery. The ﬁndings were consistent with H1Dand H1E because the indirect effects of procedural justiceon external representation ( β
unstd=.33,p<.001) and inter-
nalinﬂuence( βunstd=.18,p<.05)werebothsigniﬁcant,but
the indirect effect of procedural justice on service deliverywasnot.ThesamepatternofsupportwasfoundforH3DandH3E. The indirect effects of distributive justice on externalrepresentation ( β
unstd=.12,p<.001) and internal inﬂuence
(βunstd=.06,p<.01) were both signiﬁcant, but the indirect
effectofdistributivejusticeonservicedeliverywasnot.Theextenttowhichtheﬁndingssupportthepredictionsabouttherelative magnitudes of the effects of interactional justice onthethreeformsofCOBSB(H2DandH2E)ismoredifﬁculttojudge. On the one hand, the indirect effects of interactionaljustice on external representation ( β
unstd=.14,p<.01) and
internalinﬂuence( βunstd=.07,p<.05)werebothsigniﬁcant
and the indirect effect of interactional justice on service de-livery was not. On the other hand, interactional justice wasfoundtohaveadirecteffectonservicedelivery( β
unstd=.41,
p<.001)thatwasstrongerthanitsindirecteffectsontheother
COBSBs.Thus,itmustbeconcludedthattheoverallpatternof ﬁndings fails to support H2D and H2E.
Discussion
Consistentwithsocialexchangereasoning,theresultspro-
vide evidence that all three forms of organizational justicehavesigniﬁcant,uniqueeffectsonCOBSBsthroughjobsat-isfaction and organizational commitment. As hypothesized,theyalsoshowthateachoftherelationshipsamongthejusticedimensionsandexternalrepresentationandinternalinﬂuence
behaviorsarefullymediatedbyjobsatisfactionandorganiza-tionalcommitment.Pastresearchhasofferedsocialexchangetheoryasthetheoreticalrationaleforwhyjusticeevaluationsare positively related to extra-role behaviors. However, fewstudies have explicitly considered the psychological mecha-nisms through which justice inﬂuences prosocial behaviors.Ourresultsdemonstratethatsocialexchangetheorydoesin-deedprovideasolidtheoreticalfoundationforunderstandingthe inﬂuence of justice evaluations on COBSBs, especiallyexternal representation and internal inﬂuence behaviors. ItalsoofferscomplementaryﬁndingstopriormarketingstudiesofOCBsthatindicatethatjobsatisfactionandorganizationalcommitment are among the immediate drivers of a varietyofimportantprosocialbehaviors(cf. MacKenzieetal.1998 ;
Netemeyer et al., 1997 ).
Prior research investigating the effects of justice evalu-
ations on prosocial organizational behaviors such as OCBshasalsorarelyinvestigatedthesimultaneousinﬂuenceofallthreetheoreticallydistinctformsoforganizationaljustice(cf.Masterson et al. 2000 ;Menguc 2000 ;Moorman et al. 1998 ;
Netemeyer et al. 1997 ;Niehoff & Moorman 1993 ). When
all three forms of organizational justice have been studiedsimultaneously, researchers have not found all three to beuniquely related to OCBs (cf. Masterson 2001 ;Moorman
1991). However, our research suggests that this may stem
from the absence of consideration of both job satisfactionandorganizationalcommitmentasmediatorsofthejusticetoprosocial behaviors relationship. Only the relationship frominteractionaljusticetoservicedeliverywasfoundtobedirect.
Further, consistent with our social exchange predictions,
theresultsdemonstratedthattheindirecteffectsofprocedu-ral justice on external representation and internal inﬂuencebehaviors through job satisfaction and organizational com-mitment were generally stronger than the indirect effects ofdistributiveandinteractionaljusticeonthesebehaviors.Fur-ther,thedirectpathfrominteractionaljusticetoservicedeliv-eryreﬂectstheonlyeffectofthejusticedimensionsonservicedeliverybehaviors.Takentogether,theseresultsdemonstratethatproceduraland/orinteractionaljusticearerelativelymoreimportantdriversofallthreeformsofCOBSBswestudiedincomparison to distributive justice. Past investigations of theimpact of justice evaluations on prosocial behaviors such asOCBs have often only included a single organizational jus-ticedimensionsotheywereunabletotestforthepossibilityof differential strength of paths from distinct justice dimen-sions to prosocial behaviors (cf. Menguc 2000 ;Moorman et
al.1998;Netemeyeretal.1997 ;Niehoff&Moorman1993 ).
Finally, consistent with social exchange theory, our ﬁnd-
ings provided support for signiﬁcant indirect relationshipsfromproceduralanddistributivejusticetoexternalrepresen-tation and internal inﬂuence behaviors, the more extra-roleforms of COBSBs, whereas the indirect path relationshipsfrom procedural and distributive justice to service deliverybehaviors were not signiﬁcant. These results demonstratethe usefulness of future research offering theoretically de-154 L.A. Bettencourt et al. / Journal ofRetailing 81 (2, 2005) 141–157
rived predictions concerning the differential strength of an-
tecedents on distinct dimensions of COBSBs. Among otherdifferences among the behaviors, we argued that they differintermsoftheextenttowhichtheyareperformedatthedis-cretionoftheemployeeandintermsoftheimmediatetargetof the behavior.
The hypotheses that were not supported by our empirical
studylargelyderivefromtheeffectsofaddingofonesignif-icant path to our proposed model. Speciﬁcally, we added adirectsigniﬁcantpathfrominteractionaljusticetoservicede-livery behaviors, and this added path caused the signiﬁcantpath from job satisfaction to service delivery behaviors tobecomenonsigniﬁcant.Althoughunexpected,thenonsignif-icantpathsfromjobsatisfactionandorganizationalcommit-menttoservicedeliverybehaviorsareconsistentwithsocialexchange theory. As we argued, service delivery behaviorsare the least discretionary form of COBSB and, as such,should be the least strongly related to social exchange at-titudes such as organizational commitment and job satisfac-tion. Thus, our hypotheses anticipated weaker paths fromthe social exchange attitudes to service delivery behaviors.However, we did not expect that these paths would be non-signiﬁcant.
The strength of the direct path from interactional justice
to service delivery behaviors in comparison to the indirecteffects of interactional justice on either of the other COB-SBs was also unexpected. We offer two possible explana-tions for this ﬁnding. First, it is possible that this direct pathreﬂects a role modeling effect as FSEs gain conﬁdence intheir ability to serve customers through repeated observa-tion of their manager’s favorable treatment of themselves.Such a role modeling effect would be more likely for ser-vice delivery behaviors due to their greater similarity withfair interpersonal leadership behaviors, and it would not beexpectedthatsuchaneffectwouldbemediatedbyjobsatis-factionororganizationalcommitment.Second,therelativelyin-role nature of service delivery in comparison to externalrepresentation and internal inﬂuence may also offer an ex-planation for the strength of this direct effect. Tyler (1990)
andTylerandLind(1992) arguedthatindividualwillingness
to comply with organizational policies and directives (i.e.,perform role-prescribed behaviors) is primarily a functionof individual attitudes regarding the legitimacy of rules andauthority in the ﬁrm. Legitimacy of managerial authority isreﬂected in interactional justice because legitimate author-ities are nonarbitrary, consistent, unambiguous, reasonable,and moral. Thus, the direct path from interactional justiceto service delivery may reﬂect the importance of legitimatemanagerial authority in motivating these behaviors. Futureresearch should consider these and other possibilities.
Future research
Althoughwefoundoverallsupportforoursocialexchange
predictions, we do not contend that social exchange theoryprovides the only explanation of COBSBs. We have con-tended, for example, that a social exchange relationship be-
tween the FSE and the organization serves as a form of in-formal control that aligns an employee’s behavior with or-ganizational interests. Another important form of informalcontrol in a service context that has been shown to be posi-tivelyrelatedtocustomerperceptionsofservicequalityistheserviceclimateoftheorganizationorworkgroup( Schneider,
White,&Paul1998 ).IfFSEsbelievethatcustomer-oriented
initiativeisvaluedbytheirorganization,thenwecanexpectthat service climate perceptions will be positively related toCOBSBs.
Recent research by Donavan, Brown, and Mowen (2004)
suggeststhatitwouldalsobeworthwhiletoconsiderindivid-ual customer orientation as an antecedent of COBSBs. Fur-ther,theirresearchsuggeststhatitwouldbeworthwhiletoin-vestigatetheroleofjobsatisfactionandorganizationalcom-mitmentasmediatorsofanyeffectofcustomerorientationonCOBSBs. Although research on the personality antecedentsofcitizenshipbehaviorshasrevealedrelativelyweakrelation-ships(cf.Organ&Ryan1995 ),surfacetraitssuchascustomer
orientationmaybegoodpredictorsofCOBSBsbecausethereis a close ﬁt with the behaviors being predicted.
Anotherinterestingavenuetopursuewouldbetoinvesti-
gate the role of burnout as an antecedent of COBSBs. Singh
(2000)has demonstrated that burnout tendencies partially
mediate relationships among role stressors and commitmentandrelationshipsamongrolestressorsandperformancequal-ityofFSEs.Interestingly,distinctdimensionsofburnout(i.e.,burnout-customer versus burnout-management) and distinctdimensions of role ambiguity (i.e., role ambiguity-customervs. role ambiguity-company) exhibited a differential patternofrelationshipswithperformancequality.Thus,itwouldalsobe interesting for future research to consider the differentialpattern of relationships that might emerge among distinctburnoutandroleambiguitydimensionsanddistinctCOBSBdimensions.
Limitations
A balanced discussion of our ﬁndings must also include
consideration of research limitations. First, our ﬁndings arebased on a single sample of FSEs working for a single ﬁrm,and evidence of the generalizability of the results will re-quire further studies with different samples and ﬁrms. Inparticular, our FSE sample was predominantly female andthis may affect the generalizability of our results to the ex-tent that gender may moderate some of the relationships weidentiﬁed. Still, the generalizability of our results to otherFSE samples and service contexts should be less of a con-cerngiventhatoursamplecharacteristicsarequitesimilartothoseofpriorresearchamongFSEs(cf. Singh2000 ).Second,
although we investigated a structural model of relationshipsamong variables, our research design was cross-sectional.We can only conclude that our model is a feasible explana-tion of the observed relationships in the data. The directionof paths in our model relies on prior research. Third, ourL.A. Bettencourt et al. / Journal ofRetailing 81 (2, 2005) 141–157 155
studyonlyconsideredtwoconstructsassocialexchangeme-
diators of the effects on organizational justice on COBSBs.Althoughconceptualandempiricalliteraturejustiﬁesthefo-cus on job satisfaction and organizational commitment, itis possible that inclusion of other social exchange media-torsmayhavechangedtheresults—especiallywithregardtothe direct effect of interactional justice on service deliverybehaviors.
Managerial implications
The literature and business practice speak extensively
aboutthecriticalimportanceofﬁrmsdevelopingandimple-menting a customer orientation. Our research demonstratesfor managers the relevance of social exchange relationshipsin developing such an orientation among customer serviceemployees. As such, it offers a complementary approach tomoreformal,control-orientedperspectives.Inthissocialex-changecontext,managementmustdevelopandmaintaintwoforms of exchange, between the customer service employeeand the supervisor and between the employee and the orga-nization.
The social exchange relationship appears especially im-
portantformotivatingthemoreextra-roleformsofcustomer-oriented behavior. These actions include employees takingindividualinitiativeincommunicationswiththeﬁrmandco-workerstoimproveservicedeliveryandemployeesbeingvo-caladvocatestooutsidersoftheorganization’simage,goodsandservices.Whileacontrol-orientedmanagementapproachmay be workable in mandating role-prescribed service be-haviors,therearelimitationstothisapproachinencouragingthebroaderrangeofcustomer-orientedbehaviorswestudied.Evenintightlycontrolledservicecontexts,FSEspossesscon-siderablediscretionintermsofthecustomer-orientedbehav-iorstheychoosetoprovideorwithhold,andthesebehaviorsrely on a social exchange relationship.
Ourresearchshouldencouragemanagerstofosterawork-
place environment focused on justice to encourage socialexchange attitudes among customer service representativesthat produce customer-oriented boundary-spanning behav-iors. Our results reveal that management should devotegreater relative emphasis to procedural (processes) justiceelements to signal the importance of a social exchange rela-tionship with the employee and the importance of the em-ployee and his/her contributions to the organization. Fur-ther, because our research demonstrates that job satisfac-tion and organizational commitment play a key mediatingrole between distributive and procedural justice evaluationsand customer-oriented behaviors, it shows that any stepsthat management takes to increase employee job satisfac-tion and/or organizational commitment should lead to in-creases in the more extra-role customer-oriented behaviorsamong customer service employees. Finally, our study re-vealsthecentralimportanceoflegitimatemanagerialauthor-ity as reﬂected in fair interactions between FSEs and theirimmediate managers for motivating exceptional service de-livery behaviors in remote service contexts such as retail
banking.
Acknowledgements
TheauthorsthanktheCenterforServicesLeadershipand
thecooperatingﬁrmfortheirsupportoftheprojectandDrs.Mark B. Houston and Amy Ostrom for their helpful com-ments on an earlier version of the paper.
References
Aldrich, Howard, & Herker, Diane. (1977). Boundary spanning roles and
organizational structure. Academy ofManagement Review ,2(April),
217–230.
Arbuckle, James L., & Wothke, Werner. (1999). Amos 4.0 user’s guide .
Chicago: SmallWaters.
Aryee, Samuel, Budhwar, Pawan S., & Chen, Zhen Ziong. (2002). Trust as
a mediator of the relationship between organizational justice and workoutcomes: Test of a social exchange model. Journal ofOrganizational
Behavior,23(May), 267–285.
Bell, Simon J., & Menguc, Bulent. (2002). The employee-organization
relationship, organizational citizenship behaviors, and superior servicequality.Journal ofRetailing ,78(Summer), 131–146.
Bernhardt, Kenneth L., Donthu, Naveen, & Kennett, Pamela. (2000). A
longitudinal analysis of satisfaction and proﬁtability. Journal ofBusi-
ness Research ,47(February), 161–171.
Bettencourt, Lance A., & Brown, Stephen W. (1997). Contact employees:
Relationships among workplace fairness, job satisfaction and prosocialservice behaviors. Journal ofRetailing ,73(Spring), 39–61.
Bettencourt, Lance A., & Brown, Stephen W. (2003). Role stressors
and customer-oriented boundary-spanning behaviors in service orga-nizations. Journal ofthe Academy ofMarketing Science ,31(Fall),
394–408.
Bettencourt, Lance A., Gwinner, Kevin P., & Meuter, Matthew L. (2001).
A Comparison of attitude, personality, and knowledge predictors ofservice-oriented organizational citizenship behaviors. Journal ofAp-
plied Psychology ,86(February), 29–41.
Bies, Robert J., & Moag, Joseph S. (1986). Interactional justice: Com-
munication criteria of fairness. In R. Lewecki, H. Blair, Sheppard, H.Max, & Blazerman (Eds.), Research in negotiation in organizations:
Vol. 1(pp. 43–55). Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Blau, Peter M. (1964). Exchange and power in social life . New York:
John Wiley & Sons.
Blau, Peter M. (1968). Social exchange. In David L. Sills (Ed.), Interna-
tional encyclopedia ofthe social sciences: Vol. 7 (pp. 452–458). New
York: Macmillan Company.
Bowen, David E., Gilliland, Stephen W., & Folger, Robert. (1999). HRM
and service fairness: How being fair with employees spills over tocustomers. Organizational Dynamics ,27(Winter), 7–23.
Bowen, David E., & Schneider, Benjamin. (1985). Boundary-spanning-
role employees and the service encounter: Some guidelines for futuremanagement and research. In John Czepiel, Michael R. Solomon, &Carol F. Surprenant (Eds.), The service encounter (pp. 127–147). New
York: Lexington Books.
Brown, Steven P., & Peterson, Robert A. (1993). Antecedents and con-
sequences of salesperson job satisfaction: Meta-analysis and assess-ment of causal effects. Journal ofMarketing Research ,30(February),
63–77.
Cohen, Jacob, & Cohen, Patricia. (1983). Applied multiple regres-
sion/correlation analysis for the social sciences . Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.156 L.A. Bettencourt et al. / Journal ofRetailing 81 (2, 2005) 141–157
Colquitt, Jason A., Conlon, Donald E., Wesson, Michael J., Porter,
Christopher O. L. H., & Ng, K. Yee. (2001). Justice at the mil-lennium: A meta-analytic review of 25 years of organizational justiceresearch. Journal ofApplied Psychology ,86(3), 425–445.
Donavan, D. Todd, Brown, Tom J., & Mowen, John C. (2004). Internal
beneﬁts of service-worker customer orientation: Job satisfaction, com-mitment, and organizational citizenship behaviors. Journal ofMarket-
ing,68(January), 128–146.
Folger, Robert, & Cropanzano, Russell. (1998). Organizational justice
and human resource management . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Fornell, Claes, & Larcker S David F. (1981). Evaluating structural equa-
tion models with unobservable variables and measurement error. Jour-
nal ofMarketing Research ,18(February), 39–50.
Hartline, Michael D., & Ferrell, O. C. (1996). The management of
customer-contact service employees: An empirical investigation. Jour-
nal ofMarketing ,60(October), 52–70.
Hu, Li-tse, & Bentler, Peter M. (1999). Cutoff criteria for ﬁt indexes in
covariance structure analysis: Conventional criteria versus new alter-natives.Structural Equation Modeling ,6(1), 1–55.
J¨oreskog, Karl G., & S ¨orbom, Dag. (1982). Recent developments in struc-
tural equation modeling. Journal ofMarketing Research ,19(Novem-
ber), 404–416.
Kenny, David A., Kashy, Deborah A., & Bolger, Niall. (1998). Data
analysis in social psychology. In D. Gilbert, S. Fiske, & G. Lindzey(Eds.),Handbook ofsocial psychology: Vol. 1 (pp. 233–265). Boston:
McGraw-Hill.
Leventhal, G. S., Karuza, Jurgis, Jr., & Fry, William Rick. (1980). Be-
yond fairness: A theory of allocation preferences. In G. Mikula (Ed.),Justice and social interaction (pp. 167–218). Bern: Huber.
Lind, E. Allan, & Tyler, Tom R. (1988). The social psychology ofpro-
cedural justice . New York: Plenum Press.
MacKenzie, Scott B., Podsakoff, Philip M., & Ahearne, Michael. (1998).
Some possible antecedents and consequences of in-role and extra-rolesalesperson performance. Journal ofMarketing ,62(July), 87–98.
Masterson, Suzanne S. (2001). A trickle-down model of organizational
justice: Relating employees’ and customers’ perceptions of and reac-tions to fairness. Journal ofApplied Psychology ,86(4), 594–604.
Masterson, Suzanne S., Kyle, Lewis, Goldman S Barry M., & Taylor,
M. Susan. (2000). Integrating justice and social exchange: The dif-fering effects of fair procedures and treatment on work relationships.Academy ofManagement Journal ,43(August), 738–748.
McFarlin, Dean B., & Sweeney, Paul D. (1992). Distributive and proce-
dural justice as predictors of satisfaction with personal and organiza-tional outcomes. Academy ofManagement Journal ,35(August), 626–
637.
Menguc, Bulent. (2000). An empirical investigation of a social exchange
model of organizational citizenship behaviors across two sales situ-ations: A Turkish case. Journal ofPersonal Selling and Sales Man-
agement,20(Fall), 205–214.
Moorman, Robert H. (1991). Relationship between organizational justice
and organizational citizenship behaviors: Do fairness perceptions in-ﬂuence employee citizenship? Journal ofApplied Psychology ,76(De-
cember), 845–855.
Moorman, Robert H., Blakely, Gerald, & Niehoff, Brian P. (1998). Does
perceived organizational support mediate the relationship between pro-cedural justice and organizational citizenship behavior? Academy of
Management Journal ,41(June), 351–357.
Mowday, Richard T., Porter, Lyman W., & Steers, Richard M. (1982).
Employee-organization linkages . New York: Academic Press.
Netemeyer, Richard G., Boles, James S., McKee, Daryl O., & McMur-
rian, Robert. (1997). An investigation into the antecedents of organi-zational citizenship behaviors in a personal selling context. Journal
ofMarketing ,61(July), 85–98.
Niehoff, Brian P., & Moorman, Robert H. (1993). Justice as a media-
tor of the relationship between methods of monitoring and organiza-tional citizenship behavior. Academy ofManagement Journal ,36(3),
527–556.Nunnally, Jim C. (1978). Psychometric theory (2nd ed.). New York:
McGraw-Hill.
O’Reilly, Charles, & Chatman, Jennifer. (1986). Organizational commit-
ment and psychological attachment: The effects of compliance, identi-ﬁcation, and internalization on prosocial behavior. Journal ofApplied
Psychology ,71(August), 492–499.
Organ, Dennis W. (1988a). Organizational citizenship behavior: The good
soldier syndrome . Lexington: Lexington Books.
Organ, Dennis W. (1988b). A restatement of the satisfaction-performance
hypothesis. Journal ofManagement ,14(December), 547–557.
Organ, Dennis W. (1990). The motivational basis of organizational citizen-
ship behavior. In Barry M. Staw & L. L. Cummings (Eds.), Research
in organizational behavior: Vol. 12 (pp. 43–72). Greenwich, CT: JAI
Press.
Organ, Dennis W., & Ryan, Katherine. (1995). A meta-analytic review
of attitudinal and dispositional predictors of organizational citizenshipbehavior. Personnel Psychology ,48(Winter), 775–802.
Parasuraman, A., Zeithaml, Valarie A., & Berry, Leonard L. (1988).
SERVQUAL: A multiple-item scale for measuring consumer percep-tions of service quality. Journal ofRetailing ,64(Spring), 12–40.
Podsakoff, Philip M., MacKenzie, Scott B., Paine, Julie Beth, & Bachrach,
Daniel. (2000). Organizational citizenship behaviors: A critical reviewof the theoretical and empirical literature and suggestions for futureresearch. Journal ofManagement ,26(3), 512–563.
Podsakoff, Philip M., MacKenzie, Scott B., Podsakoff, Nathan P., & Lee,
Jeong-Yeon. (2003). Common method biases in behavioral research:A critical review of the literature and recommended remedies. Journal
ofApplied Psychology ,88(October), 879–903.
Price, James L., & Mueller, Charles W. (1986). Handbook oforganiza-
tional measurement . Marshﬁeld, MA: Pitman Publishing.
Robinson, Sandra L., Kraatz, Matthew S., & Rousseau, Denise M. (1994).
Changing obligations and the psychological contract: A longitudi-nal study. Academy ofManagement Journal ,37(February), 137–
152.
Schneider, Benjamin, & Bowen, David E. (1984). New service design,
development and implementation and the employee. In R. William,George, E. Claudia, & Marshall (Eds.), Developing new services (pp.
82–101). Chicago: American Marketing Association.
Schneider, Benjamin, White, Susan S., & Paul, Michelle C. (1998).
Linking service climate and customer perceptions of service quality:Test of a causal model. Journal ofApplied Psychology ,83(2), 150–
163.
Scullen, Steven E., Mount, Michael K., & Goff, Maynard. (2000). Un-
derstanding the latent structure of job performance ratings. Journal of
Applied Psychology ,85(December), 956–970.
Singh, Jagdip. (2000). Performance productivity and quality of frontline
employees in service organizations. Journal ofMarketing ,64(April),
15–34.
Tepper, Bennett J., Lockhart, Daniel, & Hoobler, Jenny. (2001). Justice,
citizenship, and role deﬁnition effects. Journal ofApplied Psychology ,
86(August), 789–796.
Tyler, Tom R. (1990). Why people obey the law . New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.
Tyler, Tom R., & Lind, Allan E. (1992). A relational model of authority
in groups. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social
psychology (pp. 115–191). San Diego: Academic Press.
Utne, Mary Kristine, & Kidd, Robert. (1980). Equity and attribution. In
G. Mikula (Ed.), Justice and social interaction (pp. 63–94). Bern:
Huber.
Van Dyne S Linn, Graham, Jill W., & Dienesch, Richard M. (1994).
Organizational citizenship behavior: Construct redeﬁnition, measure-ment, and validation. Academy ofManagement Journal ,37(August),
765–802.
Wayne, Sandy J., Tetrick, Lois E., Shore, Lynn M., & Bommer, William
H. (2002). The role of fair treatment and rewards in perceptions of or-ganizational support and leader-member exchange. Journal ofApplied
Psychology ,87(June), 590–598.L.A. Bettencourt et al. / Journal ofRetailing 81 (2, 2005) 141–157 157
Weiss, David J., Davis, R. V., England, G. W., & Lofquist, L. H. (1967).
Manual for the Minnesota Satisfaction Questionnaire, Minnesota Stud-ies in Vocational Rehabilitation (Vol. XXII). Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota, Industrial Relations Center Work Adjustment Project.
Williams, Larry J., & Hazer, John T. (1986). Antecedents and
consequences of satisfaction and commitment in turnovermodels: A reanalysis using latent variable structural equa-
tion methods. Journal ofApplied Psychology ,71(May), 219–
231.
Zeithaml, Valarie A., Berry, Leonard L., & Parasuraman, A. (1988). Com-
munication and control processes in the delivery of service quality.Journal ofMarketing ,52(April), 35–48.