Managing creative projects: An empirical synthesis of activities
Laurent Simon*
Service de l /C213enseignement du Management, HEC Montre ´al, 3000 Co ˆte-Ste-Catherine, Montre ´al (QC) Canada H3T 2A7
Received 1 March 2005; accepted 13 September 2005
Abstract
This paper proposes a radical empirical look on the concrete activities of project managers involved in creative projects, with a speciﬁc
focus on ‘‘non-administrative’’ issues. Through four case studies in the video-game industry, multimedia, advertising and a circus, we
propose an integrated synthesis of what creative project managers actually do. Beyond analytical, cognitive, psychological, symbolic
and discursive activities, we identify four sets of activities carefully coined to acknowledge the everyday work of project manager
involved in creative projects. We suggest that this project manager acts as a sense-maker ,aweb-weaver ,agame-master and a ﬂow-
balancer . This empirical ‘‘picture’’ raises questions on the technical and theoretical focus of research in project management where
creativity is an utmost strategic issue.
/C2112005 Elsevier Ltd and IPMA. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Managing projects; Managing and leading; Creative projects; Teams; Innovation
1. The creative imperative
In the ﬁrst issue of this journal, Blankevoort suggested
that ‘‘tools should be developed for the management of cre-
ativity to make project management complete as a recog-
nized profession’’ [1]. Researchers and practitioners as
well provided numerous answers to this call, in the form
of general management approaches [2,3], creativity-
inducing methods [4,5] and techniques [6]. Yet, little has
been said on what project managers actually do to lead
creative teams.
As our business world is shifting from a knowledge-
based to a conception/design-based economy [7], creative
projects are becoming a strategic necessity [8]. Managers
and leaders are getting more concerned about the manage-
ment of creative endeavours [9]. In this regard, it has been
suggested that construction and product-development pro-
jects ask for diﬀerent work processes, especially from the
psychosocial point of view [10]. In ‘‘Design-Oriented Orga-
nizations’’ [11], the mobilisation of collective knowledgethrough projects is essential. In projects where ambiguity
increases and goals are only broadly/partially deﬁned, col-
lective creativity has to be fostered, channelled and man-
aged. Beyond the interesting practical and theoretical
issues on creativity skills and methods [12–18] , the manage-
rial[19,20] or structural approaches to foster creativity in
individuals and groups [21–24] and the literature on crea-
tive leadership [2,25] or best practices in the management
of creativity for innovation [6,26–28] , less has been empir-
ically done to assess how project managers concretely han-
dle individual and collective creativity in projects.
In this regard, this paper aims at introducing the activ-
ities of project managers involved in creative projects in a
non-abstract, non-theoretical way, with a strong focus on
describing what they actually do. After a short theoretical
introduction and some brief methodological consider-
ations, the core of the paper presents an empirical ‘‘pic-
ture’’ based on ﬁeld data from various creative industries.
It is argued that the project manager engages in sets of
activities coined as sense-maker ,web-weaver ,game-master
andﬂow-balancer (seeFig. 1 ). Those activities and catego-
ries are discussed with further reﬂections on the manage-
ment of creativity in projects.
0263-7863/$30.00 /C2112005 Elsevier Ltd and IPMA. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.ijproman.2005.09.002*Tel.: +1 514 340 6029; fax: +1 514 340 5635.
E-mail address: laurent.simon@hec.ca .www.elsevier.com/locate/ijproman
International Journal of Project Management 24 (2006) 116–126
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF
PROJECT
MANAGEMENT2. What do creative project managers do?
As reviewed by Woodman et al. [29], creativity has been
a subject of various researches with diﬀerent focus mainly
since the 1950s. After considering individual creativity
through the life-story of creators, creativity-inducing tech-
niques at the individual level, business creativity from the
entrepreneurial point of view and as a strategic imperative,
research focused on creativity as an organizational issue to
be managed through speciﬁc contexts and leadership [2,25] .
Organizational creativity and the management of creative
teams as part of the ‘‘normal’’ day-to-day business activi-
ties are more recent concerns. Recent synthetic works as-
sessed for the complexity of the phenomenon of
organizational creativity and proposed to integrate its mul-
tiple dimensions through a multilevel perspective
[25,29,30] . Without anticipating too much on the possibil-
ity to establish a ‘‘grand theory’’ of organizational creativ-
ity, this still leaves open a wide array of subjects to explore
and theorize on, from the global strategic positioning of
companies on the macro level, organizational structures
and culture on the medium level, and to manager /C213s roles,
interpersonal relationships and individual attributes on
the micro-level. From the leadership point of view alone,
researchers /C213focus has been mainly on the skills, styles,
and behaviours of leaders; their ability to set creative cli-
mates, to coach, to motivate and to reward their creative
employees [31,32] . Interesting debates emerge and recent
management and organizational theories are thoroughly
mobilized to address the many issues that have arisen from
the literature on creativity management. For instance, what
are the eﬀects of transactional versus transformational
leadership [33]and what is the importance of emotional
intelligence in leading creative people [34]. Promising per-
spectives occur, adopting a fresh look on traditional man-
agerial metaphor [35]or exploring unusual subjects like the
leader /C213s relationship to time and rhythm in creative projects
[36]. Yet, due to the variety of stimulating challenges for
theorization, most recent papers on the management of
creativity and on leadership for creativity do not put much
emphasis on the ﬁrst level of understanding of any manage-
ment ventures: managers /C213actual practices and actions.Acknowledging the need for micro-studies in the ﬁeld of
creativity management [25], this paper proposes an original
empirical synthesis of the actual ‘‘activities’’1of project
managers involved in projects in creative and ‘‘techno-
creative’’ organizations [40]. It is based on qualitative
empirical inductive studies in creative industries, with a
strong descriptive focus. A ﬁrst ethnographic study in the
ﬁeld of video-games development provided the insight that
the creative project manager had a strong inﬂuence on the
team as a manager of context more than as an administra-
tive manager [41]. Furthermore, it appeared that a creative
project team could be described as a ‘‘playful community’’
with a strong work ethic organized around three main
activities: never-ending learning, collective knowledge shar-
ing and mutual challenging [42]. In this regard, the present
research empirically suggests that speciﬁc ‘‘activities’’ are at
the core of the creative project manager /C213s work and perfor-
mance. As little empirical descriptive literature was avail-
able on the managers /C213concrete activities in creative
projects, case studies were conducted from 2002 to 2004
in order to explore this subject further. We will now review
the research method and brieﬂy introduce the projects con-
sidered. It will then report the main ﬁndings as four sets of
detailed ‘‘activities’’ and ﬁnally reﬂect on some theoretical
and practical insights.
3. Research method
This is a cases study based research which derives from
an exploratory ethnographic ﬁeld study on the video-game
industry in the tradition of grounded theory [43,44] and
qualitative research on emergent phenomena [45–47] . Set
in the second most important development studio in the
world,2it described and analyzed the speciﬁc management
activities and work ethic in this industry. Among other
conclusive insights, it appears that project managers
(PMs) play a central role in the company, yet their major
talents lie not in planning or controlling, rather in dealing
with people in and around the project. Speciﬁc activities lie
at the heart of their work, in parallel with more traditional
administrative activities. Drawing on this insight, further
research was implemented in creativity-focused industries
in Montreal, Canada: multimedia software for the TV
industry, general advertising, and a circus company (ﬁeld
observation and semi-structured interviews with project
managers and team-members) (see Table 1 ). Departing
from most recent experimental settings for creativity re-
search (see for instance: [48,49] ), we chose a ‘‘real-world/SENSE-MAKERGAME-MASTER
FLOW-BALANCERWEB-WEAVER
Fig. 1. The activities of the creative project manager: an overview.
1We voluntarily use this neutral word, ‘‘activity’’, to depart from usual
categories like roles, skills, behaviours, attributes and the like. It aims at
focusing on the concrete actions of managers as they have been observed
through ﬁeldwork. We partly follow Mintzberg /C213s work on ‘‘roles’’ [37]and
‘‘mindsets’’ [38], yet we prefer to refer here to the PMs /C213work inductively as
‘‘practices’’, in the legacy of Scho ¨n/C213s ‘‘reﬂective practitioner’’ [39]or again,
simply ‘‘activities’’.
2Fourteen months of ﬁeld presence, observations, conversations and
questioning validated by in depth interviews.L. Simon / International Journal of Project Management 24 (2006) 116–126 117real-life’’ ﬁeld approach to let project managers express
their practices in their own words. Interviewees were
encouraged to ‘‘tell the story of the project’’ in a subjec-
tive/reﬂexive mode, with a strong emphasis on description.
Based on verbatim and ﬁeld notes, the diﬀerent stories were
compiled together as case studies. Those stories were then
read in parallel by two readers, with a focus on PMs /C213
non-administrative activities. After comparison and discus-
sion, four main categories of ‘‘activities’’ have been identi-
ﬁed with support from speciﬁc meaningful ﬁeld quotes.
Based on management literature, the next step consisted
in carefully coining those activities and sub-activities.
Faithful to the interpretive ethnographic tradition, we pres-
ent the reader with precise meaning-rich labelling to faith-
fully and consistently account for our observations.
According to our observations, every project manager
was fully aware that their goal was, as mentioned by one,
to ‘‘do something diﬀerent, to diﬀerentiate from the compe-
tition, ( ...) to make something still unheard of’’. This rad-
ical vision of creativity is still congruent with the generally
accepted deﬁnition of creativity as ‘‘the creation of a valu-
able, useful new product, service, idea, procedure or pro-
cess’’ [29]. The projects considered here had diﬀerent
goals, scopes and budgets but could all qualify as collective
creative endeavours. In each case, a PM took charge of the
organization and coordination of the team, with a rela-
tively strong involvement in the creative process.
4. The ‘‘activities’’ of creative project managers
In the following section, we propose an integrated ac-
count of the set of speciﬁc ‘‘soft’’, non-administrative activ-
ities we identify, built around four main themes, each of
which is split up in sub-themes. Those sub-activities arepresented in the logical order they appear in creative
PMs /C213day-to-day activities. Due to the voluntarily qualita-
tive orientation of this paper, theoretical comments and
references will be considered in the ﬁnal discussion (see
Fig. 2 ).
4.1. The project manager as sense-maker
Firstly, the PM makes sense out of the collective eﬀort.
She/he builds the project team identity through the crafting
of the situated collective understanding of what is at stake.
In other words she/he translates the collective enactment of
the project into a shared meaning that is constantly reas-
serted through informal communication and formal meet-
ings [50–52] . She/he gives a convergent direction to the
multiple individual talents at work in the project team.
At the same time, the PM seems all the more involved in
building meaning through interactions with other stake-
holders in the company (corporate sponsors or partners,
functional managers allocating team-members, resource-
persons with technical or managerial expertise or sales rep-
resentatives in the ﬁeld). The PM also makes contact with
external resource-persons belonging to his/her own per-
sonal network, mainly on technical and commercial issues.
He/she even uses personal partner or family members as
sounding boards to test ideas and insights or vent feelings
about the project and its dynamics.
Practically, this consists in a set of analytical, cognitive,
psychological, symbolic and discursive activities. Not al-
ways conscious but ever-present in the PM /C213s practice, those
activities aim at bringing answers to two simple yet essen-
tial sets of questions: ‘‘ What are we together for?’’ and
‘‘How do we translate this into concrete actions?’’Table 1
Description of the projects
Projects Duration (months) People Research data
Field presence (weeks) Interviews Format of research product Pages
Video-game: a core-team of ﬁve lead game-designers and a script-writer progressively aggregate with modular teams of software developers, graphic
artists, sound engineers and testers, up to 80. The game started with a new concept. Except for the core software, everything had to be created and
developed from scratch: interactive storyline, characters, settings, maps, and game-play
80% Creation 22 Up to 80 60 >20 Monograph 230
Real-time animation TV software: 12 programmers working on a piece of software used to add on-screen comments and stats to live reports (sport events,
political elections ...). Adaptation of a previous version with new real-time rendering capabilities
Adaptation: 50% creation 5 Up to 12 3 5 Case study 46
Advertising campaigns: based on a requirement from a customer, a very autonomous small creative team would deﬁne a product placement, chose a media
format (TV, radio, magazines, boards ...) and create an ad with punch line and graphics. As product placement and media choice were almost
standardized, the main part of the project remained the creation of an original concept with a powerful and well-targeted message
Pure creations >1 Up to 5 1 5 Case study 24
New circus show: seven artists decided to create a new show independently from institutionalized circus. Their self-imposed challenge was to craft a
consistent show from scratch with a background story on everyday life
Work in progress: 100% creation 18 9 2 5 Case study 22118 L. Simon / International Journal of Project Management 24 (2006) 116–126/C15The project manager learns by doing. The creative PMs
we observed mostly relied on an inductive discovery and
understanding of the project. A common comment was:
‘‘We learn as we go’’! One of the PMs added: ‘‘...at the
beginning, we have a broad idea of what we want and how
we are going to make it, but we deﬁne and reﬁne it in the pro-
cess’’ . Another one emphasizes the challenge of creation:
‘‘This hasn /C213t been done before. It was new to all of us.
As the leader, I had to make sense out of it. I talked
and listened a lot. ( ...) Even if I had my own ideas, I
had to confront them with others, then we tried
together, we tested, we learned and we built on that’’.
The ‘‘hands-on’’ approach seems to be essential here.
This inductive learning allows the PM to get the ‘‘big pic-
ture’’ in order to help each team member situate his/her
activities in the project.
/C15The project manager interprets the situations. In one
speciﬁc case, the PM would begin every formal discussion
with the team with the same introduction: ‘‘Now, this is
what /C213s happening ...’’A detailed explanation would follow
to reiterate the issues at stake into the context of the mo-
ment. He uses the same sentence when he had to change
the tasks requirements of a team member, to ground this
request in the broader project context. He would adopt
the same explanatory attitude when a team member ex-
pressed disinterest at a certain stage in the project:
‘‘What is happening is that you /C213re not excited any more
because you made it! The (technical) solution you found
is superb, but now you don /C213t feel the challenge anymore.
You need to see it in another way: the challenge is in the
implementation now ...– That /C213s right ...I feel it /C213s going to be an interesting chal-
lenge too to explain how it works to the guys ...’’
The PM does not impose his/her understanding of the
situation to the team member but tries to put the micro-is-
sue back into the broader perspective of the project. One of
the PMs emphasized that he was ‘‘thinking out loud’’. As
he was unfolding his thought, he tried to get input and
feedback from the team member. Those interpretations re-
sulted from a co-construction of meaning with the team-
members, to allow them to understand their part in the
big picture.
/C15The project manager translates the project into vision,
goals, objectives, activities and tasks. The point here is not
only to divide the mandate into tasks and sub-tasks and
then to distribute roles and responsibilities in the classic
taylorian-fayolian approach. It deals with literally translat-
ing a general plan into individual mandates that should be
a meaningful experience on two levels. They have to carry a
signiﬁcant meaning for the person involved and also make
sense as a part of the whole project. In our observations,
PMs would distribute challenges according to each team
member talents and/or tastes. In the case of video-game
development, the PM assigned the design of ‘‘camera’’
points of view in the game to a game-designer particularly
interested in movie-making. As common sense as it may
seem, it means the PM has to develop a macro/micro
understanding of the project based on his/her formal and
informal, more personal knowledge of the team-members.
/C15The project manager unveils assumptions and beliefs-in-
action. When divergence occurs, the PM tries to unveil the
source of the misunderstanding and to reframe the situa-
tion. In the case of the multimedia software company,SENSE-MAKER
Learns by doing
Interprets the situations
Translates the project into vision, goals, objectives, activities 
and tasks
Unveils assumptions and beliefs-in-action
Builds the shared meaning
Identifies individuals’ skills
“Cuts and pastes” individuals’ talents
Defines communication channels
Connects conflicting worldviews
Networks with resource person
Institutes knowledge-sharing contextsGAME-MASTER
FLOW-BALANCERWEB-WEAVER
Aims at intrinsic motivation
Sets challenges
Balances constraints and freedom
Believes in funSets the rules
Acts as a goal-bearer
Defines and guards the playground
Animates the team
Records scores, allocates sanctions/rewards
Fosters gamesmanshipLearns by doing
Interprets the situations
Translates the project into vision, goals, objectives, activities 
and tasks
Unveils assumptions and beliefs-in-action
Builds the shared meaning
Identifies individuals’ skills
“Cuts and pastes” individuals’ talents
Defines communication channels
Connects conflicting worldviews
Networks with resource person
Institutes knowledge-sharing contexts
Aims at intrinsic motivation
Sets challenges
Balances constraints and freedom
Believes in funSets the rules
Acts as a goal-bearer
Defines and guards the playground
Animates the team
Records scores, allocates sanctions/rewards
Fosters gamesmanship
Fig. 2. The activities of the creative project manager.L. Simon / International Journal of Project Management 24 (2006) 116–126 119one of the beliefs-in-action was that the team-members had
to compete against each other to showcase their skills in or-
der to get in line for a possible promotion. The PM had to
acknowledge the competitive drive of the team-members
and to put it back into perspective of teamwork at the same
time: ‘‘You all want to be better than your friends, to show
what you can do. It /C213s ok, but you are all doing a great job!
So please don /C213t forget that you /C213re working together’’ .
This is an ongoing part of the work that asks for con-
stant attention from the PM. In action, he/she cognitively
puts his/herself in the shoes of the employee to understand
his/her point of view and to frame it back into the project
alignment. It generally aims at shifting from an individual
diverging understanding of the project to the common for-
mally accepted understanding of the collective endeavour.
/C15The project manager builds the shared meaning. ‘‘It /C213sa
constant issue to me: as a team, we need to know where we
are heading , mentioned the PM in the multimedia software
company , that /C213s why I remind them often what this project is
all about’’ . Our observations suggest that an important part
of the PM /C213s activities aims at building the ‘‘shared mean-
ing’’ [51], not only through systematic reassertions in for-
mal meetings, but also through the every day
interpersonal micro-activities mentioned earlier. As one vi-
deo-game PM puts it:
‘‘I realised that on many occasions I was always coming
back to what the project was about. ( ...) Once (the
employees) understand the project, they know where
they stand. They understand their own contribution to
the project’’.
In parallel with this process of establishing the shared
meaning as the collective cognitive basis of the project,
the PM works at building the ground for work with the
internal and external stake-holders.
4.2. The project manager as web-weaver
In creative activities and projects, members act as play-
ful ‘‘bricoleurs’’,3crafting a ‘‘mosaic’’, creating their tools
and products through a cut-and-paste process of various
pieces of knowledge [53–57] . The PM her/himself acts as
a cut-and-paste integrator of people inside and outside
the team. She/he engaged her/himself in intense network-
ing activities. She/he has to put and ﬁt together the diver-
siﬁed talents, abilities and ideas of the team-members,
mostly through the identiﬁcation and linking of resource
people and the weaving of communication channels.
/C15The project manager identiﬁes individuals /C213skills, knowl-
edge and talents. In the cases observed here, the team is
assembled on an ad-hoc basis that gives a lot of room to
personal relationships and micro-politics as well as to the
advice of trusted colleagues or to the recommendationsand pressure of powerful ones, followed by negotiations
with the corporate sponsors and with the functional man-
agers. A PM in the video-game studio comments: ‘‘When
I see one guy (in another project) making fast progress or
popping new ideas, I try to learn more about him and I do
what it takes to get him excited with my next project. I want
to make sure to always get the best guys’’! Another PM in
the multimedia ﬁrm explains: ‘‘I want to know what (my
employees) can do. ( ...) As I identify expertise, I /C213m able
to put them to work together ...’’This ﬁrst step in the pro-
cess of skills identiﬁcation is essential to build an eﬃcient
team.
/C15The project manager ‘‘cuts and pastes’’ individuals /C213tal-
ents. Following the identiﬁcation stage, the next step con-
sists of ﬁnding the ‘‘ﬁt’’ between the team-members in
terms of technical and non-technical, social skills. The
PM wants to concretely induce synergy between the diﬀer-
ent team-players. In all the cases we observed, this was
achieved through the physical settings of the oﬃce. As this
could seem very taylorian – proximity is deﬁned by tasks
dependency – this also has a lot to do with social skills.
For instance, in a bilingual team, the PM always made sure
to put a perfectly bilingual employee between a French-
speaking and an English-speaking employee. In another
case, the PM insisted in not placing face-to-face the desks
of two employees that did not get along well. The PM
wants the relationships to foster learning through appren-
ticeship or cross-fertilization of knowledge.
/C15The project manager deﬁnes communication channels.
In classical management theory, organization asks for
coordination [58]. In this perspective, the PM acts as a
gate-keeper. For instance, she/he asks junior employees
to interact on speciﬁc issues only with a speciﬁc senior.
He guides the employee towards the right people based
on their technical skills and/or on organizational (in)for-
mal habits. For instance, in the video-game company, ju-
nior game-designers were not allowed to talk directly to
their counterparts in the animation studio on the same pro-
ject. They had to go through a gate-keeper responsible to
keep tracks of orders and to frame them into the proper
vocabulary of graphic design to avoid confusing requests.
It also helps to reuse parts already available, so that they
would not have to ‘‘reinvent the wheel’’.
/C15The project manager connects conﬂicting worldviews
through translation. In multi-disciplinary, multi-back-
ground teams, the issue of shared meaning is far from obvi-
ous. On many occasions, we observed the PM arbitrating
issues between team-members. Tensions or conﬂicts usually
arise from misunderstandings rooted in diﬀerent world-
views induced by academic and professional backgrounds.
When a game-designer asks a programmer to design an
animated ‘‘rope’’ as a decorative object in a virtual setting,
he thinks it /C213s a very simple task and does not understand
the rebuttal from the programmer, rather promoting a
stick. The project manager has to ﬁnd out from the pro-
grammer and explain to the designer that a rope, as simple
as it seems, is a very complex physical object highly3The usual pun on words is even more relevant than ever here: the
‘‘bricoleur’’ acts as a ‘‘bris-colleur’’, literally cutting and pasting skills,
knowledge and talents.120 L. Simon / International Journal of Project Management 24 (2006) 116–126demanding in computer power. To be able to settle similar
conﬂicts, the PM has to learn the culture, ethos and even
jargon of each profession involved in the project. This let
us think that curiosity and a strong interest for discovery
lies at the heart of the PM job, in parallel with strong skills
in listening and learning.
/C15The project manager networks with the ‘‘resource-
person’’.4The PM acts as resource-person especially in
terms of knowledge identiﬁcation, developing relationships
inside the project and the company and also outside the
borders of the company. In many cases, the PM in the vi-
deo-game ﬁrm reacted to questions with the same sentence:
‘‘Did you go see X or Y? Did you talk to W or Z’’? X, Y, W
and Z were previously identiﬁed as skilled people regarding
the issues at stake. In the multimedia ﬁrm, the PM used to
spend a lot of his personal free time socializing with people
in the TV industry or with friends with speciﬁc computer
skills. Back at work, he could settle issues by referring
team-members to external resource-persons. This intense
social activity in mastering the social-political environment
of the project seems to provide strategic advantages in
problem-solving.
/C15The project manager institutes knowledge-sharing con-
texts. In the four cases, almost every meeting we attended
started with a reminder of what the project was about
and its strategic relevance. Following a formal introduc-
tion, the PM would act as animator and moderator, chan-
nelling discussions at the beginning, stimulating questions/
reactions, even stirring up debates, then setting collective
and individual agendas as a conclusion. In addition, in
the video-game studio, when one of the employees found
a clever technical trick or a nice piece of artwork, it was
normal practice for the PM to stop every activity and to
ask the person to showcase this contribution. In four con-
texts, curiosity for others /C213work and a questioning attitude
would be considered a normal, expected attitude. Employ-
ees searching for isolation were informally but ﬁrmly in-
vited to participate in social events with team-mates at
work and after work; otherwise they would be progres-
sively informally ostracized. Again, this sharing attitude
is enticed by the physical setting: open spaces, desks orga-
nized in circles ...In the performing art case, most members
of the project even shared a multiplex house.
Once the environment of the project is ﬁrmly established
through the collectively shared vision; communication and
knowledge-sharing attitudes seem to ﬂow freely. Then the
PM engages in another type of activity. This could be
generically sum-up as ‘‘coaching’’, but we prefer to present
it as a twofold reality, the ﬁrst focused on the animation of
the team eﬀorts – the ‘‘game-master’’ -, the second with a
strong emphasis on individuals /C213motivation – the ‘‘ﬂow-
balancer’’.4.3. The project manager as game-master
Management of creativity at work is merely seen as the
art of setting the material, social and symbolic limits of the
workspace collectively experienced as a creative play-
ground [2,14,15] . As the game-master, the PM sets the goal,
negotiates the rules and provides the materials/resources
for the game. As a leader, she/he encourages the interdisci-
plinary players/team-members to ‘‘co-opetitively’’ build on
each other /C213s contributions. It is suggested that in such an
environment, the art of being an eﬃcient PM merely con-
sists of crafting a ‘‘good enough environment’’ [59]where
the team can play the creativity game.
/C15The project manager sets the rules. In any organiza-
tional setting, the ﬁrst responsibility of the ‘‘boss’’ is to
set the agenda. This would also apply in creative projects.
The PM is expected to set the rules. This activity is twofold.
First, the PM reasserts the goal of the collective eﬀort. He/
she explains what is inside the scope of the team eﬀort and
what is not. For instance, in the video-game studio, the
marketing and sales sides of the project are outside the
scope. The PM states the famous iron-triangle: speciﬁca-
tions, resources and timetable for the project: ‘‘We are
going to make this great game. It has to be beautiful, original
and fun. You have what it takes to make a great game. But
remember this has to be over in July’’ .
Setting the rules also deals with every day activity. The
game designers were allowed to play video-games to keep
in touch with the industry and to ﬁnd inspiration or com-
parison in other products. The PM had to set a strict set of
rules: playing was agreed upon during lunch breaks or after
work and only on necessary occasions during working
hours.
/C15The project manager acts as a goal bearer. Once the
goal is known, accepted and shared, the team needs an im-
pulse. It is often a simple sentence that is heard at the end
of the kick-oﬀ meeting to inspire the team-members. Often,
it comes back again and again, almost as a slogan5used in
times of low motivation or even in times of crisis. It /C213s a re-
minder of what lies at the heart of the project and of the
team involvement. In the video-game ﬁrm, the PM used
to conclude with: ‘‘Let /C213s go guys! Let /C213s do it! It /C213s going be
the best game in the world ever!’’ In the multimedia ﬁrm,
the PM closed the meetings with: ‘‘Let /C213s hit the screens. The
whole world is going to see us!’’ In the performing art group,
the informal leader would cheer up the team with the
sentence: ‘‘Let /C213s show the world who we are!’’ That would
sum-up the spirit and goal of the project: expressing each
artist /C213s creativity and building on each others work to show
on stage how extraordinary talents they developed. In the
scientiﬁc tool company, working to develop systems for
crime labs, the tone was softer but still very determined.
‘‘We are going to save lives’’ . This symbolic reassertion of
the goal of the project seems important for the teams to
4This expression is widely used in North America and especially Canada
where it describes a person who could act as an expert or a useful help and
reference on a speciﬁc subject.5Keeping in mind that for the Scots the word ‘‘slogan’’ means an war-
cry, to launch a battle ...L. Simon / International Journal of Project Management 24 (2006) 116–126 121go back to every day tasks with renewed energy and
inspiration.
/C15The project manager deﬁnes and guards the borders of
the playground. The PM is responsible for the convergence
of individual eﬀorts, but should not completely deﬁne their
tasks if she/he still wants to leave some space for creative
development through divergence. The project can thus be
described as a playground, with clear borders surrounding
a free space. The team-members can play freely in this
space, enjoying healthy and creative divergences, but as
soon as one is too close to the limits, divergence threatens
to be too strong to ﬁt into the collective work again. The
PM has to blow the whistle each time he/she thinks one
team member is wandering too far from the focus of the
project. The PM in the multimedia ﬁrm explains: ‘‘One of
the guys seemed to be on his own. He wasn /C213t part of the team
in his behaviour. I had to talk to him. He wasn /C213t doing a bad
job, but still ..., he wasn /C213t aligned with the other /C213s eﬀorts’’ .
/C15The project manager animates the team. The PM also
plays the positive role of a coach, concerned not only with
work issues, but also within team-members as people and
with the atmosphere in the project. Every morning, the
PM in the video-game ﬁrm spent around two hours on
administrative issues, but in mid-morning he would wander
around the workspace. He would share ideas with one per-
son or another, ask questions, listen a lot. Sitting at one
desk for some time, he had some words of appreciation
for the work done. Those moments seem to be really appre-
ciated by the team-members and eventually conversations
would start on various work or personal issues. In the mul-
timedia ﬁrm, in the quietest times in the day, the PM used
to start some ‘‘mess’’, starting a ﬁght by throwing crumpled
paper balls to one of the team-members, quickly joined by
the others members. He explains:
‘‘I don /C213t want them to fall asleep or to start getting
bored. I know this is a serious and often stressful job.
They must stay concentrated, but sometimes it /C213s good
to unwind a bit. So I act crazy sometimes just to release
some tensions and remind them that all this shouldn /C213tb e
too painful ...It gives them more energy to continue on’’.
This kind of behaviour acts as a ritual to keep things in a
healthy perspective and to reassert the existence of the pro-
ject team as a true social community underneath the formal
functions and organizational pressures.
/C15The project manager records scores and allocates sanc-
tions and rewards. This social link and trust are also based
on the perceived fairness of the PM. In the video-game pro-
ject, when the PM noticed a special performance from an
individual, he/she would stop all activities and ask the
team-members to come and enjoy the interesting piece of
work and learn from it. This would start a team discussion,
with technical questions and words of appreciation and the
team-members would go back to work with renewed moti-
vation. On the opposite side, when a designer would make
a mistake or would not follow the rules, the PM would not
put him under the spotlight. The PM would have a seriousconversation with the person on the issue, trying to put
the focus on learning to prevent this from occurring again.
He would later share his thought on the issue through
email in a most objective way, not mentioning the person
involved, to foster learning in the team. The PM used to
take notes on every good and less good ‘‘moves’’ he was
aware of as a base for future promotions and career
evolution.
/C15The project manager fosters gamesmanship. The PM,
like it or not, is a role-model. He/she sets the standards
in the team, particularly in terms of work ethic and of
the community ‘‘ethos’’: the speciﬁc, idiosyncratic, emer-
gent and relational culture of the team. When the team
ﬁnds a balance between individual involvement in the tasks
and collective knowledge sharing, it seems that the project
ﬂows more easily towards its goals. If the PM plays by the
rules, the team-members are going to be drawn into playing
by the rules. If she/he allows some space for errors/right of
failure, as opportunities to learn, the team-members are
going to be more prone to try new things, to take risks
and to innovate.
In the multimedia ﬁrm, two similar projects with the
same ﬁnal client had very diﬀerent trajectories due to the
PM behaviour towards their team-members. The PM fos-
tering competition in the team ended dealing with conﬂict
and respect issues. The ‘‘friendly but fair’’ PM had it easier,
not being too lenient but establishing a healthy co-
opetition.
The PM exerts a strong inﬂuence not only on the behav-
iour of team members, but also on their attitudes towards
the project. In the advertising agency, the PM would al-
ways stress the creative and stimulating aspect of the re-
quest from the client: ‘‘I know this (mandate) seems
really boring, but I /C213m sure you can surprise us. I know you /C213re
going to come out with some incredible stuﬀ’’ . As a result,
the two employees stopped complaining, went back to
work and started sharing their wild ideas.
Acting as a game-master, the PM sets the playground
where the team is going to play and she/he motivates the
team by setting the stage for the expression of collective
creativity. In the next section, we address a more individ-
ual, one-on-one aspect of theses motivational activities.
4.4. The project manager as ﬂow-balancer
Finally, the PM aims at deﬁning a speciﬁc environment
that should allow each team-mate to get involved at full
potential. As the project/game appears as a space of con-
structed and constrained virtual freedom to be actualised
through play [60–66] , the project manager adjusts the expe-
rience of the individual project members so that they would
feel at the same time supported and challenged in the pro-
cess[2].
/C15The project manager aims at intrinsic motivation. The
more the PM knows the team-members, the more she/he
gets to understand what motivates them and can tailor
their mandates. Considering the sources of motivation of122 L. Simon / International Journal of Project Management 24 (2006) 116–126the ‘‘Y Generation’’ at work [67–69] , a PM in the video-
game studio explains:
‘‘Those guys are not excited about money. They
don /C213t ﬁt in hierarchical relationships and they don /C213t
think in terms of career track. They want to do
something interesting. They want to learn. They
want stimulation through challenges, teamwork and
fun. ( ...) (I have) to discover what arouses their
brains and guts’’.
In the circus case, the almost self-directed team built its
creation on the respect of each individual /C213s desires to engage
in diﬀerent types of challenges. For instance, one of the ar-
tists was more involved in story-telling, so he was responsi-
ble for the scenario. The one more concerned by the pure
physical aspect of the show became responsible for the ﬁt-
ness and contorsionism training and coaching. The admin-
istrative manager comments: ‘‘That /C213s self-organization, but
the rule is: if you choose to do it, it /C213s because you have a pecu-
liar interest in it. If you choose it; there are more chances that
you/C213re going to perform above the expectations ...’’
Another very eﬃcient key to intrinsic motivation seems
to be translating organizational goals into challenges.
/C15The project manager sets challenges. ‘‘Y Generation’’
expects to be challenged at work [67–69] . The video-game
PM closed each weekly meeting on a challenge for the week:
‘‘Marketing expects us to produce a working demo to
showcase the 3D settings. We are going to give them this
demo and more than that: this is going to be a fully
working demo, with light eﬀects and artiﬁcial intelli-
gence in place. I really want you to impress them, so give
it your best shot’’!
The PM is not only responsible for setting the goals, but
also to literally frame those objectives in the way that
would appeal to the team-member. The PM has to be very
sensitive to every word he uses in setting the mandates. One
employee would react to technical terms when an other
would only respond to visionary words of inspiration. This
very subtle social skill means that the PM must personally
know enough about each team member to be able to grasp
their tolerance or aversion to stress, to diﬃculties or adver-
sity. A PM in the video-game ﬁrm explains:
‘‘All along the project, I have to reframe the task
descriptions according to the worldview and the style
of the guy I /C213m talking to. As I /C213m talking, I look for
the words or the ideas that would trigger a reaction,
positive or negative. I want to see a spark in the eye of
the guy I /C213m talking to ( ...). I try to craft that in a stim-
ulating way. I don /C213t only describe the job; I also try to
make it sound exciting’’.
The PM deals with each team member through a formal
mandate and through an inspirational ‘‘mission’’, often
individualized. All through the project, he/she adjusts the
mandates in accordance with the progress the employee
makes or the diﬃculties he encounters./C15The project manager balances constraints and freedom.
Interviewed PMs were looking for something they had dif-
ﬁculties to deﬁne. The PM in the video-game ﬁrm puts it
this way:
‘‘Sometimes the work ﬂows naturally. The atmosphere is
good and the guys look concentrated but not too seri-
ous. They joke but they don /C213t act too foolish. Even con-
ﬂicts seem to be a natural part of the job, and they /C213re
being taken care of without a ﬁght or frustration. Then,
we are much more productive than usual. I don /C213t know
what it is, but I like that’’.
This comment and many more observations in the ﬁeld
were referring to the state of ‘‘ﬂow’’ [64,65] , where the indi-
vidual masters the rules and constraints of the context and
feel fully in touch with and in control of the situation. He/
she becomes part of the situation; literally surﬁng on the
challenges. This occurs when the balance between con-
straints and freedom is ﬁnely set. When the individual
thinks that the challenge could be tackled with and is
meaningful, then he/she can progress and learn through
his/her work, fully engaged. The PMs we observed did
not seem formally aware of what the ﬂow is; yet they were
very conscious of what it takes to make it happen. The PM
in the multimedia ﬁrm comments:
‘‘I try to ﬁne-tune the level of challenge, but it /C213s not easy:
if I let them too loose, nothing happens and they waste
their time. But I know I can /C213t always pressure them: I
have to let them breathe. I /C213m always playing with the
limits ( ...). I/C213m trying to ﬁnd a balance ...’’
The creative director in the advertising agency seems to
have an insight on how to assess this state of ﬂow: fun! He
explains how he monitors one creative duet:
‘‘I know that everything is ok when I hear them laugh.
They challenge each others and they shoot crazy ideas
in the process. If one makes the other laugh, the other
would react with a crazier idea, and so on and so forth-
They have fun while building on each others ideas. Fun
is an important part of the process’’.
/C15The project manager believes in fun. In those cases, fun
is not a marginal consequence of the process; it is at the
heart. That is what ‘‘ﬂow’’ is all about: enjoying the crea-
tive exploitation of the environment and the possibilities
to express oneself through the mastery of the rules and con-
straints of the project. This is strictly similar to the enjoy-
ment the player experiences while playing games:
determined by the rules, but yet using them to achieve
the goal [60]. The creative director in the advertising agency
concludes: ‘‘I do believe in fun. That /C213s really powerful ( ...).
It/C213s all about enjoying what you /C213re involved in. If you enjoy it,
you/C213re going to be good at it’’. Having fun at work still
seems almost ‘‘taboo’’ in most business environments; yet
challenging, co-opetitive and fun-inducing contexts may
well be among the main sources of mobilisation of the
new creative generation at work [67,69–74] .L. Simon / International Journal of Project Management 24 (2006) 116–126 1235. Concluding remarks
This study remains exploratory and needs further empir-
ical validation/refutation and a stronger eﬀort in theoriza-
tion. However, it has the merit to account for the pluralistic
and complex roles well-balanced creative project managers
are playing in their ﬁeld. We do not propose strong theoret-
ical claims based on this ﬁeldwork. Rather we would like to
use this rich and detailed picture to emphasize three points
to expose some reﬂections and insights for further research.
First point, we would like to stress the congruency of
our observations with the main trends in research on crea-
tive leadership. Most of our observations could easily be
reinterpreted, discussed and debated in the perspective of
the theoretical research on leadership for creativity of the
last twenty years. These descriptions are mostly consistent
with the classical description of the manager /C213s job, the pro-
ject managers play interpersonal, informational and deci-
sional roles [37]. From the point of view of the
management of creativity, our project managers act in
accordance with the now classical description of creative
leadership [2]. All through the four sets of activities intro-
duced here, the creative PMs were mostly providing the
individuals and the team with meaning, knowledge-sharing
spaces, and a balance of challenges and support. They
would act as context builders more than plan-and-control
managers [75]. Project managers trust the expertise of their
employees and focus in deﬁning a clear orientation for the
project and a supportive context all along the project. Sup-
port is granted through imposed and negotiated rules, com-
munication and animation, leaving a lot of freedom for
experimentation, trials and errors. Motivation is fostered
through the implementation of a creative climate [76,77]
based on clarity of objectives, careful job assignments
and alignment of individuals /C213interests with sub-mandates,
a constant reassertion of challenges, permanent recognition
of achievement, reinforcement through sense-making, and
a sense of collective fun. As our accounts are not com-
pletely new in this perspective, they contribute in two ways
to the understanding of the management of creative teams
in projects. First, in grounding our descriptions into the
deeds and words of managers, those descriptions bring
some ﬂesh to more and more abstract theoretical consider-
ations. Second, those observations allow understanding
into more details how project managers concretely handle
individual and collective creativity in projects.
Our second insight proposes to reconsider the activities
of project managers involved in creative endeavours
through the framework that emerged from the ﬁeldwork.
As a ‘‘sense-maker’’, the main concern of creative project
managers seem to be to establish a ‘‘platform of under-
standing’’, fuelled by ‘‘shared meaning’’. The project man-
ager would spend time and eﬀorts to establish a common
ground for collective action. As a ‘‘web-weaver’’, he/she
would reinforce these sense-making activities through
intensive work in developing a communication infrastruc-
ture and social context that favour learning and knowledgesharing. In this regards, this framework is consistent with
some previous experimental work on creative leadership
and team development which raises similar issues about
the orientation of project managers as creative leaders
[78]. The PM /C213s second main concern seems to be to keep
the level of individual engagement and motivation as high
and aligned as possible. As a ‘‘game-master’’, he/she would
also try to maintain and develop the common ground as a
playground, where each individual would participate, get
involved and feel challenged according to his/her own tal-
ents. In doing so, he/she handles another issue emphasized
by Ekvall and Arvonen [79], constant change. Change is
addressed through micro-challenges at the individual level
and through reciprocal ‘‘co-opetitive’’ challenges at the in-
ter-individual level, which foster intrinsic motivation. It
can be hypothesized here that this is one important key is-
sue to answer the main concern of creative project manag-
ers: performing. As ‘‘game-masters’’ and ‘‘ﬂow-balancers’’,
the creative project managers we observed would put a very
strong emphasis on the quality of the experience for any
team members and on the never-ending quest for ‘‘ﬂow’’.
Flow and fun seem to be more and more acknowledged
as a powerful lever for creativity in ‘‘new wave’’ organiza-
tions and projects [43–47] . Further research is needed to de-
velop a better understanding of the emergence of ﬂow/fun
through concrete managerial practice. One interesting per-
spective emerging from the ﬁeld is to consider the creative
project as a – very serious – game. According to our obser-
vations, that is what creative project managers actually do,
framing and animating the team with clear goals and vi-
sions, crafting empowering rules, and focusing on develop-
ing a subtle balance between constraints and freedom. This
approach is consistent with the structural deﬁnition of
what a game is: ‘‘the invention of a freedom in/by a set
of rules’’ [60]. According to one informant, this balance
is the key to creative performance: ‘‘We provide the
employees with a work environment where they can exper-
iment, learn, share tricks, within clear boundaries. It /C213s all
about those boundaries, the space they create and the re-
sources and support we bring in. If everything is there, they
will play the game and give their best, because they would
experience deep fun. We let them play, but ﬁne-tuning the
rules is a lot of work!’’ Congruent with the well-known
work of Csikszenmihaliy, these insights still ask for empir-
ical research to account for the concrete management of
work as play and its eﬃciency [64,65] .
In line with recent works on middle-management
[80,81] , our third and ﬁnal comment takes the shape of a
praise of creative project managers. Simple practice as
the public rewarding of positive realisation and the one-
and-one evaluation of errors shows the embedded tacit wis-
dom of project managers. As the main interface, they play
a determining role in integrating the group, the individual
and the organizational context [82]. The time and eﬀorts
they would spend to clarify the meaning of individual
and collective action and to craft a cohesive image of the
project should draw researchers /C213attention back on the124 L. Simon / International Journal of Project Management 24 (2006) 116–126reﬂexivity in action in such creative projects. If we expect to
address further the need for a multilevel understanding of
the management of creative teams and projects, theoretical
integration will ask for more research at the concrete end of
the continuum: direct observations and qualitative ac-
counts of project managers /C213actual actions, intuitive deci-
sion-making and rationale.
References
[1] Blankevoort PJ. Management of creativity. Int J Project Manage
1983;1:1–33.
[2] Amabile T, editor. Creativity in context. Boulder: Westview Press;
1996.
[3] Brown JS, editor. Seeing diﬀerently: insights on innovation. Boston:
Harvard Business School Publishing; 1997.
[4] Osborn A. Applied imagination: principles and procedures of creative
thinking. New York: Scribner; 1953.
[5] De Bono E. Lateral thinking: creativity step by step. Perennial; 1973.
[6] Kelley T, Littman J, Peters T. The art of innovation: lessons in
creativity from IDEO, America /C213s leading design ﬁrm. Currency; 2001.
[7] Florida R. The rise of the creative class. How it /C213s transforming work,
leisure, community and every day life. Basic Books; 2003.
[8] Hitt MA, Keats BW, DeMarie SM. Navigating in the competitive
landscape: building strategic ﬂexibility and competitive advantage in
the 21st century. Acad Manage Exec 1998;12:22–42.
[9] Dess GG, Pickens JC. Changing roles: leadership in the 21st century.
Organ Dyn 2000;28:18–34.
[10] Zika-Viktorsson A, Hovmark S, Nordqvist S. Psychosocial aspects of
project work: a comparison between product development and
construction projects. Int J Project Manage 2003;21:563–9.
[11] Hatchuel A, Le Masson P, Weil B. De la gestion des connaissances
aux organisations oriente ´es conception. In: Rowe F, editor. Faire de
la recherche en syste `mes d /C213information. Paris: Veibert Froge; 2002. p.
155–70.
[12] De Bono E. Six action shoes. New York: HarperBusiness; 1991.
[13] De Bono E. Serious creativity: using the power of lateral thinking to
create new ideas. London: Harper-Collins; 1992.
[14] Noller RB, Parnes SJ, Biondi AM. Creative action book. New York:
Scribners; 1976.
[15] Isaksen SG, editor. Frontiers of creativity research: beyond the basics.
Buﬀalo, NY: Bearly Limited; 1987.
[16] Isaksen SG, Dorval KB. Toward an improved understanding of
creativity within people: the level-style distinction. In: Isaksen SG,
Murdock MC, Firestien RL, Treﬃnger DJ, editors. Understanding
and recognizing creativity: emergence of a discipline. Norwood, NJ:
Ablex; 1993. p. 299–330.
[17] Isaksen SG, Dorval KB. Changing views of creative problem solving:
over 40 years of continuous improvement. Int Creat Network
Newslett 1993;3(1):1. p. 4–5.
[18] Isaksen SG, Dorval KB, Noller RB, Firestien RL. The dynamic
nature of creative problem solving. In: Gryskiewicz SS, editor.
Discovering creativity: proceedings of the 1992 international creativ-
ity and networking conference. Greensboro, NC: Center for Creative
Leadership; 1993. p. 155–62.
[19] Clegg B. Creativity and innovation for managers. Butterworth-
Heinemann; 1999.
[20] Florida R, Goodnight J. Managing for creativity: managing the high-
performance organization. Harvard Bus Rev July–August; 2005
[special Issue].
[21] Ciborra C. The platform organisation: recombining strategies,
structures and surprises. Org Sci 1996;7:103–18.
[22] Baldwind C. Managing at the age of modularity. Harvard Bus Rev
1997;5(Sep–Oct):84–93.
[23] Langlois R. Modularity in technology and organization. J Econ
Behav Org 2002;49:19–31.[24] Tomala F, Se ´ne´chal O. Innovation management: a synthesis of
academic and industrial point of view. Int J Project Manage
2003;22:281–97.
[25] Mumford MD, Scott GM, Gaddis B, Strange JM. Leading creative
people: orchestrating expertise and relationships. Leadership Quart
2002;13(6).
[26] Kanter R, Kao JJ, editors. Innovation. Breakthrough thinking at 3M,
DuPont, GE, Pﬁzer, and Rubbermaid. HarperCollins; 1997.
[27] Schrage M. Serious play. How the world best companies simulate to
innovate. Harvard Business School Press; 2000.
[28] Steﬁk M, Steﬁk B. Breakthrough. Stories and strategies of radical
innovation. MIT Press; 2004.
[29] Woodman RW, Sawyer JE, Griﬃn RW. Toward a theory
of organizational creativity. Acad Manage Rev 1993;18(2):
293–321.
[30] Drazin R, Glynn MA, Kazanjian R. Multilevel theorizing about
creativity in organizations: a sensemaking perspective. Acad Manage
Rev 1999(April).
[31] Feist JG, Runco MA. Trends in the creativity literature: an analysis
of research in the journal of creative behavior (1967–1989). Creativity
Res J 1993;6(3).
[32] Mumford MD, Licuanan B. Leading for innovation: conclusions,
issues, and directions. Leadership Quart 2004;15:163–71.
[33] Jung SI, Chow C, Wu A. The role of transformational leadership in
enhancing organizational innovation: hypotheses and some prelimin-
ary ﬁndings. Leadership Quart 2003;14:525–44.
[34] Zhou J, George JM. Awakening employee creativity: the role
of leader emotional intelligence. Leadership Quart 2003;14:
545–68.
[35] Hunt JG, Stelluto GE, Hooijberg R. Toward new-wave organization
creativity: beyond romance and analogy in the relationship between
orchestra-conductor leadership and musician creativity. Leadership
Quart 2004;15:145–62.
[36] Halbesleben J, Novicevic ML, Harvey MG, Buckley MR. Awareness
of temporal complexity in leadership of creativity and innovation: a
competency-based model. Leadership Quart 2003;14:433–54.
[37] Mintzberg H. The manager /C213s job: folklore and facts. Harvard Bus
Rev 1975(July–August):49–61.
[38] Golsing J, Mintzberg H. The ﬁve minds of the manager. Harvard Bus
Rev 2003(October):54–63.
[39] Scho ¨n D. The reﬂective practitioner: how professionals think in
action. Basic Books; 1983.
[40] Kling R. Organizational analysis in computer science. In: Huﬀ C,
Finholt T, editors. Social issues in computing: putting computing in
its place. New York: McGraw-Hill; 1994. p. 18–37.
[41] Simon L. Le management en univers ludique. Jouer, cre ´er et travailler
chez Ubi Soft (1998–1999). Unpublished PhD. Thesis. HEC
Montre ´al; 2002.
[42] Simon L. Let them play! The playful dynamics of video-games
making. 19th EGOS colloquium – organization analysis informing
social and global development. Copenhagen, Denmark. July 1–3;
2003.
[43] Glaser B, Strauss A. The discovery of grounded theory: strategies for
qualitative research. Chicago: Aldine Publishing; 1967.
[44] Glaser B. Theoretical sensitivity. San Francisco: University of
California; 1978.
[45] Eisenhardt K. Building theories from case study research. Acad
Manage Rev 1989;14(4):352–550.
[46] Schwartzman H. The meeting: gatherings in organizations and
communities. New York: Plenum Publishing Corporation;
1989.
[47] Schwartzman H. Ethnography in organizations. Qualitative research
methods, vol. 27. New York: Sage Publications; 1993.
[48] Mumford MD, Connelly S, Gaddis B. How creative leaders
think: experimental ﬁndings and cases. Leadership Quart 2003;14:
411–32.
[49] Jaussi KS, Dionne SD. Leading for creativity: the role of unconven-
tional leader behaviour. Leadership Quart 2003;14:475–98.L. Simon / International Journal of Project Management 24 (2006) 116–126 125[50] Thiry M. Sensemaking in value management practice. Int J Project
Manage 2001;19:71–7.
[51] Weick K. Sensemaking in organizations. New York: Sage Publica-
tions; 1995.
[52] Senge P. The ﬁfth discipline. New York: Currency; 1990.
[53] Le ´vi-Strauss C. La pense ´e sauvage. Paris: Plon; 1962.
[54] Papert S. Mindstorms: children, computers, and powerful ideas. New
York: Basic Books; 1980.
[55] Turkle S. The second self: computers and the human spirit. New
York: Simon and Schuster; 1984.
[56] Negroponte N. Being digital. New York: Alfred Knopf; 1995.
[57] Declerck R. Le barrage d /C213Assouan et 100.000 millions de bouteilles de
ketchup. Working Paper. Institut d /C213Administration des Entreprise,
Universite ´de Lille (France); 1979.
[58] Fayol H. Administration industrielle et ge ´ne´rale. Paris: Dunod; 1916.
[59] Winnicott DW. Playing and reality. Bristol: Routledge; 1971.
[60] Duﬂo C. Jouer et philosopher. Paris: PUF; 1997.
[61] Le ´vy P. Becoming virtual: reality in the digital age. Perseus
Publishing; 1998.
[62] Le ´vy P. Cyberculture. University of Minnesota Press; 2001.
[63] Deleuze G. Diﬀerence and repetition. Columbia University Press;
1995.
[64] Csikszenmihaliy M. Flow: the psychology of optimal experience. New
York: Harper and Row; 1990.
[65] Csikszenmihaliy M. Good business: leadership, ﬂow, and the making
of meaning. Viking Press; 2003.
[66] Davison R. Task Engagment (Part two), ProChain Solutions News-
letter. vol. IV, number 2. ProChain Solutions Inc.; 2001.
[67] Zemke R, Raines C. Generations at work: managing the clash of
veterans, boomers, xers, and nexters in your workplace. AMACOM;
2000.
[68] Bennis W, Thomas R. Geeks and geezers. Boston: Harvard Business
School Press; 2002.[69] Glen P. Leading geeks. How to manage and lead people who deliver
technology. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass; 2003.
[70] Himanen P. The hacker ethic and the spirit of the information age.
New York: Random House; 2001.
[71] Ridderstrale J, Nordstrom K. Funky business. Stockholm: Book-
house Publishing; 1999.
[72] Torvalds L, Diamond D. Just for fun: the story of an accidental
revolutionary. HarperBusiness; 2001.
[73] Beck JC, Wade M. Got game. how the gamer generation is reshaping
business for ever. Boston: Harvard Business School Press; 2004.
[74] Yerkes L. Fun works. Creating places where people love to work. San
Francisco: Berrett-Koehler; 2001.
[75] Picq T. Manager une e ´quipe de projet. Pilotage. Enjeux. Performance.
Paris: Dunod; 1999.
[76] Ekvall G. The organizational culture of idea management: a creative
climate for the management of ideas. In: Walker D, Henry J, editors.
Managing innovation. Sage; 1991. p. 73–9.
[77] Ekvall G. Creativity in project work: a longitudinal study of a
product development project. Creat Innovation Manage
1993;2:17–32.
[78] Rickards T, Moger S. Creative leadership processes in projects team
development: an alternative to tuckman /C213s stage model. Br J Manage
2000;11:273–83.
[79] Ekvall G, Arvonen J. Leadership proﬁles, situations and eﬀectiveness.
Creat Innovation Manage 1994;3(3):139–61.
[80] Quy Nguyen H. In praise of middle managers. Harvard Bus Rev
2001;79(8):72–80.
[81] Van Der Weide JG, Wilderom C. Deromancing leadership: what are
the behaviours of highly eﬀective middle managers? Int J Manage
Pract 2004;1(1):3–20.
[82] Agrell A, Gustafson R. Innovation and creativity in work groups. In:
West MA, editor. Handbook of work group psychology. Chichester,
UK: Wiley; 1996. p. 317–43.126 L. Simon / International Journal of Project Management 24 (2006) 116–126