--- PAGE 1 ---
1
Routledge
Francis Group
GLOBAL
Journal of Global Marketing
MARKETING
ISSN: 0891-1762 (Print) 1528-6975 (Online) Journal homepage: WWWtandfonline com/iournals/wglo2o
Formalization, Role Stress, Organizational
Commitment; and Propensity-to-Leave
A Study of Korean Industrial
Salespersons
Keun S. Lee & Anil Mathur
To cite this article: Keun S. Lee & Anil Mathur (1997) Formalization, Role Stress, Organizational
Commitment; and Propensity-to-Leave, Journal of Global Marketing; 11.2,23-42, DOI: 10.1300L
J042v11n02 03
To link to this article: https //doi org/10 1300/1042v11n02_03
Published online: 11 Oct 2008_
Submit your article to this journal
Lul
Article views: 101
View related articles
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https:I /www.tandfonline com/action/journallnformation?journalCode-wglozo
--- PAGE 2 ---
Formalization, Role Stress;
Organizational Commitment,
and Propensity-to-Leave:
Study of Korean Industrial Salespersons
Keun S. Lee
Anil Mathur
ABSTRACT This study of Korean industrial salespeople (N = 140)
examines the relationships among organizational formalization, role
stress, organizational
commitment;
and  propensity to
leave. AI-
though most of the theoretical and empirical research in this area was
done in the United States, this study examines whether the same
concepts could be applied to
culturally different salesforce
The
results of the structural modeling analysis suggest that overall the
model of job variables and propensity to leave developed in the U.S.
could be applied to a Korean salesforce. However; some culture-re-
lated  differences do exist in the nature of specific relationships.
[Article copies available for a fee from The Haworth Document Delivery
Service: 1-800-342-9678.
E-mail address:
getinfo@haworthcom]
INTRODUCTION
International sales  management research has received little research
attention despite its international marketing importance. Research on the
linkage between  salespersons' job behavior and performance has been
richly documented in the U.S  However; few researchers examined the
Keun S. Lee is Assistant Professor; Department of Marketing and International
Business, Hofstra University: Anil Mathur is Assistant Professor; Department of
Marketing and Internationai Business, 222 Weller Hall, 134 Hofstra University;
Hempstead, NY 11550-1090.
Journal of Global Marketing, Vol. H(2) 1997
1997 by The Haworth Press, Inc. All rights reserved.
23
--- PAGE 3 ---
24
JOURNAL OF GLOBAL MARKETING
salesperson behavior in the international context and the work environ-
ment in
which these salespersons operate
recently,
a few studies
addressed the important issues pertaining to work environment and job-re-
lated factors that shape foreign-based salespersons"
behavior and
mance (Agarwal 1993; Dubinsky et al. 1991
James and Hill 1995). Other
sales-related  research   reported   different  sales  management  approaches
(Apasu et al. 1987) , patterns of managing a multinational sales force (Hill
et al. 1991), and factors that affect the sales force choice in international
market
strategies (Schuster and Keith 1993)
Given the importance of the behavioral aspects of the salesperson, this
study attempts to test the model of the relationships among formalization;
role stress, commitment; and propensity-to-leave using a Korean sample
of industrial salespersons_
The effects of formalized procedures on sales-
persons 
role stress, organizational commitment; and job outcomes
work alienation) have been empirically examined in the U.S. (Michaels,
Cron, Dubinsky, & Joachimsthaler
988; Ramaswami, Agarwal, & Bhar-
gava 1993), and in the international context (Agarwal 1993).
A few sales
management researchers suggest increased formalization to enhance con -
trol over salesperson behavior and performance (Chonko 1986; Stephen-
son, Cron, & Frazier 1979).
The importance of role stress consisting of
role ambiguity and role conflict has also been widely cited in the sales
management literature (Behrman & Perreault 1984; Michaels et al. 1988;
Ramaswami et al. 1993). Previous studies have also shown that commit-
ment is a good predictor of propensity-to-leave (Ingram & Lee 1990) and
actual turnover (Lucas, Parasuraman, Davis, & Enis 1987).
Although most of the models in this area were developed in the United
States, with the supporting research
carried
out
using American
samples, it is usually assumed that the same models would have universal
application.
However; considering the fact that there are vast  cultural
differences among different countries, it is important to validate this
as-
sumption
samples from different countries. Korea has been selected
for this study for several reasons. First; individuals in the United States
and Korea work under the influence of different cultures. Korea, like its
neighboring Japan and China, is a country that has maintained Confucian
values, whereas the Judeo-Christian cultures dominate the United States
and   Western   Europe (Lee and  Green
1991).
Confucian
work  culture
stresses collectivism,
as
opposed to the individualism emphasized in the
U.S. and Western nations. Second, Korea is also well known for its impor-
tance as a
trading partner and a major market for many U.S. multinational
firs. Third, the variables included in the model for this study are relevant
to Korean samples. Korean companies maintained
tradition of formaliz-
Only
perfor-
entry
(e.g ,
being
using
--- PAGE 4 ---
Keun S Lee and Anil Mathur
25
ing operating procedures within the organization as an employee control
mechanism; while commitment (or loyalty) is a core value of the Confu-
cian culture. Dunung (1995) has stated that oe of the major principles of
Korean society throughout history has been
"the importance of autho-
ritarian centralized controlF
(p. 62).
FRAMEWORK AND BACKGROUND
The hypothesized relationships among the variables in the study are
illustrated in Figure 1. In the framework; formalization is hypothesized to
decrease Korean salespersons' role ambiguity; but to increase role conflict:
AII three variables of formalization, role ambiguity,
role conflict de-
crease the level of Korean salespersons
commitment which, in turn, re-
duces propensity-to-leave.
The paucity of research pertaining to formalization and  salesperson
behavior involving  workers in  foreign  countries  beyond
the   national
boundary of the United States limits theoretical validity of hypothesized
relationships among the variables in the study Also, results on the findings
of previous studies are hardly generalizable to workers in foreign
coun-
tries, especially to Koreans who may be distinctively different culturally in
the work place. Therefore, a literature review on both the U.S. and Korean
business culture and motivational practices is provided here as a basis for
the development of hypotheses.
LITERATURE REVIEW AND HYPOTHESES
Formalization and Role Ambiguity
Despite some variations among different firms in terms of
'degree, many
Korean employees expect to receive directives and orders from superiors
without being consulted in some cases, and seldom challenge the authority
of their superiors due t0 the Confucian belief stressing loyalty. Confucian
values have been maintained in Korea for many centuries, and Koreans
incorporate Confucius' tcachings into their daily lives (Jacobs 1986)
Close control of marketing employees' behavior through formalized bu-
reaucratic structuring has been previously hypothesized to reduce role am-
biguity levels (Michaels et al. 1988; Ramaswami et al.
While foral-
ization is defined as the extent to which rules
procedures are formally
specified (Ford & Slocum 1977), role ambiguity is the degree to which an
and
1993).
and
--- PAGE 5 ---
26
JOURNAL OF GLOBAL MARKETING
FIGURE 1. Hypothesized Relationships of the Study Variables
RC
FORM
OC
PTL
113
RA
12
FORM
Organizational formalization
RC
Role conflict
RA
Role ambiguity
OC
Organizational commitment
PTL
Propensity-to-leave
Summated score of
items from organizational formalization scale
Summated score of 8 items from role conflict scale
Y2
Summated score of 6 items from role ambiguity scale
Summated score of 15 item organizational commitment scale
Summated score of 3 item propensity-to-leave scale
Plus (+) and minus ( ~ ) signs indicate the nature of relationship
employee is unclear with  respect to goals, methods, and consequences
associated with job activities (Kahn, Wolfe, Quinn, & Snoek 1964).
The hypothesized linkage between formalization and role ambiguity in
Figure
is consistent with the results reported by Michaels et al. (1988),
but inconsistent with the
findings of Ramaswami et al
1993). Although
both studies hypothesized a positive influence of formalization
on role
ambiguity, only the former (Ramaswami et al. 1993) reports a positive
--- PAGE 6 ---
Keun S Lee and Anil Mathur
27
influence, while the latter shows the opposite. The inconsistencies in the
directions with respect to linkage between formalization and role ambigu-
ity can be attributable to the different nature of samples used for the
studies. For example, marketing employees used as a sample by Michaels
et al. (1988), with their constant contact with supervisors; may be more
negative toward explicit rules and rule observation practices than more
independent-minded industrial salespersons, used by Ramaswami et al
(1993), with little direct supervision _
The latter may need the presence of
explicit
policies, and procedures to clarify roles in place of direct
supervision. These explicit rules may help reduce conflict over competi-
tive
negotiations with customers and managers_
Korean industrial salespersons,
sample for the study, perform their
boundary spanning roles under a different corporate culture compared to
their American counterparts  Although these Koreans, like most American
industrial salespersons, have to be away from supervisors quite often to
call on industrial buyers to sell industrial products;
are
in accor-
dance with seniority The value of individual achievement is discounted
for the sake of the Confucian seniority system which emphasizes hierar-
chy and order: Therefore, Korean salary-based salespersons' reactions to
formalization may be
negative, and different from that of American salcs-
persons who get
in the form of individual Or team incentives.
One more notable corporate culture in Korea which is uniquely distin -
guishable from that of many American companies is the surprising lack of
job description concepts. The lack of job definitions can be attributable to
Korean
companies'
job rotation practices  which
designed to mold
managers into gencralists rather than  specialists.
These practices
were
largely borrowed from the Japanese way of running organizations; the
underiying philosophical theme behind these practices is
Inhwa
(har-
mony) among all functional constituencies within the firm (Leppert 1987).
In the absence of well-defined jobs and
quantifiable measure of job
performance, Korean executives do not have many choices other than to
use directives and to constantly check o the process and its results, while
Korean salespersons may have to tolerate the insufficient amount of in-
formation to carry out their selling activities_
Regarding the linkage between formalization and role ambiguity it is
hypothesized that formalization will inversely influence Korean salesper-
sons' role ambiguity:
Formalization and Role Conflict
In addition t0 the lack of role clarity, salespeople can experience role
conflict in the form of incompatible expectations from customers (e.g,
rulcs,
selling
paid
they
paid
are
--- PAGE 7 ---
28
JOURNAL OF GLOBAL MARKETING
discounts) and superior (profit margin): Study results pertaining to the
effect of formalization on role conflict are mixed. While some research has
found
positive relationship (Michaels, Day, & Joachimsthaler 1987;
Michacls et al. 1988), other have shown
negative relationship (Nichol-
son & Goh 1983; Podsakoff &
1986)
Under a rigid formal control environment; & salesperson has little free-
dom in bargaining prices and delivery dates Many difficult situations can
be created between customers and salespeople, and thesc conflicts should
be  resolved by  managers
the   headquarters_
The  more   formal and
centralized the decisions made, the more salespeople may become suscep
tible to the
feelings of powerlessness and frustration serving customers in
the   field
Korean  salespeople  are
not
exceptions to this phenomenon
Since the harmonious relationship (e.g,
inhwa
(Leppert 1987
and
trust are S0 much valued and campaigned in the business culture of Korea,
any face-losing situation where a salesperson has to say "no
to long-ac-
quainted customers, due to the addition of explicit rules and procedures,
creates embarrassment to all parties. Therefore, it can be hypothesized that
formalization will positively influence Korean salespersons' role conflict.
Formalization and Commitment
The linkage between  formalization and commitment is also mixed
Commitment is defined in terms of the
extent to which
an  employee
identifies with an organization (Porter; Steers, Mowday, & Boulian 1974).
Highly committed employees tend to have a (1) strong belief in the orga-
nization' $
values, (2) willingness to exert considerable effort on
behalf of the organization, and (3) strong desire to maintain membership
in the
organization (Morrow 1983). Some researchers have found a
tive relationship between the two variables (Greene 1978; Michaels et al.
1988; Morris & Steers 1980), and others have shown a
negative relation -
ship (Ramaswami et al.
1993)
In
a recent crOSS-national research, rule
observation (formalization) had a favorable influence on the commitment
of salespersons in India (Argawal 1993). Regarding the relationship be-
tween  formalization and commitment; however; Michaels et al.
(1988)
have found that the linkage is indirect, rather than direct, through role
ambiguity and role conflict 
What would rigorously-formalized sales control do to the loyalty of a
company'$ salesforce? Would tight control with frequent directives and
procedures help the disloyal or the neutral turn into loyal and committed
salespersons or vice versa? Previous studies indicate that employee satis-
faction and commitment are linked positively: In other rescarch, the nega-
tive   relationship between   formalization and satisfaction is well docu-
Organ
goals
and
posi-
--- PAGE 8 ---
Keun S. Lee and Anil Mathur
29
mented.
From the previous  findings, it
can be
posited that the
more
formalized the salesforce control system; the less satisfied salespersons
become, which in turn lowers the overall level of commitment to the firm:
Korean business executives expect and nurture employees' loyalty to
the firm in exchange for long-term job security and traditional group
maintenance   practices, such
as group bonus and
team
building:  Until
recently,
military-style rigid  system represented Korean  firms
most
common employee control mechanism; loyalty was taken for granted or
naturally expected by offering salaries and long-term job security (Mente
1989). According to Confucius, order and hierarchy should be restored by
teaching people the virtue of respect for seniority and loyalty to the ruler:
Discipline and rigid control
were inevitable means used to achieve the
ends (e.g , order and loyalty).
dictatorships survived until the late
1980s, decades after Korea $ independence in 1945 from Japanese colo-
nialization 
Although the top-down directives and military order-style might help
restore a sense of authority and hierarchy among some Korean employees
and motivate them to act;, the excessive use of the formal mechanism can
and often does hurt the
or
kibun
(one's important feeling) of many
Korean   workers
In Korea, great care is taken to avoid
others
~kibun
hurt in any way, and criticisms are often toned down or withheld
to save
kibun_
Kibun
for Koreans is as important as
'face"
in human
relations, and extreme emotion, and in some cases violence, erupts when
~kibun"
is hurt (Leppert 1987). Some Westerners find Korean business
people emotional and intuitive, rather than rational,
employees' loyal-
ty to the company
can be broken
more for emotional reasons than for
rational reasons.
The harsh
top-down control
On
employee behavior
can
hurt Koreans
kibun;
and dissatisfied workers
can break the code of
ethics regarding loyalty and hierarchy (Leppert 1987)Based on the pre-
ceding discussion, we hypothesize that formalization will negatively influ-
ence Korean salespersons' commitment
Role Stress and Commitment
Role ambiguity and role conflict are the two major role stress variables
adopted in sales management literature: The dysfunctional effect of these
variables on commitment has been previously documented (Michaels et al.
1988; Ramaswami et al. 1993).
The relationship between role stress variables and commitment has also
been richly documented in industrial psychology literature. Higher role
ambiguity clouds
an
employee's
understanding of how to achieve cOrpo-
rate
and, thus, reduces commitment to the firm. In the same vein,
Many
pride
having
and
goals
--- PAGE 9 ---
30
JOURNAL OF GLOBAL MARKETING
more
conflicting expectations and incompatible demands from managers
and customers (higher role conflict) precipitates the tendency of an em-
ployee to alienate psychologically from the firm: Empirical support for the
negative correlations for both role ambiguity and role conflict with com-
mitment is abundant (Jackson & Schuler 1985; Johnston, Parasuraman,
Futrell, & Black 1990; Mathieu & Zajac 1990; Michaels et al.
1988;
Salancik 1977)
The argument for the negative relationship between role stress and
commitment can be found in the fact that salespersons with unclear
and corporate values expend less effort on
activities than those who
understand roles clearly. Porter et al.'s
1974) definition of commitment
includes & strong belief in the firm s
and values.
Role ambiguity and role conflict are salient issues for many Korean
companies which do not provide their salespersons with clear job descrip-
tions 
Written rules give way to intuitive judgments, and often directives
and temporary rules subject to
when new superiors take positions_
In the same vein, incompatible expectations from customers (e g , delivery
spced) and managers (e.g-, delivery cost reduction) can create an embar-
rassing environment  where
salesperson, for example, can lose face
Under the circumstance, Korean salespersons
kibun
can be hurt and;
subsequently, the level of commitment decreases_
Korean salespersons'
loyalty to a firm can only be maintained when their
'kibun
is not severe-
ly damaged. Based on the discussion _
we hypothesize that Korean sales-
persons "
commitment will be negatively influenced by both role ambigu-
ity and role conflict:
Commitment and Propensity-to-Leave
Value of commitment as
construct can be found in its predictive
power of propensity-to-leave and actual turnover
(Ingram & Lee 1990;
Johnston et a, 1990; Lucas et al. 1987).
The negative linkage between
commitment and propensity-to-leave has been reported in previous sales-
force literature (Ingram & Lee 1990; Johnston et al, 1990). It is widely
believed that salespeople who are highly committed are less likely to leave
their employer
Despite the paucity of commitment research involving Korean salesper-
sons, it can be
posited that a reduction in loyalty to the firm; caused by a
scries of undesirable
experiences within the firm, will precipitate a sales-
person to think about quitting:
This notion can be supported by the fact
that  many large Korean  firms, including the firm participating in this
study, reward their salespersons with salary and group bonus for their
performance with a view t0 fostering
inhwa
among salespersons (Lep-
goals
work
goals
change
--- PAGE 10 ---
Keun S Lee and Anil Mathur
31
pert 1987). While the Korean firms' incentive system is not quite instru-
mental for the successful
motivation of the Korean salespersons; salesper-
sons' loyalty can be depended upon as a tool for motivating and retaining
productive salespersons. Based on the preceding discussion, it is expected
that commitment will negatively influence Korean salespersons' propensi-
ty-to-leave_
Role Stress and Propensity-to-Leave
The rationale behind an argument for a direct relationship between role
stress and propensity-to-leave comes from the fact that stressful conditions
create
psychological distraction and discomfort (Michaels et al. 1988). O
depression; a sense of futility, lower job involvement, and psychological
withdrawal from a group (Brief &
1976). Salespersons with stress-
ful role ambiguity and role conflict can be alienated  from
jobs
(Ramaswami et ai. 1993) which may increase thoughts of quitting:
Previous studies in the U.S
report that the more committed salesper-
sons are, the less likely they consider quitting the selling job (Ingram &
Lee 1990; Johnston et al. 1990). Since role stress
commitment
negatively related (Michaels et al
1988; Ramaswami et al. 1993), it can
also be hypothesized that salespersons with high levels of role stress are
less likely to consider quitting than those with low levels of role stress_
Korean   salespersons
Iack of knowledge necessary for selling
to and
serving customers (role ambiguity)
can
put them in a situation where they
lose face for their lack of preparation in dealing with customers In the same
vein, severe stress
coming from the need to compromise between the bar-
gaining mentality of Korean customers, and often iron-faced Korean super-
visors (role conflict), can hamper keeping the "kibun'
in good order among
the
parties involved If the
kibun
is damaged, relationships can be cut off
and even an enmity can be created (Harris & Moran 1991). Face-sa
an
important Confucian concept practiced in business and social customs in
many Asian countries, is a prerequisite to maintaining membership with the
firm (Chesanow 1985)_
The preceding discussion provides a basis for the
hypothesis that both role ambiguity and role conflict will positively influ-
ence Korean salespersons' propensity-to-leave.
METHODOLOGY
Sample and Data Collection
Unlike in the U.S_, getting a mailing list of industrial salespeople in
Korea is a difficult task_
A few
Korean firms manufacturing indus-
Aldag
selling
and
are
ving;
global
--- PAGE 11 ---
32
JOURNAL OF GLOBAL MARKETING
trial
were contacted for the research; and a leading Korean rubber
company agreed to participate.  This rubber product firm
was selected
since the firm is well known among Koreans for its
very traditional and
bureacratic
management style. This type of style typifies many
chae -
bol" (giant) Korean conglomerates that do business globally Salespersons
working under such work culture may be more susceptible to the influence
of formalization and role stress due to their lack of autonomy on the job_
One hundred
salespersons employed by the firm were surveyed for
the study: The participating company currently employs approximately
five thousand workers, and grosses about one billion dollars in sales vol-
ume globally These salespersons sell rubber products to dealers and large
industrial buyers; they do not sell directly to final consumers.
The company'$ market research department
contacted and distrib-
uted a questionnaire t0 each member of the S0-member salesforce. Confi-
dentiality
was
guaranteed in writing on the cover page of each question-
naire by instructing participants not to reveal their identities, and to return
their responses directly to the outside researcher from a medium university
in the northeastern region of the U.S. Respondents were assured that their
responses would only be used for statistical analyses_
One hundred
responses were
usable; there were eight nonresponses, and two incomplete
responses; thus yielding a 93.3% response rate.
The average age of the respondents was 30 years, and 95% of them
were less than
years old. The average tenure of the respondents with
the firm was five years (60 months),
40% of them had stayed less than
three years with the firm:
About half (50.7%) of the respondents
were
married, and 9S% of those married had at least one child. While 20% of
those who had at least two years of
50% actually had completed
college, and 47% had only
high school diploma. All of the surveyed
salespersons were male, and 80% of the respondents were mainly involved
in outside selling assignments (e.g-, frequent customer calls and delivery
of products) It is quite rare in Korea that females are recruited for outside
sales assignments for
rubber products
Measurement
The method of translation and back-translation was utilized to develop
measures for the Korean sample. Measurement scales of all five variables
used to test hypotheses were adopted from those measures used in Ameri-
can
studies,
While formalization
measure
was
modified slightly to be
tailored to the unique Korean sales job environment; the other four vari-
ables of role ambiguity, role conflict, commitment; and propensity-to-
leave were adopted from American literature.
goods
fifty
staff
forty
forty
and
college,
heavy
--- PAGE 12 ---
Keun S Lee and Anil Mathur
33
Formalization
was measured
on a 4-item scale adapted from
a scale
developed by Aiken and
(1966). The 4-item scale used for the study
measures the degree to which rules are prescribed and enforced:
Three
items were adopted from the 7-item scale of Aiken and Hage (1966)
without modification, while one item was developed specifically for Ko-
rean
salespersons; this item was selected and added to the scale based on
the results of focus group intervicws with Korean salespersons. During the
interview, seven salespersons were given seven items of Aiken and Hage's
1966) scale, and were requested to select the most appropriate items for
the Korean
sales job environment:
Korean  interviewees selected three
items from among the seven items given, and added one more item which
was not
represented by the seven items on the scale
wcre
provided:
Role ambiguity and role conflict were measured using Rizzo, House,
and Lirtzman $ (1970) six and eight items, respectively: Among role stress
measures, these measures are currently the most widely used in
marketing
literature
Organizational commitment of Korean salespersons was measured
on
thc
5-item Organizational  Commitment Questionnaire (OCQ):
Devel-
by Porter et al. in 1974, this measure was widely utilized by many
researchers of sales management in the United  States (Ingram; Lee, &
Skinner 1989; Johnston et al. 1990; Michaels et al. 1988)
According to Randall s (1993) review
of cross-cultural research
on
organizational commitment, the 15-item OCQ is
far the most
instrument for measuring organizational commitment" (p: 102) Randall
(1993) further reports that the OCQ was once used with Korean workers
(Luthans, McCaul, & Dodd 1985).
The 3-item propensity-to-leave measure
was
obtained by asking
re -
spondents the extent to which they were seeking to change firms (going to
another   company),
(from  selling to nonselling) ,
supervisors _
While a one-item propensity measure
was   utilized by
a few previous
studies of salesperson turnover (Busch 1980; Futrell & Parasuraman 1984;
Johnston, Futrell, & Sager 1987), a multiple item propensity-to-leave mea-
surc was used by other researchers (Ingram & Lee 1990; Jackofsky &
Peters 1983). A strong relationship between intentions and actual turnover
behavior has been reported previously (Johnston et al. 1987)
Analysis
The first
in the analysis was to establish the reliability of the
measures_
Reliability coefficients for all the scales used in the study are
given in Table 1. The reliabilities for all the scales; except for that of role
conflict;,
were in the
acceptable range. Considering the fact that these
Hage
they
oped
popular
~by
and
jobs
step
--- PAGE 13 ---
34
JOURNAL OF GLOBAL MARKETING
TABLE 1, Scale Reliabilities
Construct
Reliability (a)
Organizational Formalization (FORM)
.70
4 items)
Role Conflict (RC) (8 items)
58
Role Ambiguity (RA) (6 items)
67
Organizational Commitment (OC)
90
(15 items)
Propensity to Leave (PTL)
72
3 items)
scales were developed for an American sample and translated and applied
to the Korean sample, the reliability of even the role conflict scale appears
to be acceptable_
The data was analyzed
LISREL
(Joreskog & Sorbom 1993a).
Preprocessor to LISREL, PRELIS 2 (Joreskog & Sorbom 1993b)
was
used for data screening and for the computation of correlation matrix used
in the analysis. Although the initial sample contained 140 responses, the
listwise deletion method used for the computation of correlation matrix
reduced the sample size to 133. According to the generally accepted
guidelines, this sample size is more than adequate for testing the model
(cf: Bagozzi 1980; Gerbing & Anderson 1985).
Since the scales used to measure the variables had a
number of
items, the
scoreS
were  summed to represent
single  indicator of the
construct: Thus, scores for the 15 items used to measure commitment were
added, and this score was used t0 represent a single indicator for commit-
ment indicator: Similarly, summated scores for four items represented a
single indicator
formalization construct; summated scores for eight
items for role conflict scale represented a single indicator of that construct;
summated scores for six items measuring role ambiguity represented a
single indicator of that construct;
summated scores of three items
measuring   propensity-to-leave  represented
single   indicator
of  this
construct
Using such single indicator for each construct is consistent with
past   efforts
Price, Arould, &  Tierney 1995). Also, in line with
normally accepted practice, the error terms for all indicators were fixed at
I-reliability (1-a) to account for measurement ertor:
Evaluation of the overall fit of the model was based on multiple indica -
using
large
for
and
(e.g ,
--- PAGE 14 ---
Keun S Lee and Anil Mathur
35
tors aS
suggested by Bagozzi and Yi (1988)
These  multiple indicators
suggest that the model fits nearly perfectly Chi-square was 0.97 (df = 2,p=
62) , Goodness of fit index was i.00, AGFI was .98, Bentler and Bonett'$
(1980) normed fit index was .99. Furthermore, root-mean square residual
was .012
Table 2 gives the parameter estimates and the t-values obtained
by maximum likelihood estimation:
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The hypothesized model in Figure L suggested that formalization will be
negatively related to role ambiguity: This hypothesis was not supported by
the data (maximum likelihood estimate = .29,t-value = 2.27). The results of
the analyses showed that formalization increased, rather than decreased, the
level of role ambiguity The second hypothesis suggested that formalization
will be positively related to role conflict This hypothesis was supported by
the data (maximum likelihood estimate
72, t-value
3.60). The model
also
suggested
negative  effect  of  formalization
on  commitment
This
hypothesis was not supported by the data (maximum likelihood estimate
.06,n.s.).
TABLE 2. Parameter Estimates for the Structural Model
Parameter
MLE
Standard Error
T-Value
1X
.07
11.44
14
5.56
.08
10.42
1
2

'6.86
Ym1
(FORM-
RC)
3.60
Y21
(FORM- RA)
2.27
P3i
{FORNOC
OC)
1
2.25
B32
(RA- OC)
2.08
Ba1
(RC + PTL)
3
1.66
Ba2
(RA > PTL)
3.06
843
(OC + PTL)
41
-3.05
Note: Error terms for all indicators were fixed at (1
12 =0.97 (df = 2,
p =.62) , GFI
1.00, AGFI
98, RMSR = .012;
Normed fit index
99
OC)
--- PAGE 15 ---
36
JOURNAL OF GLOBAL MARKETING
According to the model, role conflict
was
expected to be negatively
related to commitment: This hypothesis was supported by the data (Maxi-
mum likelihood estimate
50, t-value
2.19).
As expected, role
ambiguity
was
negatively related
to commitment (maximum likelihood
estimate
23,t-value
2.08).
The model (Figure 1) also suggested that commitment was negatively
related to propensity-to-leave. This hypothesis was also supported by the
data (maximum likelihood estimate
'41, t-value
3.05). The hy-
pothesized model also suggested a direct influence of role ambiguity
on
propensity-to-leave. This hypothesis was supported by the data (maximum
likelihood estimate = .41, t-value = 3.06). Finally, the hypothesized model
suggested a positive relationship between role conflict and propensity to
leave
This hypothesis was not supported by the data (maximum likeli-
hood estimate
23,n.s.).
The results reported above pertain to the interrelationships among for-
malization, role ambiguity, role conflict; commitment; and propensity-to-
leave using Korean industrial salespersons as a study sample. Using Ko-
rean industrial
salespersons as the study sample, this study
found that
formalization affects role ambiguity
role conflict (role stress) positive-
ly, while it does not affect commitment
This study has also found the
negative effects of role ambiguity and role conflict
on
Korean salesper-
sons
commitment_
Korean   salespersons "
propensity-to-leave has been
found to be affected negatively by commitment and positively by role
ambiguity Role conflict did not affect propensity-to-leave.
Overall, the surprising similarities between Korean salespersons and
their American counterparts sampled in previous studies (Agarwal 1993;
Ramaswami et al. 1993) can be found in the results of the data analyses
with respect to the interrelationships among job variables adopted for this
study: These results suggest that a model of American salespersons'
for -
malization is fairly robust and might be applied t0 salespersons in other
countries where a different
organizational culture
payment)
shapes the minds of the salesperson
A few surprises, however; do exist in the findings of the study: For
example, Korean industrial salespersons
formalization has been found to
affect role ambiguity positively; this is contrary to the hypothesized direc-
tion_
This finding implies that the direct impact of formalization
on role
ambiguity of salespersons is similar for both for Americans and Koreans_
Then; the question is, "why the coded instructions and formalized job
observation that are intended to decrease Korean salespersons' role ambi-
guity increase it instead?'
For the American sample, explanations do
already exist in some sales management literature. The literature explains
has
and
salary
(e.g ,
--- PAGE 16 ---
Keun S Lee and Anil Mathur
37
that & high degree of formal specification of their activities imposed
on
salespersons creates greater role stress, including role ambiguity, since
complex nature of boundary-spanning positions
e.g , salesperson) does
not iend itself to easy codification of jobs without numerous
exceptions
(Behrman & Perreault 1984; Ramaswami et al.
993). Rules, procedures,
and methods for salespersons need to be continually redefined due to their
participation in the exchange process involving customers, competitors,
and managers_
The positive relationship between   formalization and role ambiguity
identified for Korean salespersons in this research appears to be related to
unique Korean work culture. Korean salespersons who get
a fixed
compensation in the form of salary may view the increase in the
rules and supervision as an extra burden o their endeavors to maintain
relationships with customers ("In-hwa
culture), and an added con-
fusion to their complex roles on the job. Although job specification
behavioral codes may be beneficial for other job types; the multinational
company's attempt to formalize salespersons 
work rules and procedures
as a part of
globalization strategy can become dysfunctional for both the
American
Korean salesforce.
The absence of the
significant relationship between formalization and
Korean salespersons' commitment is also an issue of discussion. Previous
studies have documented
significant relationships between these two vari-
ables for both American and Indian salespersons
While the American
sample manifested a positive relationship; the Indian sample showed the
opposite (Agarwal 1993; Michaels et al. 1988)
The answer for the "no
linkage
between the two variables for the Korean sample can possibly be
found in the concept of
'loyalty
that is a social norm cultivated in
Confucian culture. Commitment to the firm may not be altered by the
direct influence of rule codes and strict rule observation.
IMPLICATIONS
As multinational firms move into foreign markets, sales organizations
become multicultural. This multicultural phenomenon necessitates global
managers to consider recruiting and managing host country nationals. To
adapt to the increasing need for managing host country national salesper -
sons,
global marketing managers cannot have ethnocentric views about
global sales management practices. The findings of the present study offer
managerial and future research implications pertaining to the salesperson
management in
culturally distant
countries
Our findings suggest that formalization as bureacratic means of control
paid
explicit
good
and
and
--- PAGE 17 ---
38
JOURNAL OF GLOBAL MARKETING
has deleterious impact
on
Korean  salespersons
role perception _
Global
managers managing salespersons in
internally homogeneous"
countries,
such
as
Korea,
and Taiwan, may have to take into account the
inefficiency associated with the utilization of authoritarian leadership as a
control  mechanism (Sohn 1994). Under the authoritarian management,
Korean salespersons, unlike their Japanese counterparts with group-based
behavioral orientations, may start searching for better opportunities and
quickly terminate their contractual relationship with the employer: Korean
workers
are known for their individualistic orientations (Dubinsky et al.
1992).
The absence of significant
between perceived formalization and
commitment does not imply that a similar relationship might hold true
toward a
'foreign
employer in Korea. It is likely that other variables like
nationalistic feelings might play a role in such situations. However; it is an
important issue of interest to foreign companies interested in doing busi-
ness in Korea, and future researchers might investigate the issue.
The detrimental effect of role stress 0n commitment and propensity-to-
leave for a foreign sales force necessitates managers to create and maintain
a sales environment where host country salespersons experience a moder-
ate level of role stress. It is well known that many Korean firms, large and
small, do manage their employees including salespersons without clear job
descriptions (Leppert 1987). Given the fact that the negative impact of role
stress on commitment is stronger for Korean salespersons than for Ameri-
can counterparts (Dubinsky et al.
992), managerial interventions should
be made to decrease Korean salespersons' role conflict and role ambiguity:
Job descriptions and extensive in-house and on-the-job training pertaining
to products, customers, and
selling skills can help Korean salespersons
enhance role clarity, whereas the elimination of unrealistic rules
the
mentoring program designed to enhance interaction between managers
and subordinates will
reduce role conflict: In Korea,
'In-hwa"
(har-
mony) on the
organizational level, and ~Kibun
(personal feeling)
on
the
individual level, should be carefully monitored and maintained by manag-
ers since the destruction of these leads to the loss of commitment and a
subsequent search for better jobs. If any rules and procedures are viewed
as
'confusing
to the Koreans who have to struggle with many uncertain -
ties on the job due to the lack of clear job descriptions, the deleterious
impact of the role ambiguity of Korean salespersons will cause
decrease
in loyalty and salesperson retention_
The present study has some limitations and leaves room for future
research_
Although the tested model is a
replication of previous studies
involving American and Indian samples, this research surveyed only the
Japan;
linkage
and
help
--- PAGE 18 ---
Keun S. Lee and Anil Mathur
39
Korean sample. Future studies need to include additional countries in the
Confucian culture, due to the variations of behavioral orientations among
the workers in the similar Confucian culture. For example, Japanese work-
ers are more consensus oriented than Koreans who are rather individualis-
tic in their employee orientation (Kotabe
et al_
1992).
However; since
Korean companies' corporate cultures are similar to those of the Japanese
in many other aspects, the findings of this study help us hypothesize that
the Japanese salesforce will exhibit similarity in the relationships among
the variables included in the tested model.
Another limitation that is worthwhile to note is the selection of one
industry (rubber product) for the sample. It is, therefore, hoped that future
research will attempt to replicate this study with different job types_
For
example, retail salespersons may react differently to formalized supervi-
sion when compared to industrial salespersons
Without the inclusion of
other sales
types, the external validity of the findings will be limited.
In all, the present study has served its purpose if it stimulated research
effort toward understanding
salesforce behavior:
REFERENCES
Agarwal, Sanjeev (1993). Influence of Formalization on Role Stress, Organiza-
tional Commitment; and Work Alienation of Salespersons:
A Cross-National
Comparative Study. Journal of International Business Studies, Fourth Quarter;
715-739
Aiken, M. & Hage, J. (1966). Organizational alienation; A Comparative analysis
American Sociological Review; 31(August) , 497-507:
Bagozzi, R
P (1980). Causal models in marketing: New York: John
Sons Inc_
Bagozzi, R. P & Yi, Y (1988). On the evaluation of structural equation models.
Journal 0f the Academy of Marketing Science, [6(Spring), 74-94
Behran; D. N. & Perreault; W D,, Jr:
984). A role stress model of the perfor-
mance and satisfaction of industrial salespersons_
Journal of Marketing, 48
(Fall), 9-21_
Bentler; P M:
& Bonett; D. G. (1980). Significance tests
goodness of fit in the
analysis of covariance structures. Psychological Bulletin, 88, 588-606.
Brief; A.
P & Aldag, R:
(1976).
Correlates of role indices_
Journal of Applied
Psychology; 61(August) , 468-472_
Busch, P (1980). The sales manager '$ bases of social power and influence upon
the sales force. Journal of Marketing, 44(Summer) , 91-101_
Chesanow; N.
1985).
The world-class executive: How to do business like a pro
around the world. New York; NY: Rawson Associates
Chonko, L. B. (1986). Organizational commitment in the sales force
Journal of
Personal Selling and Sales Management, 6(November), 19-27.
job
global
Wiley
and
--- PAGE 19 ---
40
JOURNAL OF GLOBAL MARKETING
Dubinsky, A.J,, RE: Michaels; M. Kotabe, CU. Lim, and H.C. Moon (1992)
Influence of Role Stress
on
Industrial  Salespeople's Work Outcomes in the
United States, Japan, and Korea_
Journal of International Business Studies,
First Quarter; 77-99.
Dunung, Sanjyot P ([995),
Business in Asia: The Complete Guide. New
York; NY: Lexington Books:
Ford,
J.D. & Slocum
W, Jr: (1977). Size, technology, environment; and the
structure of
organizations Academy of Management Review; 2(October), 561-
75.
Futrell; C M_
& Parasuraman,
(1984). The relationship of satisfaction and
performance to salesforce turnover: Journal of Marketing  48(Fall) , 33-40.
Gerbing, D W. & Anderson, J. C. (1985). The effects of sampling error and model
characteristics
on parameter estimation for maximum likelihood confirmatory
analysis. Multivariate Behavioral Research, 20(July), 255-271
Greene, C. N. (1978). Identification modes of professionals: Relationships with
formalization, role strain, and alienation. Academy 0f Management Journal,
21(September) , 486-92.
Harris, P R:
& Moran; R: T: (1991). Managing cultural differences: High perfor-
mance Strategies for a new world of business, Houston, TX: Gulf
Publishing
Company:
Ingram, T N,, Lee; K. S. & Skinner; S_
J. (1989).
An empirical assessment of
salesperson motivation, commitment, and job outcomes.
Journal of Personal
Sales Management, 9(Fall), 25-33.
Ingram,
TN & Lee, K
S. (1990). Sales force commitment and turnover:
Indus -
trial Marketing Management, 19,149-154_
Jackofsky, E: F & Peters,
L. H. (1983). Job turnover versus company tumnover:
Reassessment of the March and Simon participation hypothesis
Journal of
Applied Psychology; 63(3) , 490-495_
Jackson, S_
E. & Schuler; R
S. (1985).
A meta analysis and conceptual critique of
research on role ambiguity and role conflict in work settings  Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Process, 36(August) , 16-78.
Jacobs, Norman (1986). The Korean Road to Modernization and Development
Urbana and Chicago, IIL:: University of Chicago Press
James_
William L , and Hill, John S. (1995). Perceptions of Multinational Sales-
persons and Their Market Environments: An Exploratory
Cluster Analysis
Journal of Global Marketing, 8(3/4), 67-83_
Johnston,M_
W, Futrell; C M, & Sager, J. (1987). The relationship between
organizational commitment, job satisfaction, and tumover among
ncw sales-
people:
Journal of Personal Selling and Sales Management, 7(November),
29-38_
Johnston, M_
W,, Parasuraman;
A._
Futrell, C.
M;
& Black
W: C. (1990).
longitudinal assessment of the impact of selected organizational influences o
salespeople $ organizational commitment during early employment. Journal of
Marketing Research, 27(August) , 333-344.
Doing
Selling
and _
--- PAGE 20 ---
Keun S Lee and Anil Mathur
Joreskog, K. G. & Sorbom; D. (1993a). LISREL 8 user $ reference
Chicago,
IL: Scientific Software International Inc_
Joreskog; K  G. & Sorbom, D. (1993b). PRELIS 2 user $ reference
Chica -
go, IL: Scientific Software International Inc:
Kahn, R_
L, Wolfe, D
M,, Quinn;, R P, & Snoek,
J D. (1964). Organizational
siress:
Studies in role conflict and ambiguity New York; NY: John Wiley &
Sons, Inc
Leppert, P (1987).
business with Koreans:
A Handbook for executives_
Chulsa Vista, Cal.: Patton Pacific
Inc_
Lucas, G. H:
Jr,, Parasuraman, A;
Davis
A,, & Enis_
M: (1987)
An
empirical study of salesforce turnover. Journal of Marketing, 51 (July), 34-59 .
Luthans, , McCaul, H: S_ & Dodd, N. G.
1985). Organizational commitment: A
comparison of American;
Japanese, and Korean employees. Academy of Man-
agement Journal, 28,213-219_
Mathieu, J. E. & Zajac, D. M. (1990). A review and meta-analysis of the anteced-
ents, correlates, and consequences of organizational commitment. Psychologi-
cal Bulletin, 108 (September) , 171-194
Mente_
De (1989)
Korean Etiquette & Ethics in Business: Lincolnwood, IIL::
NTC Business Books:
Michaels, RJ
E,,
L. & Joachimsthaler; E. A. (1987). Role stress among
industrial   buyers:
An
integrative  model.
Journal  of
Marketing,  51(April),
28-45.
Michaels,
E,, Cron; W
L,, Dubinsky, A. J,, & Joachimsthaler; E_
(1988)
Influence of formalization on the
organizational commitment and work alien-
ation of salespeople and industrial buyers
Journal of Marketing
Research,
2S(November) , 376-83_
Morris_
J. H & Steers, R
M (1980).
Structural  influences
on
organizational
commitment Journal of Vocational Behavior; [7(August) , 50-7 .
MorTow,
C &
Organ, D_
W. (1986). Self-reports in organizational research:
Problems and prospects. Journal of Management, 12(Winter) , 531-544_
Ramaswami,
N,, Agarwal, S, & Bhargava, M
(1993). Work alienation of
marketing employees: Influence of task; supervisory, and organizational struc-
ture   factors_
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 21(Summer),
179-193_
Randall, D M. (1993). Cross-cultural research on
organizational commitment: A
review and application of Hofstede's value survey module. Journal of Business
Research, 26,91-410.
Rizzo_
J.R,, House, R. J. & Lirtzman; S. 1. (1970). Role conflict and ambiguity in
complex organizations Administrative Science Quarterly; 15, 150-163_
Salancik, G. R (1977). Commitment and the control of organizational behavior
and belief: In B. M. Straw and GR. Salancik; eds , New Directions in
nizational Behavior: Chicago: St. Clair Press 
1-53
Schuster; Camille P, and Keith, Janet (1993). Factors that Affect the Sales Force
Choice Decision in Intemational Market
Strategies
Journal of Global
Marketing; 7(2), 27-49.
guide
guide.
Doing
Press;
Boye _
Day;
Orga-
Entry
--- PAGE 21 ---
42
JOURNAL OF GLOBAL MARKETING
Sohn, Jung Hoon Derick
1994). Social  Knowledge as
Control  System:
Proposition and Evidence from the Japanese FDI Behavior Journal of Interna-
tional Business Studies; Second Quarter; 295-324_
Stephenson, P R, Cron, W. J,, & Frazier; G. (1979). Delegating pricing authority
to the sales force: The effects on sales and profit performance. Journal of
Marketing, 43 (Spring), 21-8.
HAWORTH JOURNALS
ARE AVAILABLE ON MICROFORM
AII Haworth Journals are avallable in elther microfiche or microfilm from
The Haworth Press
Inc;
Microflche and microfilms are available to hardcopy subscrbers at the lower
"Indlvldual" subscrlption rate.
Other mlcroform subscribers may purchase
microfiche or microform at
Ilbrary
subscription rate_
Microfilm specifications: 35mm; diazo or silver;
Microfiche specifications: IO5mm x 184mm (4"
X 6*); reduction ratio: 24x:
nonsilver (dlazo) positive polarity:
Microform are mailed upon completion of each volume
For further informatlon 
contact Janette Hall; Microform Contact 
The Haworth Press, Inc: , 10 Alice Street, Binghamton: NY 13904-1580;
Tel: (800) 342-9678 (ext. 328); Fax: (607) 722-1424;
E-Mail: getinfo@haworth com
Orders for microform
also be placed with University Microfilms
International, 300 North Zeeb Road, Ann Arbor; MI 48106;
Tel: (303) 761-4700,
the
may