The Service Industries Journal
ISSN: 0264-2069 (Print) 1743-9507 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/fsij20
Exploring the role of front-line employees as
innovators
Marit Engen & Peter Magnusson
To cite this article: Marit Engen & Peter Magnusson (2015) Exploring the role of front-
line employees as innovators, The Service Industries Journal, 35:6, 303-324, DOI:
10.1080/02642069.2015.1003370
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/02642069.2015.1003370
Published online: 19 Feb 2015.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 3154
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 11 View citing articles 
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=fsij20
Exploring the role of front-line employees as innovators
Marit Engena*and Peter Magnussonb
aFaculty of Economic and Organization Science, Lillehammer University College, Pb. 952, 2604
Lillehammer, Norway;bService Research Center, Karlstad University, SE-65188 Karlstad, Sweden
(Received 30 November 2012; accepted 15 October 2014 )
This article aims for a deeper understanding of front-line employees (FLEs) and their
boundary-spanning role in service organizations ’innovation processes from the
vantage points of creativity and service innovation theory. It explores in particular
FLEs ’processes of creativity by focusing on how ideas emerge and how these ideas
are further managed in the organizations ’innovation processes. It draws on an in-
depth empirical study of three units at a large spa and resort hotel. The article
demonstrates how FLEs ’ideas are related to the assimilation and utilization of
knowledge gained in the customer –supplier interface. Furthermore, it introduces the
concept of ‘management by weaving ’, which encompasses the middle managers ’
roles in the complexity of leading diverse innovation processes in the service
organization. By having the roles of facilitator, gatekeeper, and translator, middlemanagers hold the key position for letting FLEs play the role as innovators.
Keywords: service innovation; idea creation; front-line employees; knowledge
utilization; middle managers
Introduction
In today ’s rapidly changing environment, organizations strive to achieve competitive
advantage through innovation. Creativity and innovation are not just a result of ﬁrms’strat-
egies and overall access to resources, but, more fundamentally, also stem from the individ-
ual employees, who themselves or with others carry out the work of the organization every
day (Amabile, Schatzel, Moneta, & Kramer, 2004 ). While doing their job, employees gain
knowledge that might induce new ideas in the form of novel products or procedures, which,
when implemented, might become organizational innovations.
As individual creativity provides the foundation for organizational creativity and inno-
vation (Amabile, 1988 ; Shalley & Gilson, 2004 ), employees represent a valuable asset for
theﬁrm. Though the importance of creativity and the level of creativity needed will differ
depending on elements such as the task, the organization, and the business, one can assume
that there is room for creativity in just about every job (Shalley & Gilson, 2004 ). Within the
service sector, the signi ﬁcance of the front-line employees (FLEs) as a driver for business
success in general is an acknowledged factor (Cadwallader, Jarvis, Bitner, & Ostrom,2010 ). In today ’s competitive environment where customers desire and expect customized
services, the employees working in the front line interacting with the customers are throughtheir adaptive behaviours characterized as the heart of a ﬁrm’s ability to deliver this type of
© 2015 Taylor & Francis*Corresponding author. Email: marit.engen@hil.noThe Service Industries Journal , 2015
Vol. 35, No. 6, 303 –324, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02642069.2015.1003370

customized service (Gwinner, Bitner, Brown, & Kumar, 2005 , p. 144). At the same time, it
is possible for employees to learn and gain valuable knowledge from the customers (Mat-
thing, Sandén, & Edvardsson, 2004 ). This boundary-spanning role that FLEs take on points
towards two important factors. First, one can assume that the employees ’capacity to be
ﬂexible and adapt to the customers partly will be based on their creativity. Second, knowl-
edge regarding the customers that the employees absorb will be important to incorporate inthe organizations ’innovation processes. Hence, FLEs represent a vital asset for the creative
and innovative activities in service organizations, and a critical challenge for the organiz-ation is to facilitate and utilize the resource they represent.
Despite the innovative potential of front-line service employees, in general little knowledge
exists regarding innovation processes on a micro-level (van der Aa & Elfring, 2002;C r e v a n i ,
Palm, & Schilling, 2011) and on creativity among FLEs in particular (Coelho, Augusto, &
Lages, 2011; Wong & Ladkin, 2008). The role of employees in service organizations is
however of particular interest since service innovations rarely are R&D-based (Sundbo &Gallouj, 2000;T e t h e r , 2005) and consequently may be more dependent on employees ’input
in general. In order to identify how ﬁrms can facilitate the creative individual, like FLEs, it is
essential to have some understanding of the requirements for creative thought and the character-istics of their work style (Mumford, 2000). Though we can argue that the FLEs are in a position
to be creative and have valuable ideas, we need to know more about the process and the outcome.
Accordingly, the purpose of this study is to gain a deeper understanding of the FLEs and
their boundary-spanning role in service organizations ’innovation processes. The article
explores in particular the employees ’creativity processes by focusing on how ideas from
FLEs emerge, and furthermore examines how these ideas are subsequently developedand managed in the organizations ’innovation processes.
Previous empirical studies on organizational creativity are to a great extent laboratory
studies or quantitative ﬁeld studies. This study takes a qualitative in-depth approach, and
thus responds to Zhou and Shalley ’s(2003 ) call for more qualitative research on creativity.
To comprehend the boundary-spanning role of FLEs in regard to creativity fully, we
explore the type of ideas that FLEs create and how their creative processes are linked to
organizational innovation activities. Though the concepts of creativity and innovation arestrongly related, which the literature acknowledges, empirical studies rarely show the link
between them. Research on organizational creativity and employees ’creativity focuses on
how we can enhance creativity, identify barriers, and understand managerial practices. But
less is understood regarding the process based on employee-created ideas and its implemen-
tation later on (Axtell, Holman, Unsworth, Wall, & Waterson, 2000 ). Using a qualitative
approach, we are able to gain knowledge on what in ﬂuences FLEs ’creative processes
from their perspective, and we can also track the employees ’ideas further along in organiz-
ations ’innovation process, as well as their possible implementation or rejection.
First, this article presents a theoretical framework for understanding the main factors
that in ﬂuence FLEs ’ability to create ideas at work and to engage in service organizations ’
innovative activities. Next, the method chosen for the study is described before the ﬁndings
are presented. The article ends with a discussion of theoretical and practical implications,
followed by suggestions for further research.
Theoretical background
Innovation and creativity
Innovation is often de ﬁned
as the implementation of the ideas, whereas creativity is related
to the production of the ideas (Amabile, Conti, Coon, Lazenby, & Herron, 1996 ; Shalley,304 M. Engen and P. Magnusson
Zhou, & Oldham, 2004 ). Thus, ‘creativity is a necessary (but not sufﬁ cient) factor enabling
innovation ’(Carayannis & Gonzalez, 2003 , p. 587). A commonly understood de ﬁnition of
creativity is the development of ideas on products, practices, services, or procedures that are
both novel andpotentially useful to the organization (Oldham & Cummings, 1996 ; Shalley
et al., 2004 ). Creative ideas may thus range from incremental suggestions to radical organ-
izational changes, just as long as the idea is both unique compared with other ideas withinthe organization and might provide potential value for the organization (Mumford & Gus-
tafson, 1988 ; Shalley et al., 2004 ). However, the value of an idea is realized ﬁrst when it is
implemented, which links creativity to innovation.
Service innovation
The service innovation process is often characterized as less formalized compared with that
of physical products. The process is also usually linked to the actual service delivery
process (Ettlie & Rosenthal, 2011 ; Sundbo, 1997 ,2008 ; Toivonen, 2010 ). Sundbo
(2008 , p. 27) describes a service as a behavioural act, and thus service innovations are fun-
damentally a renewal of human behaviour. In the service context, special emphasis is oftengiven to the client –supplier interface (i.e. the customer and the FLE) (Toivonen & Tuomi-
nen, 2009 ). In many service contexts, such as the hospitality sector, the host –guest trans-
action is viewed as the core activity (Onsøyen, Mykletun, & Steiro, 2009 ). Hence, one
can assume that this interaction represents a focal point for innovating activities andprocesses.
Service innovations can be the result of a planned, strategic process or a more unstruc-
tured, ad hoc-based process, or both. The latter process is often connected to ‘ad hoc inno-
vations ’,d eﬁned as ‘a solution to a particular problem posed by a given client ’(Gallouj &
Weinstein, 1997 , p. 549), where the executed adjustment needs to be reproducible in a new
situation (Gallouj, 2002 ). Furthermore, Toivonen and Tuominen (2009 ) have found in their
studies two more processes that lead to innovation. One is ‘rapid application ’, where an idea
is brought to the market and, if successful, is then further developed. The other is the ‘prac-
tice-driven model ’(or the a posteriori model) (Toivonen, 2010 ), where a change in the
service practice is acknowledged in retrospect as an innovation and consequently developed
further (Toivonen & Tuominen, 2009 ). Fuglsang and Sørensen ( 2011 ) have introduced an
additional interrelated innovation; innovation as bricolage or tinkering. This is de ﬁned
 as‘a
change of structure and adjustment of protocol which is created from resources at hand’(Fuglsang & Sørensen, 2011 , p. 584). In all three types of innovations, ad hoc, practice-
driven, and bricolage, the customer –employee interaction is central. Hence, employees
who interact with the customers are also likely to come up with ideas, ideas that mightimmediately be implemented (e.g. bricolage) or are in the need of further development,
or both. As ideas are ignited and created by employees, their ability to be creative willmost likely in ﬂuence their organization ’s innovation activities.
Employee creativity
Though every employee may be creative, not everyone is. An employee ’s creativity can be
described by a framework where creativity is a function of personal characteristics, charac-
teristics of the organizational context, and the interactions among these characteristics
(Amabile, 1988 ; Shalley & Gilson, 2004 ; Woodman, Sawyer, & Grif ﬁn,1993 ). According
to Amabile ( 1988 ), individual creative performance is affected by three components:
domain-relevant skills, creativity-relevant skills, and intrinsic task motivation. Collectively,The Service Industries Journal 305
this is known as the ‘componential model’ . The ﬁrst component, domain-relevant skills, is
the foundation for all creative work, consisting of factual knowledge, technical skills, and
special talents. It is thus a type of a personal expert knowledge within a speci ﬁc domain.
The second component, creativity-relevant skills, includes the ability to take new perspec-
tives on problems and refers to how individuals approach problems and solutions (Amabile,
1988 ). The ﬁrst two components should be regarded as creative capability, while it is the
third component, intrinsic task motivation, that determines the actual outcome that
people will accomplish (Amabile, 1988 ). Whereas task motivation in general includes
the individuals ’attitudes towards a speciﬁ c task and their perception of the motivation
for doing or working on the task (Zhou & Shalley, 2003 ), intrinsic task motivation refers
to the motivation to engage in a task primarily for its own sake, because it is interesting,
engaging, or in some way satisfying. Intrinsically motivated people have been found tobe more creative than those who are extrinsically motivated and work primarily to
receive rewards or recognition or to ful ﬁl a command (Eisenberger & Shanock, 2003 ;
Hennessey, 2000 ).
The three components are building blocks for creativity; all are necessary in order to
accomplish some level of creativity. Furthermore, the higher the level of each of the
three components, the higher the level of overall creativity (Amabile, 1988 , p. 137). In
the next section, we shall discuss how the components for individual creativity can stimu-
late FLEs in their creative work.
Front-line employees ’antecedents for creativity
In short, to come up with new creative ideas FLEs need to have knowledge concerning the
domain of the task, some general creative skills, and motivation to do the actual task. But
since innovation might emerge through interactions between customers and employees,
enabling employees to act upon ideas is vital.
From a perspective of knowledge, at least two types of knowledge can be discerned as
necessary to succeed with innovation: supply-side knowledge and demand-side knowledge(von Hippel, 1994 ; Ozer, 2009 ). Supply-side knowledge is necessary to understand how
ideas are supposed to be implemented, and thus it is a focus on issues of feasibility, includ-
ing both technical and organizational issues, which is also called ‘technology knowledge ’
(Magnusson, 2009 )o r‘technical knowledge ’(Lüthje, 2004 ). The demand-side knowledge,
also called ‘use knowledge ’(Magnusson, 2009 )o r‘use experience ’(Lüthje, 2004 ), con-
cerns the understanding of how user or customer value is created through the use of under-
lying technology. The supply and demand sides are complementary: the supplier side looksupon the idea from the company ’s perspective and the demand side takes the customer ’s
view. Both the supply and demand sides of knowledge are necessary to activate, to accom-plish, and, accordingly, to evaluate innovation (von Hippel, 1994 ; Kanter, 1988 ). On the
one hand, FLEs know their work domain and practices, that is, the work they perform.
On the other hand, they get to know the customers through the interaction. It is thus reason-
able to expect that FLEs have or are in a position to gain both types of knowledge.
In
order to innovate, organizations need not only knowledgeable individuals, but also
employees who are able to initiate a process that breaks free from the organization ’s estab-
lished routines or practices (Kanter, 1988 ). Breaking existing routines and practices in a
service organization can be the start for a new way of doing things and can become an inno-vation, which is either directly implemented (bricolage) or adopted by the organization for
further development, as described in the practice-driven model. This requires people whoare able and willing to pay attention and to sense opportunities. Close customer or user306 M. Engen and P. Magnusson
contact is known as an important innovation activator (de Brentani, 2001 ; Kanter, 1988 ;
Ordanini & Parasuraman, 2011 ). It should, however, be noted that (too much) technology
knowledge has been found to be a hindrance to creativity because people tend not to stretch
beyond what is currently possible (Magnusson, 2009 ; Marsh, Bink, & Hicks, 1999 ). Too
much technology knowledge can thus be a burden for creativity.
Interaction with others has consistently been referred to in the research on creativity as a
necessary precondition for creative performance (Shalley & Gilson, 2004 ). Groups and
their characteristics have been the subjects of numerous studies, and studies of workenvironment in general show that employees are more likely to be creative whenworking with supportive and nurturing co-workers (Amabile et al., 1996 ; Zhou &
George, 2001 ). Care is also central when leadership styles and organizational encourage-
ment are studied. The vast majority of earlier studies provide substantial positive supportfor supportive leadership and intrinsic motivation (Shalley et al., 2004 ). There is no
reason to assume that a nurturing work environment should be any less important inservice organizations than they are in other industries. There is a challenge involved withservice organizations, however. FLEs engage constantly with customers through their
work, and leaders might struggle to be close enough to the work practices to follow-up
on the potentially useful new ideas and knowledge that evolve from the practice.
Research framework
On the basis of the aforementioned research, Figure 1 represents a framework for studying
how the FLEs generate ideas and subsequently the process of further elaborating the ideas.
Amabile ’s(1988 ) componential model is used as an analytical framework for the ﬁrst part
of the study, which explores FLEs ’process of creativity by looking at how the factors of
domain knowledge, creative skills, and motivation affect FLEs ’creativity. Amabile ’s
model is germane because its components that identify the inﬂ uences on a person ’s
ability to be creative in general have been thoroughly empirically tested and are widely
accepted (see e.g. Shalley et al., 2004 ; Zhou & Shalley, 2003 ). However, it should be
noted that the purpose of the study is not to con ﬁrm the established model, but to use it
as an analytical lens for understanding the processes that take place in FLE innovation.Accordingly, this study takes a ﬂexible approach owing to the need to adapt the componen-
tial model to this context. In particular, Amabile focuses on intrinsic motivation, but there is
a paucity of research done on FLEs. Thus, one cannot just rule out the effect of extrinsic
motivation (e.g. monetary rewards), which has in some studies been shown to affect crea-
tivity (Shalley et al., 2004 ). Accordingly, the framework in this article refers to the concept
of motivation in general. Furthermore, on the basis of the FLEs ’role as boundary workers,
Figure 1. Antecedents to idea creation in the front line.The Service Industries Journal 307
the study explores the type of knowledge related to this role, and hence distinguishes
between use knowledge and technology knowledge. Besides drawing attention to the ante-
cedents to idea creation, the framework employed here points to the question of how ideasare managed and then transformed into innovations. The study aims to gain more knowl-
edge of the link between idea creation and innovation, thus following the whole innovation
process.
Method
An in-depth study of a large spa and resort hotel located in Sweden was performed in order
to learn more about how the FLEs ’ideas emerge and are managed in the organization ’s
innovation processes. This study chose a tourism and hospitality case, a SPA-resort, on
the basis of how the increasing market expectations to experience something new and
meaningful might in ﬂuence the need for FLEs to be ﬂexible and creative at work
(Boswijk, Thijssen, & Peelen, 2007 ). A single-case study was conducted owing to the
need to carry out a comprehensive study where the data would make it possible to makecomparisons within a single organization, instead of comparisons between cases (Stake,
2003 ; Yin, 2009 ). This approach will provide new insight into the FLEs ’idea-creation
process, the potential similarity and differences between the employees, and the follow-
up on the ideas. Furthermore, the SPA-resort, with a total of 95 permanent employees, con-
sists of three more or less independent entities or units: Hotel (i.e. reception and beds), res-taurant and bar, and spa and ﬁtness unit. All three units have unique services and facilities
but are integrated under the same roof and serve the same customers. This characteristicenabled a comparison between three different contexts in which both the employees andthe managers could be studied, as will be discussed in the ﬁndings.
Data collection
Data were collected through interviews and observations. Internal and external documents
were also collected. Interviews were conducted mainly with FLEs, but in addition someback-of ﬁce personnel and managers of the units were interviewed. A total of 22 interviews
were conducted: 13 with FLEs, 7 with managers, and the remaining 2 with employees whoworked primarily in the back of ﬁce, but who had tasks that enabled them to observe the
customers ’use of the services (e.g. housekeeper). In line with the recommendations
made by several innovation scholars (Veldhuizen, Hultink, & Grif ﬁn,2006 ), we used mul-
tiple informants with different functional backgrounds. Of the employees, 5 came from thehotel, 4 from the restaurant, and 6 from the spa and ﬁtness unit. The interviews focused on
idea creation and involvement in the organization ’s innovation process. An interview guide
was used, where questions were aimed at identifying the main factors in the FLEs ’idea-cre-
ation process, as seen in Figure 1 . In addition, questions were aimed at following up on the
further processing of the ideas, and the employees ’involvement in the organization ’s inno-
vation processes. On the basis of these considerations, this study deemed it critical tocapture the employees’ own perceptions and perspectives of idea creation and innovation,
and it emphasized the need to follow-up on what the employees called attention to. Inter-views lasted between 30 minutes and 1:15 hours (effective time), for a total of 16 hours. Allinterviews were transcribed as soon as possible. Several rounds of interviews were con-
ducted, which made adaptions possible as data were analysed on an on-going basis.
Observations were conducted of internal meetings focused on generation of ideas.
When appropriate, notes were taken during the observation. In addition, a wide range of308 M. Engen and P. Magnusson
documents were collected, including written presentations, reports, service development
schemes, and so on. The data were triangulated for reliability through the comparison of
the different data sources with each other. When empirical saturation was achieved, thedata collection was terminated.
Data analysis
In order to analyse the role of the FLEs in the innovation processes, a ‘thematic analysis ’
(Boyatzis, 1998 ) was used, in line with the recommendations of Braun and Clark (2006 ).
They suggest a six-phase analysis, beginning with familiarizing oneself with the data,
through generating codes, searching, and reviewing themes, de ﬁning and naming
themes, and ending with the ﬁnal phase, the write-up. Though some of the factors that inﬂ u-
ence creativity are well known and established a priori in the research model, the thematicapproach was chosen to gain the FLEs ’perception of the process for idea creation. A con-
densed description of the analysis is provided below.
Codes based on our research questions were identi ﬁed, framed as ‘how do the ideas
from FLEs emerge? ’and‘how are these ideas subsequently developed and managed in
the organizations ’innovation processes? ’After the initial coding, both researchers analysed
all the codes individually in order to uncover relationships between the codes that couldform different themes. This resulted in a list of 10 preliminary themes: (1) getting ideas
based on situations, (2) getting ideas based on people, (3) getting ideas based on the per-sonality, (4) kind of ideas, (5) why ideas, (6) value of the ideas, (7) organizational
factors, (8) what motivates, (9) connection to management, and (10) the process. Each
theme was interpreted in order to understand the underlying meaning; the next phaseused the interpretations to review and modify the themes. Through reviewing and de ﬁning
the themes, corresponding to Phases 4 and 5 in Braun and Clark (2006 ), the analysis
resulted in one of the candidate themes being discarded and some being merged, resultingin different levels of themes. In this part of the analyse process, it is vital that data within the
themes cohere together meaningfully, at the same time that they are distinct in between.
Furthermore, the themes must be considered to the data set, that they re ﬂect the meanings
evident in the data set as a whole (Braun & Clarke, 2006 ). Thus as a result, the ﬁrst 10
themes were rede ﬁned into 5 main themes, one blurred with several others and therefore
rejected (10), the other 4 ﬁtted into subthemes in other to be distinct from each other.
Theﬁve themes were (the preliminary in parenthesis): (1) the triggers of idea creation
(1–2), (2) the creator of the ideas (3), (3) motivation for idea creation (5, 6, 7, and 8),
(4) type of ideas created (4), and (5) elaboration of the ideas (9). These themes emergedprimarily from the interviews with FLEs and back-of ﬁce employees. Moreover, the inter-
views with managers were analysed according to the themes. In addition, the interviewswith the unit managers at the restaurant/bar (food and beverage manager), the hotel(hotel manager), and the spa/ ﬁtness (spa manager) along with the CEO of the SPA-resort
were analysed separately, where there was a particular focus on if and how managersemphasize ideas from their staff and to which degree this is something that is fosteredwithin the units. Analysing the idea-creation and the organization ’s innovation processes
from two perspectives, that is, FLEs and management, made it possible to examine howthe two groups relate to each other in idea-creation and subsequent development processes.Looking at the three units separately also made it possible to compare the processes within
the SPA-resort. In the next section, we present our ﬁndings, ﬁrst by connecting the themes
to build on the previous model, and then by displaying the data to support the ﬁndings as
shown in Figure 2 .The Service Industries Journal 309
Findings
The themes presented above depict the service innovation process, from the FLEs ’idea cre-
ation to their implementation. The ﬁve themes are closely connected and through this con-
nection the processes for idea creation and further development can best be understood. The
themes encompass three activities: (1) idea creation, (2) idea management, and (3)
implementation, thus portraying the FLEs ’innovation process. Furthermore, this process
includes both management’ s and employees ’controlled activities. How the themes ﬁt
within the activities and the processes is described more in detail below and is illustratedinFigure 2 .
The ﬁrst activity represents idea creation. As the research framework illustrates
(Figure 1 ), employees’ ability to create ideas, or their creative process, can be analysed
by using the component model for individual creativity as de ﬁned by Amabile ( 1988 ).
The components comprise domain knowledge, motivation, and creativity skills, and
together they should reﬂ ect the basic understanding for creativity. As stated, a central
object for the FLE interviews was to study the FLEs ’own perspective of the innovation
process, and all three factors, albeit to different degrees, are reﬂ ected in the themes that
emerged through the analysis. The ﬁrst two themes, ‘the triggers of idea creation ’and
‘the creator of the ideas’ , cover the employees ’reﬂections on elements involving knowl-
edge and characteristics of their own personality. The second only partly points to creativeskills and the employees’ cognitive skills are not represented in the ﬁndings. The third
theme, ‘motivation for idea creation ’, represents their thoughts on what motivates them
to come up with ideas.
In our research framework ( Figure 1 ), the further development of the ideas follows idea
creation. In the analysis of our data, we found that the further development consisted of two
parts, idea management and implementation. In idea management, ideas are either rejected
or accepted for further development and implementation. The unit manager –who we found
to have multiple roles –makes the actual evaluation and plays a critical part in linking idea
creation to further formal implementation of the ideas. As illustrated in Figure 2 , this phase
Figure 2. Antecedents to and consequences of idea creation in the front line.310 M. Engen and P. Magnusson
was also found to have an inﬂ uence on idea creation. Feedback to the FLEs regarding the
evaluation was vital for motivating the FLEs ’creativity and in many ways decided whether
they regarded work practice to be open to new ideas or not. In addition, managers were also
in a position to in ﬂuence the employees ’creativity directly through, for example, actively
facilitating idea creation. We shall see below that the manager could either be engaged inand initiate the innovation processes or be more reluctant and uninvolved.
Furthermore, as seen in Figure 2 , we also found a shortcut, an informal process for
implementing FLEs ’ideas. These are the ideas that FLEs themselves are in control of
and can realize without involving the management. The ideas are embedded within thework practice, what we referred to earlier as a bricolage innovation, which alters the
employees’ practices. Both the formal and informal paths to innovation are based on
Themes 4 and 5, that is, the types of ideas created and how the ideas are elaborated. The
next section elaborates the ﬁndings illustrated in Figure 2 . Though the activities are por-
trayed as stages in a linear process, the process will in practice take on the form of reinfor-cing loops. How idea management is led inﬂ uences idea creation, and having ideas
implemented can also in ﬂuence the employees ’process of idea creation, as shown in
Figure 2 .
Idea creation
In this section, we focus on the initial innovation activity in the front line, the idea-creation
process, by examining the knowledge ideas were based on, who created ideas, and the moti-
vational factors for coming up with ideas.
Domain knowledge
The FLEs at the SPA-resort all expressed the opinion that the workplace represents a plat-
form for learning opportunities, primarily based on interactions with customers and
co-workers. As a boundary worker, the FLEs share meeting arenas with customers and
co-workers. These arenas gave rise to new employee ideas on the basis of either direct inter-action face-to-face with the customers or by observing them. In addition to gaining knowl-
edge from inside the SPA-resort, the majority of the interviewees reported how external
sources also led to ideas. These three learning sources –customers, co-workers, and exter-
nal information in addition to the knowledge initially held by the FLEs –gave the employ-
ees an opportunity to gain and act on new knowledge. Table 1 illustrates the quotations
from employees at the SPA-resort that state how ideas came about and they re ﬂect the
different learning sources. The quotations illustrate situations or actions that can be
related to either customer (use) knowledge, organizational (technology) knowledge, or a
combination of them.
As seen in Table 1 , FLEs gain use knowledge by being approached directly by the cus-
tomers (e.g. quotations no. 1 –2i nTable 1 ). In addition, the employees also observe the cus-
tomers, and they repeatedly stated that this was a way of coming up with new ideas (e.g.quotation no. 4 in Table 1 ). The restaurant manager at the SPA-resort gave an example,
where the functionality of the buffet was improved by reducing the queues to get drinksby placing them directly at the table. This small adaption of the service delivery processwas introduced after observations of the customers in the restaurant.
Technology knowledge is related to the employees ’formal competences as well as their
knowledge of the organization in general and its practices and resources in particular. Thus,technology knowledge can be seen as the competences necessary for FLEs to perform theirThe Service Industries Journal 311
job. As the quotations in Table 1 illustrate (e.g. no. 5 –7), this is also quite evident in their
ideas which are based on the FLEs ’technology knowledge. More important is how employ-
ees’interaction with their co-workers enables them to increase their knowledge. By inter-
acting and exchanging experiences, they learn from each other and build upon each other ’s
ideas, rather like a brainstorming session. This is in particular related to the employees ’
closest colleagues within the same unit, but the interviews also point to the need forTable 1. Front-line employees-related practices for domain-relevant knowledge.
No. Quotations from FLEsUse
knowledgeTechnology
knowledge
1. Sometimes you hear a guest saying something, which you catch
up. You can get a lot of ideas from the customers. Some are
stupid and some are good, so you have to sort out where it
belongs. And some stuff that customers bring up is really good,
and then it can be smart to use it ’. [Restaurant/bar]X
2. I get a lot of ideas from the customers. They tell me what they
miss. They absolutely do confront me with ideas. [Fitnessinstructor]X
3. Doing our job you cannot just follow a template; you have to be
ﬂexible dealing with different customers. You have to be able
to, to some extent, ‘read’the customers. [Receptionist]X
4. We see how they use their rooms and whether changes work or
not. [Housekeeping]X
5. I learn from my colleagues; for example new ways of doing
massage. I can add this to my own way of doing my job. [Spatherapist]X
6. We are specialists in different ﬁelds, so we come up with ideas
based on our expertise. [Spa therapist]X
7. We have a lot of extra staff who bring in new and fresh ideas. It
becomes so that you catch on to [the idea of] ‘yes, this is a much
better way of doing it ’, because they may have been doing it like
that in another workplace. …So you catch on to it, like ‘but this
is great, we do it like this ’. [Restaurant/bar]X
8. Well, you get quite good feedback most of all from customers, that
is one thing, but also from colleagues who talk to each other andtoss ideas around. [Restaurant/bar]XX
9. I think it is important that we can meet with all of the company ’s
units. You get somewhat inside your own world, like thereception in one, we in another, and we may not think alike. So,
actually, you should have regular meetings together, even if
there are no particular issues that arise, because it will be useful.…I think it is very useful to talk to each other, to gain a joint
understanding. [Fitness instructor]XX
10. I read a lot, buy a lot of food magazines [and] wine and drink
articles, because I am interested. Also I go online, and I am out alot to check up dishes and drinks. [Restaurant/bar]XX
11. It is us who work within the practice that now what works.
[Restaurant/bar]XX
12. …well, sometimes you feel like they [referring to management,
our remark] decide things that may not work in the real life. Youhave to see how it actually works and not just decide one thing,[…] you need to bring along someone who can explain how it
is. [Receptionist]XX312 M. Engen and P. Magnusson
interaction across units. It is a way of getting ‘everybody actively involved ’, as stated by an
employee, and of sharing knowledge across practices (e.g. quotation no. 9 in Table 1 ).
AsTable 1 illustrates (e.g. quotations no. 7 and 10), employees also gain both use and
technology knowledge from being outside the organization; business trips, attending trade
fairs, or observing ﬁrms within the same industry inspire new thinking. This is one way of
preventing ‘home blindness ’as one respondent expressed it. Creativity is often connected
to being able to ‘think outside the box ’. Being in the same working environment over a long
period can reduce the ability to think beyond quotidian patterns, but by looking outside the
company, employees are able to follow-up on trends, both in the market and within the pro-fession. All respondents working as ﬁtness instructors were convinced that being informed
onﬁtness trends enabled them to renew both themselves and the programme they teach, and
also to introduce new ﬁtness styles or classes to the SPA-resort.
Summing up, the FLEs ’domain knowledge is primarily based on knowledge of the
practice and is augmented on the basis of interactions with customers and co-workerswithin the practice and organization. As seen, the knowledge is typically gained by‘doing their job’ , which in the case of FLEs indicates the combination of use knowledge
and technology knowledge, a combination essential to innovative activity. Furthermore,the employees in general claim to possess an understanding of the organization and the cus-tomers from a different viewpoint than the management ’s, therefore enabling them to
present ideas from an alternative perspective (e.g. quotations no. 11 –12 in Table 1 ).
Their knowledge of the customers combined with the knowledge of the routines withinthe practice and service delivery processes thus presents the opportunity to initiate some-
thing new to the organization, which will be addressed later in the ﬁndings.
Creative skills
Individuals are different when it comes to being creative, which re ﬂects their creative skills.
The concept of creative skills refers to the individual ’s personality as well as how a person
works and thinks. The interviews did not provide the possibility of a thorough analysis of
this factor, but differences between the employees did appear in the data. Some employees
came up with ideas constantly and could have inspired co-workers, while others were more
satisﬁed doing what they usually do:
…I am not the kind of person who takes a lot of initiative, [ …] I think it is ok when it runs
smoothly; that is the kind of person I am. [Spa therapist]
On the other hand, there were the employees who characterized themselves with a drive to
take initiative and to be creative, which was expressed by two interviewees from the spa andﬁtness unit:
I have a lot of ideas and I cannot be silent. I just have to let them out. …If I have an opinion, I
express it. And then they can either relate to it or not. But at least I have said what I wanted and
expressed my ideas. And that feels important to me. [Fitness instructor]
I think I am a creative person who tries to see opportunities and not focuses on problems. ...
That is who I am as a person. [Fitness instructor]
As mentioned earlier, the interviews were insuf ﬁcient for measuring the employees’ crea-
tive skills, since they were self-reports. Also, the employees differed from one another. The
unit managers acknowledged these differences by ascribing to their staff different attitudes
regarding the contribution of ideas and being involved in the development of the resort.
Irrespective of the employees’ skill, the factor of motivation was essential for everyone,
and will be addressed in the next section.The Service Industries Journal 313
Motivation
As we have seen, the literature on organizational creativity emphasizes the importance of
intrinsic motivation. Intrinsically motivated FLEs are those who have an inner drive fortheir job, a passion for what they do, as opposed to extrinsically motivated employees
who primarily are driven by rewards or a fear of penalties. The factor that is the most appar-
ent among the interviewees can be illustrated from the following quotation:
For me the thought of a reward sounds ridiculous. It is not about competing. If you get an idea,
it is not just about you, but everyone. [Spa therapist]
Several employees raised the same point: rewards are not necessary. The reward seemed to
lie primarily in being satis ﬁed, enjoying the job, and improving the service for themselves,
the workplace, and the customers. The following sample of quotations illustrates the FLEs ’
view.
I feel engrossed with my job. You want to do your best and to solve problems, to make sure that
the customer is satis ﬁed.…I enjoy working with people. [Receptionist 1]
I am satis ﬁed when the customer is satis ﬁed. [Receptionist 2]
I live for ﬁtness and training –I think that is my ‘calling ’in life. [Fitness instructor]
I take a huge interest in what I do at work. [Restaurant/bar]
In general, the employees seem to be driven by the job and the work practice. Moreover, the
ideas do not seem to be so much about individual gain, but about fellowship. As one spa
therapist stated, ‘when you have an idea it is not just about you, but everyone you work
with’. Being motivated is not a static state, independent of the social environment. At
the SPA-resort, we see that social interaction is not just about gaining knowledge, but italso seems essential for creating an environment conducive for the sharing of ideas:
You hear others having ideas, like one guy whom I am working with downstairs at the bar; he is
very innovative with different things. So he pushed me and then it just became like ‘yes, I just
got an idea’ and then I expressed the idea. [Restaurant/bar]
Working together inspired employees to come up with ideas. In general, they expressed a
preference for being creative and generating ideas in collaboration with others. The employ-
ees commented that a lack of having regular meetings within and across the units was a dis-
advantage, both in general and for generating ideas speci ﬁcally.
The importance of support from co-workers is also emphasized in the interviews.
Receiving feedback seems to strengthen con ﬁdence, which again stimulates new ideas. It
triggers the employees into a positive cycle, which one respondent stated when explaining
the reasons for why the ideas kept coming up:
I think it is like this, that I have received a response and have been shown trust by my managers
and my colleagues. You get feedback, like ‘yes, this works well ’, and that makes you dare to
take the next step. [Fitness instructor]
This quotation illustrates an important point. Merely having the ability to generate ideas
does not imply that people do; there is also the ingredient of feeling con ﬁdent that your
attempts to innovate will be well received. Equally important as having supportive co-
workers is receiving support from the management. It is noteworthy that the employeesexpressed an understanding that their ideas might not be prioritized and not implemented,
but they believed it was important to learn why their ideas were not applied. In short, feed-
back is essential. Re ﬂecting upon what hampers idea creation, one employee stated:
That no one listens. I understand that they cannot take in everything and go through with every-
thing. But just to say, ‘yes, we have listened, it is a good idea or we will try to do something314 M. Engen and P. Magnusson
about it. Do you have any ideas on how to get there? ’But it does not get there. They just ‘yes,
yes’. And then there is nothing more and you hear no more of it. [Fitness instructor]
Other respondents expressed similar thoughts. It seemed essential in many ways that the
unit manager listened and gave feedback. These practices appeared to spark the process
of creating ideas while also providing a mutual understanding of the acceptance or rejectionof the ideas. Without managerial feedback, employees might easily get caught up in a nega-
tive circle, as is illustrated by the following quotation:
It is dif ﬁcult, I think; it is very dif ﬁcult to in ﬂuence. You may tell your ideas and point of view
and nothing happens, so ﬁnally you become silent, unable or unwilling to do that anymore.
[Housekeeping]
There also seems to be a mutual agreement among the employees that communication
should follow the formal lines within the organization. Consequently, ideas are passed
on to the unit manager and their leadership style will to a great degree inﬂ uence the
work environment and the employees ’motivation, which will be discussed in the next
section.
Idea management
The next phase depicts the further processing of the ideas, which is basically a management-
controlled activity. As seen in Figure 2 , some ideas were never dispatched to the unit
manager but were instead informally implemented directly by the FLEs. Other ideas
could, however, not be implemented directly because the FLEs did not have the resources
or the authority to do so. The FLEs instead presented the ideas to their unit managers, who
became the ‘owner ’for their further processing. The manager could either immediately
reject the idea or decide to proceed with further development and implementation. If the
idea did not affect any other unit the managers pursued the idea on their own; otherwise
they had to present it to the CEO (or the top managerial group). The unit managers werethus gatekeepers with a great impact on the creative process and the outcome. They were
found not only to select ideas, but, as the previous section showed, also to inﬂ uence
the FLEs ’motivation a great deal and thereby the generation of ideas.
The role of gatekeeper took different shapes depending on the three unit managers’
diverse attitudes of valuing employees ’ideas and contribution. The spa/ﬁ tness unit had
the most structured and methodical manner with respect to idea creation and innovation,
and the spa manager was also convinced that the FLEs had the best ideas. The following
quotation illustrates the developmental process and the manager’ s attitude:
…I started up developmental groups at the unit to come up with ideas within different areas of
expertise such as skin therapy, massage, spa therapy, and training. [ …] The best ideas come
from the personnel, guaranteed. They interact with the customers and that is where from you
learn. [Spa manager]
The spa unit ’s employees could devote some hours per month to take part in innovative
activities, such as tossing ideas around and discussing development. Two issues seemed
most important for the manager during the evaluation of the ideas. First, there was the ques-
tion of whether the idea resonated with the newly decided strategic brand image of the spahotel as a sport and wellness resort. This quotation demonstrates this point:
…now it is much easier to say “no”to ideas that doesn ’tﬁt our concept sport & wellness.
The other issue was pro ﬁtability, including both estimated cost and revenue. The manager
had the competence to make these evaluations and decisions, but wanted the employees toThe Service Industries Journal 315
learn to think in terms of pro ﬁtability. After the manager had selected the most promising
ideas, it was actually the employees who ﬁrst evaluated them. They were asked to investi-
gate if the idea would be feasible and potentially pro ﬁtable.
It is very easy to say to me: “Boss we should do this and that ”. But instead of me looking into
and assessing if it is good I threw the ball back to them …
They get it [the idea] back to investigate …would it be feasible, pro ﬁtable, what would we
gain, what would the objectives be, etc.? …They work in teams with the issue and I support
them if needed. …in this processes about 50 per cent of the ideas are discarded by the
group. …Interestingly I have noticed that they tend to think more and more cost-effectively
as time goes by. [Spa manager]
The spa manager had thus created an environment where the employees gradually learned
more about issues of cost and feasibility and gained a better understanding of what makes
ideas suitable for further development. According to the spa manager, the number of ideas
had decreased over time but the quality had improved. The manager thought that thereduction in ideas was due to the employees ’not putting forward ideas that they had
learned were not suitable.
A striking contrast to the spa unit was the hotel/reception, which had virtually no
speciﬁcally structured activities for generating ideas and developing new services. The
whole unit had a strict focus on reducing costs. Even when it came to introducing newservices, the hotel manager expressed concerns. The development was instead reactive;therefore, problems that occurred in the course of daily operations were dealt with hapha-
zardly, as expressed by the following:
It is easy to come up with new ideas, but we often forget to look into the costs side. [ …] I think
we have a rather broad offer already. [Hotel manager]
No proactive activities for coming up with new ideas could be discerned at the hotel/recep-
tion unit. Innovation was a term not spoken of, but there were activities in sharing problems
and issues that had arisen during the daily operations.
If there is a problem at any of the departments it is brought forward at the unit ’s regular meet-
ings. We discuss what can be done about it. This is not really development …the trigger is nor-
mally an incident in the daily operation that needs to be corrected. [Hotel manager]
The manager expressed an attitude that the hotel and reception had very little opportunity to
be innovative and to come up with creative ideas. The main indicator of performance was
the ef ﬁciency of the employees.
To me the most important performance indicator is ef ﬁciency of the employees. …We are a
large-scale production …. we must try to do this in a standardized way; it is not just possible
to customize this. [Hotel manager]
The food and beverage manager ’s attitude lay in between the other two units. The manager
was also engaged in stimulating the employees ’creativity, but not as systematically as the
spa/ﬁtness unit. In this regard, listening and giving feedback were essential issues, which
are illustrated by the following quotations:
I think the most important condition for my employees to come up with new ideas is that their
boss listens to them and that it makes a difference. …if you decide to reject an idea you need to
take time to explain why, otherwise you will kill their willingness to come up with new ideas.
[Food and beverage manager]
The manager also put a lot of trust into the employees’ ability actually to be creative and
saw his/her own role more as being responsible for the pro ﬁtability, as indicated by this
quotation regarding how new menus were created:316 M. Engen and P. Magnusson
There is a team in the kitchen, approximately half of the staff, who suggests the menus [ …];
they brainstorm and then present their menu suggestions to me. We then make a cost-estimate
of the suggestion and make a go/no-go decision. [Food and beverage manager]
Theﬁnal decision was thus based upon an economical calculus, but the employees were
allowed to be creative and come up with new concepts. The process was, however, less for-
malized and structured than was the case with the spa unit.
Emerging from the data were thus three different approaches to managing and stimulat-
ing idea creation and innovation that emerged, spanning from focal, proactive activities toproblem- ﬁxing tactics. It seemed that the CEO was aware of this imbalance between the
units, stating that:
…I think it ’s the spa [unit] that is in the forefront of innovation here. They do have a small
board for dealing with innovation and developmental issues, especially regarding therapy.
Many ideas come from there. [CEO]
At the same time, the CEO was aware that not all of the units could have the same con-
ditions for enabling innovative work. The CEO himself is by the other managers considered
as being a real innovator in respect of coming up with new ideas. As one of the managers
stated: ‘Our CEO is a visionary and has fantastic ideas; he ’s a starter ’. But at the SPA-resort,
the CEO is dependent on the unit managers for the reception of ideas from the front line.
Consequently, ideas pass through the formal channels of communication, and this structure
affects the ideas that are eventually implemented.
Implementation
Figure 2 illustrates two diverse paths for implementing the FLEs ’ideas, namely formal and
informal implementations. The difference between the two is primarily based on who con-
trols the resources needed for implementation. As Figure 2 shows, the path for informal
implantation is ideas that are neither presented to nor evaluated by management. Theseideas do not need to go through management because the employees themselves controlthe resources needed to implement them. The formal path to implementation indicates
the opposite. Here the employees need approval or resources, or both, in order to
develop and implement the idea. We can better understand the differences between thetwo paths by examining the type of ideas created by the employees.
Though the ideas that are informally implemented vary, they share some common
characteristics. The ideas can to a large extent be considered as incremental, as smallimprovements. The ideas often arise from employees doing their job and are considered
to be small adjustments in the service or the service delivery. They may be planned or
emerge as a solution to a problem in the job ’s practices. As an example, a FLE working
at the restaurant reported the following innovation:
They are kind of small solutions; we try out new ways –things that might make things easier –
or when new things arise like this weekend: we had 120 guests dining downstairs, and there
were not enough tables and the place was packed. Because the cash register is not designed
to handle so many guests, we had to come up with a new solution based on using guests ’
room numbers in order to serve and register them. And it worked out very well, much better
than if we had done it the ordinary way. [Restaurant/bar]
The quotation above illustrates in many ways a typical idea described by the respondents.
An idea was created to solve an unforeseen problem that arose in the service delivery
process. The employees used the resources at hand to change the regular routine, and
thus these were instances of informal innovation processes as previously discussed. Wecan classify these actions as instances of bricolage innovation. The mentioning of theseThe Service Industries Journal 317
informal processes appeared quite regularly in the interviews, and they seemed to be a way
for employees to adjust the service delivery continuously and in some ways ensured the
ﬂexibility of the process and the customization of the service delivered.
Thus, it could be said that the ideas in some way altered the employees ’practices. The
ideas were set in the workplace and when they were implemented, the practice waschanged, not radically but by small adjustments to the service process or to the serviceconcept. As one employee expressed it;
‘It is about our way of doing our job. That is also what I get ideas about. ’[Receptionist]
The formal path to innovation is, as mentioned, based on ideas that require resources that
the employees do not fully control in order to be implemented. These types of ideas need a
more advanced developmental process. An example from SPA-resort was the spa therapist
who suggested a ‘coffee corner shop with ﬁtness-related products ’as a new service concept,
or the ﬁtness instructor who suggested a new type of ﬁtness session .The idea for a coffee
shop illustrates a developmental process that goes beyond the resources in control of theFLEs. The process of implementing this idea would require both ﬁnancial and human
resources, as well as the involvement of different units within the organization. The
ﬁtness instructor ’s idea of adding a new session is similar in the sense that the further inno-
vation process also requires additional resources. Thus, these examples depict a formal path
to innovation since the development and the implementation of these ideas would necessi-
tate the initiation of an organizational innovation process.
Discussion and conclusion
There has been a call for studies that can give greater depth to the understanding of the
service innovation process (Crevani et al., 2011 ; Zhou & Shalley, 2003 ); this study has
responded to this call by investigating on a micro-level the seminal creative phase of
FLEs ’generation of ideas and their further development into potential implementation in
the organization. Studying the innovation process from a bottom-up perspective allows
us to understand how FLEs act as innovators more fully.
The study primarily makes two contributions regarding FLEs and service innovation.
(1) The ﬁrst relates to the in ﬂuence of knowledge for making FLEs apt as innovators. In
this study, we have drawn upon previous works from creativity research (Amabile,
1988 ) and have added a deeper understanding to the concept of domain-relevant knowl-
edge, with regard to both the type of knowledge and the mechanisms that build this knowl-
edge. (2) The second contribution comprises both our distinguishing between multiple
service innovations processes within the organization that involve FLEs and our identifying
of the crucial role of the middle manager for managing the service innovation processes,conceptualized as ‘weaving ’. The implications of these results are of both a theoretical
and a practical nature and we address them next.
Front-line employees as an idea creator
The study suggests that FLEs possess a considerable innovative capacity, that is, the poten-
tial to innovate. This capacity can be understood within the same framework as individualcreativity in general, which is based on the factors of creative skills, domain knowledge,
and motivation. This ﬁnding supports previous research on employee creativity (see e.g.
Zhou & Shalley, 2003 ). However, this study also elaborates on what makes FLEs
unique, namely, their boundary-spanning role in the interface between company and318 M. Engen and P. Magnusson
customer. The empirical data illustrate how this position enables them to absorb both use
knowledge and technology knowledge, both considered necessary for one to become inno-
vative (von Hippel, 1994 ). Customers are considered as having more use knowledge and
providers more technology knowledge. Our study identi ﬁes how FLEs through their
work practice actually gain sufﬁ cient use knowledge that can be combined with their tech-
nology knowledge in order to propose new ideas for services. Although previous researchhas emphasized the importance of involving FLEs in innovation processes (de Brentani,
2001 ; Ordanini & Parasuraman, 2011 ), this study contributes with a more thorough under-
standing of what contributions FLEs can make with regard to service innovation. Their
knowledge of both the demand and the supply side is to a great extent limited to the
context of their work practice, and the ideas are primarily related to the development of
existing practices and resources.
The results indicate that the knowledge held by the FLEs is to a great extent unknown to
the middle and top management, and this enables the organization to obtain a new perspec-tive. However, this assumes that FLEs ’ideas are validated and implemented. As shown in
this study, there are multiple paths for implementation, informal or ad hoc, where empow-
ered employees can solve problems that arise by using resources under their control (e.g.
bricolage innovation). Yet there is also a more formal process that relies on dispatchingthe idea to the manager because it requires a managerial decision for it to be implemented.
This dual aspect re ﬂects the nature of service innovation being partly intertwined with
the organizational structures and processes in the company, con ﬁrming previous studies
(Fuglsang & Sørensen, 2011 ; Sundbo, 2008 ; Toivonen & Tuominen, 2009 ). A service inno-
vation always requires some new or modiﬁ ed resource or practice, or both, to be adopted by
theﬁrm. The FLEs have the knowledge and the ideas, but the middle manager holds the key
to whether the ideas will be further developed into innovations.
Innovation management by ‘weaving ’
In the locus of the service innovation processes stands the middle (unit) manager with a key
role. Their role for supporting organizational creativity and innovation is in general known
in the literature (Amabile et al., 2004 ; de Jong & Vermeulen, 2003 ; Shalley & Gilson, 2004 ;
Sundbo, 2008 ). In the study by Fuglsang and Sørensen (2011 ), the role of middle managers
is evident as the link between top-management-initiated innovation and employee-initiatedinnovation (de ﬁned as bricolage). In the SPA-resort, we observe how diverse ideas have
different paths to implementation, thus con ﬁrming Fuglsang and Sørensen ’s(2011 )
notion of multiple innovation processes. Our study goes deeper into the middle manager ’s
role on a micro-level and unveils the complexity of their innovation-related task due tohaving to balance between multiple, sometimes con ﬂicting, roles. The study thus provides
a deeper understanding of how the processes identi ﬁed in recent research can be managed in
order to foster innovation in the organization, from informal and formal paths to theimplementation of ideas.
The middle-management roles can be identi ﬁed as facilitators of the FLEs ’efforts to
innovate: ‘I have started up development groups in my department ’, [Spa manager]; as
gatekeepers ;‘It is important to take the time to explain why we cannot develop the idea
further ’,
[Food and beverage manager]; and ﬁnally as translators to FLEs of the top man-
agement ’s strategic intentions:
I do experience that when we in the management group have decided on something, I automati-
cally assume that the information is being communicated to and within the different units.The Service Industries Journal 319
Then, when things are not followed up, I discover that the information never came through.
[CEO]
The same type of functions can be found in the literature, for instance Amabile et al. (2004 ),
on leadership support. Nonaka (1994 ) identi ﬁes the middle managers as the link for com-
municating ‘middle-up-down ’and Zhou and Woodman ( 2003 ) conceptualize the impor-
tance of managers ’recognition of the employees ’ideas. However, our study strongly
suggests that the key lies in being able to handle them simultaneously. The middle
manager needs to ﬁnd a balance between these roles –facilitator, gatekeeper, and translator
–in order to support the necessary implementation of small ideas that the FLEs can manage
on their own and to encourage the employees to bring their ideas forward so that they canundergo a process of further development. At the same time, they have to make sure that the
practice and the organization are on the same path, in both the long and short runs.
A way of understanding how the middle (unit) managers deal with these challenges is
by introducing the metaphor of ‘weaving ’. A service operation can be seen as a number of
concurrent processes or practices that deliver services in interaction with the customers.
Each process or practice can be thought of as a thread. Together, the threads form aweaving, representing the organization ’s service system. In different ways –for example,
interacting and observing –the FLEs discover de ﬁciencies or new possibilities in the
service weaving on a micro-level. New threads need to be added or existing ones needto be changed. Some of these changes can be managed by the FLEs themselves, a practice
known as bricolage innovation. However, some new threads cannot be woven without the
support from the middle manager, because the FLEs do not have access and control of theresources needed to make the changes. The unit manager holds the key for letting those
threads become a part of the existing pattern in the weaving. An important point is that
though the threads are woven from the bottom-up by the FLEs, the main pattern in theweaving (strategic course) is primarily decided by the management. The strategic course
deﬁnes which threads are suitable, and it also the top management ’s decisions that
decides the design for future weavings. Our study identi ﬁed one such design pattern or
model as the new ‘sport and wellness ’concept for the resort. The pattern design can be
a help for the middle managers in their decision to select appropriate ideas by re ﬂecting
over whether they are apt, as expressed by the spa manager concerning the assessment
of strategic ﬁt of FLEs ’ideas.
Metaphorically, the employees bring in their ideas, their threads, which must be com-
patible with the existing threads in the work practice and the overall pattern for the organ-ization de ﬁned by the top management. The middle managers must be able to facilitate the
creative process, and at the same time they must discard some ideas in their role as gate-keepers. Furthermore, the middle manager must tend to the development of the practicewhile also making sure that the daily service processes are running smoothly. Thus, as
stated earlier, middle management is not just about one role, but multiple roles that may
conﬂict. But as we see at the SPA-resort, there is a thin line between creating a positive
cycle that fosters an environment that motivates employees to create and bring ideas
forward versus a negative one that leads to the opposite. The latter, where a manager is
not able to take on the roles, can thus leave the organization with loose threads and apoorer pattern.
Practical implications
For practitioners, this study provides relevant insights regarding the role of FLEs as inno-
vators. From this study, it should be understood that FLEs have the potential for being320 M. Engen and P. Magnusson
innovators of new services owing to their possessing a unique combination of use and
technology knowledge. This knowledge is primarily based on the FLEs ’work practice,
and when it is transformed into ideas it represents a new perspective to the organization.
In order to transform the FLEs ’innovative potential into service innovations, the organ-
ization needs to be actively engaged in innovation activities that include employees at alllevels of the organization. Although FLEs are not employed to be innovators, their workand knowledge give them a role in the organization ’s innovation arena. The study has
shown that minor innovations can be accomplished if FLEs have the authority toimplement ideas as opportunities arise (i.e. informal implementation). However, goingbeyond, for example, bricolage innovations, the ideas need further processing, and
here FLEs have a more limited opportunity to realize their ideas. There is thus a
need to establish some kind of formalized structure and process for managing upcomingideas from FLEs. Although this study identi ﬁes middle managers as having a key role in
the transformation of ideas into practicable service innovations, the organization ’s top
management needs to establish the emphasis on acknowledging the FLEs ’ideas.
These processes will require resources and it is also vital for middle managers to
have organizational support and established follow-up routines in order to accomplish
the implementation of ideas.
Furthermore, middle managers need to be aware of their active role in nurturing inno-
vation; in fact we identi ﬁed three different roles: facilitator ,gatekeeper , and translator.
FLEs need facilitation in order to be motivated and to be creative. This can be accomplishedby creating arenas for innovative work, such as in the spa unit of this study. In these arenas,
employees can meet, discuss, and learn, not just within the unit but also across the organ-
ization. This is important for triggering more and better ideas, consequently making thegatekeeper role easier to manage. Furthermore, creating work and development groups
across the units can be one step to establishing shared ownership of ideas and the innovation
process. Finally, the middle manager ’s role as translator of the strategic issues is central for
creating a mutual direction for the different innovation processes that continuously take
place in a service organization. It is neither possible nor desirable for the managers to
control all the processes (e.g. bricolage innovations), but by ensuring that also FLEs areaware of (relevant) strategic choices, the middle manager creates a guide for FLEs ’
ideas. It is thus essential for middle managers to understand that they must undertakenew activities in order to nurture innovation; FLEs ’knowledge and ideas need to be recog-
nized and the processes of further development must become a part of the managers’
agenda.
Future research
The study is based on empirical data from one organization, comparing three different
departments. The choice of an in-depth study of an explorative nature is, however, done
at the expense of the generalizability of the study ’sﬁndings. There is therefore a need
for further studies in order to establish to what extent this study ’s results apply to other
similar settings. Furthermore, studies should be conducted on different kinds of businessesin order to gain more knowledge on the role of FLEs in creativity and innovation. From our
study, it is quite clear that the middle managers play a decisive role in service innovationand represent the link between FLEs ’ideas and the implantation. There is much to be
learned about middle managers ’practices in organizations that successfully incorporate
FLEs ’ideas, when it comes to their role in creating a nurturing and supporting environment
and their role as gatekeeper.The Service Industries Journal 321
As many FLEs ’innovations are ad hoc solutions to an unexpected problem, researchers
should try to learn more about the practices that enable the quick ﬁx to be transformed into
an institutionalized service innovation to be used in the daily practices. Through more
research, we might ﬁnd a balance that allows ﬁrms to capture the implementation of inno-
vations that occur beneath the radar (or control) of management so that organizations do notmiss out on ideas that should be managed as part of the organizational innovation process.
Funding
This work was supported by Vinnova [2009-01732].
Disclosure statement
No potential con ﬂict of interest was reported by the authors.
References
van der Aa, W., & Elfring, T. (2002). Realizing innovation in services. Scandinavian Journal of
Management, 18(2), 155 –171. doi:10.1016/S0956-5221(00)00040-3 .
Amabile, T. M. (1988). A model of creativity and innovation in organizations. In M. B. Staw & L. L.
Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior (Vol. 10, pp. 123 –167). Greenwich,
CN: JAI Press.
Amabile, T. M., Conti, R., Coon, H., Lazenby, J., & Herron, M. (1996). Assessing the work environ-
ment for creativity. Academy of Management Journal ,39(5), 1154 –1184. doi:10.2307/256995 .
Amabile, T. M., Schatzel, E. A., Moneta, G. B., & Kramer, S. J. (2004). Leader behaviors and the
work environment for creativity: Perceived leader support. Leadership Quarterly ,15(1), 5 –
32.doi:10.1016/j.leaqua.2003.12.003 .
Axtell, C. M., Holman, D. J., Unsworth, K. L., Wall, T. D., & Waterson, P. E. (2000). Shopﬂ oor inno-
vation: Facilitating the suggestion and implementation of ideas. Journal of Occupational &
Organizational Psychology ,73(3), 265 –385. doi:10.1348/096317900167029 .
Boswijk, A., Thijssen, T., & Peelen, E. (2007). The experience economy: A new perspective .
Amsterdam: Pearson Education.
Boyatzis, R. E. (1998). Transforming qualitative information: Thematic analysis and code develop-
ment. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in
Psychology ,3(2), 77 –101. doi:10.1191/1478088706qp063oa .
de Brentani, U. (2001). Innovative versus incremental new business services: Different keys for
achieving success. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 18, 169 –187. doi:10.1111/
1540-5885.1830169 .
Cadwallader, S., Jarvis, C., Bitner, M., & Ostrom, A. (2010). Frontline employee motivation to par-
ticipate in service innovation implementation. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science ,
38(2), 219 –239. doi:10.1007/s11747-009-0151-3 .
Carayannis, G. E., & Gonzalez, E. (2003). Creativity and innovation –Competitiveness? When, how,
and why? In V. L. Shavinina (Ed.), The international handbook on innovation (pp. 587 –606).
Oxford: Elsevier.
Coelho, F., Augusto, M., & Lages, L. F. (2011). Contextual factors and the creativity of frontline
employees: The mediating effects of role stress and intrinsic motivation. Journal of
Retailing ,87(1), 31–45.doi:10.1016/j.jretai.2010.11.004 .
Crevani, L., Palm, K., & Schilling, A. (2011). Innovation management in service ﬁrms: A research
agenda. Service Business ,5(2), 177 –193. doi:10.1007/s11628-011-0109-7
Eisenberger, R., & Shanock, L. (2003). Rewards, intrinsic motivation, and creativity: A case study of
conceptual and methodological Isolation. Creativity Research Journal ,15(2), 121 –130. doi:10.
1207/S15326934CRJ152&3_02 .
Ettlie, J. E., & Rosenthal, S. R. (2011). Service versus manufacturing innovation. Journal of Product
Innovation Management, 28(2), 285 –299. doi:10.1111/j.1540-5885.2011.00797.x .322 M. Engen and P. Magnusson
Fuglsang, L., & Sørensen, F. (2011). The balance between bricolage and innovation: Management
dilemmas in sustainable public innovation. Service Industries Journal ,31(4), 581 –595.
doi:10.1080/02642069.2010.504302 .
Gallouj, F. (2002). Innovation in the service economy: The new wealth of nations . Cheltenham:
Edward Elgar.
Gallouj, F., & Weinstein, O. (1997). Innovation in services. Research Policy ,26, 537 –556. doi:10.
1016/S0048-7333(97)00030-9 .
Gwinner, K. P., Bitner, M. J., Brown, S. W., & Kumar, A. (2005). Service customization through
employee adaptiveness. Journal of Service Research, 8(2), 131 –148. doi:10.1177/
1094670505279699 .
Hennessey, B. A. (2000). Rewards and creativity. In C. Sansone & J. M. Harackiewicz (Eds.),
Intrinsic and extrinsic motivation: The search for optimal motivation and performance
(pp. 55 –78). San Diego, CA: San Diego Academic Press.
von Hippel, E. (1994). “Sticky Information ”and the locus of problem solving: Implications for inno-
vation. Management Science ,40(4), 429 –439. doi:10.1287/mnsc.40.4.429 .
de Jong, J. P. J., & Vermeulen, P. A. M. (2003). Organizing successful new service development: A
literature review. Management Decision ,41(9), 844 –858. doi:10.1108/00251740310491706.
Kanter, M. R. (1988). When a thousand ﬂowers bloom: Structural, collective, and social conditions
for innovation in organization. In M. B. Staw & L. L. Cummings (Eds.), Research in organ-
izational behavior (Vol. 10, pp. 169 –211). Greenwich, CN: JAI Press.
Lüthje, C. (2004). Characteristics of innovating users in a consumer goods ﬁeld: An empirical study of
sport-related product consumers. Technovation ,24(9), 683 –695. doi:10.1016/S0166-4972(02)
00150-5 .
Magnusson, P. R. (2009). Exploring the contributions of involving ordinary users in ideation of tech-
nology-based services. Journal of Product Innovation Management ,26(5), 578 –593. doi:10.
1111/j.1540-5885.2009.00684.x .
Marsh, R. L., Bink, M. L., & Hicks, J. L. (1999). Conceptual priming in a generative problem-solving
task. Memory and Cognition ,27(2), 355–363. doi:10.3758/BF03211419 .
Matthing, J., Sandén, B., & Edvardsson, B. (2004). New service development learning from and with
customers. International Journal of Service Industry Management ,15(5), 479 –498. doi:10.
1108/09564230410564948 .
Mumford, M. D. (2000). Managing creative people: Strategies and tactics for innovation. Human
Resource Management Review ,10(3), 313 –351. doi:10.1016/s1053-4822(99)00043-1 .
Mumford, M. D., & Gustafson, S. B. (1988). Creativity syndrome: Integration, application, and inno-
vation. Psychological Bulletin ,103(1), 27 –43.doi:10.1037/0033-2909.103.1.27 .
Nonaka, I. (1994). A dynamic theory of organizational knowledge creation. Organization Science ,
5(1), 14 –37.doi:10.1287/orsc.5.1.14 .
Oldham, G. R., & Cummings, A. (1996). Employee creativity: Personal and contextual factors at
work. Academy of Management Journal ,39(3), 607 –607. doi:10.2307/256657 .
Onsøyen, L. E., Mykletun, R. J., & Steiro, T. J. (2009). Silenced and invisible: The work-experience
of room-attendants in Norwegian Hotels. Scandinavian Journal of Hospitality and Tourism ,
9(1), 81 –102. doi:10.1080/15022250902761462 .
Ordanini, A., & Parasuraman, A. (2011). Service innovation viewed through a service-dominant logic
lens: A conceptual framework and empirical analysis. Journal of Service Research, 14(1),
3–23.doi:10.1177/1094670510385332 .
Ozer, M. (2009). The roles of product lead-users and product experts in new product evaluation.
Research Policy ,38(8), 1340 –1349. doi:10.1016/j.respol.2009.07.001 .
Shalley, C. E., & Gilson, L. L. (2004). What leaders need to know: A review of social and contextual
factors that can foster or hinder creativity. The Leadership Quarterly ,15(1), 33 –53.doi:10.
1016/j.leaqua.2003.12.004 .
Shalley, C. E., Zhou, J., & Oldham, G. R. (2004). The effects of personal and contextual character-
istics on creativity: Where should we go from here? Journal of Management, 30(6), 933–958.
doi:10.1016/j.jm.2004.06.007 .
Stake, R. E. (2003). Case studies. In N. K. Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.), Strategies of qualitative
inquiry (2nd. ed., pp. 134 –164). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Sundbo, J. (1997). Management of innovation in services. The Service Industry Journal ,17(3),
432–455. doi:10.1080/02642069700000028.The Service Industries Journal 323
Sundbo, J. (2008). Innovation and involvement in services. In L. Fuglsang (Ed.), Innovation and the
creative process. Towards innovation with care (pp. 87 –111). Cheltenham, MA: Edward
Elgar.
Sundbo, J., & Gallouj, F. (2000). Innovation as a loosely coupled system in services. International
Journal of Services Technology and Management, 1(1), 15 –36.
Tether, B. S. (2005). Do services innovate (Differently)? Insights from the European Innobarometer
survey. Industry & Innovation ,12, 153 –184. doi:10.1080/13662710500087891.
Toivonen, M. (2010). Different types of innovation processes in services and their organisational
implications. In F. Gallouj & F. Djellal (Eds.), The handbook of innovation and services:
A multi-disciplinary perspective (pp. 221 –249). Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Toivonen, M., & Tuominen, T. (2009). Emergence of innovations in services. The Service Industries
Journal ,29(7), 887 –902. doi:10.1080/02642060902749492 .
Veldhuizen, E., Hultink, E. J., & Grif ﬁn, A. (2006). Modeling market information processing in new
product development: An empirical analysis. Journal of Engineering and Technology
Management, 23(4), 353 –373. doi:10.1016/j.jengtecman.2006.08.005 .
Wong, S. C.-k., & Ladkin, A. (2008). Exploring the relationship between employee creativity and job-
related motivators in the Hong Kong hotel industry. International Journal of Hospitality
Management, 27(3), 426 –437. doi:10.1016/j.ijhm.2008.01.001 .
Woodman, R. W., Sawyer, J. E., & Grif ﬁn, R. W. (1993). Toward a theory of organizational creativ-
ity.Academy of Management Review ,18(2), 293 –321. doi:10.2307/258761 .
Yin, R. K. (2009). Case study research: Design and methods (4th ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Zhou, J., & George, J. M. (2001). When job dissatisfaction leads to creativity: Encouraging the
expression of voice. The Academy of Management Journal ,44(4), 682 –696. doi:10.2307/
3069410 .
Zhou, J., & Shalley, C. E. (2003). Research on employee creativity: A critical review and directions
for future research. Research in Personnel and Human Resources Management, 22, 165 –217.
doi:10.1016/S0742-7301(03)22004-1 .
Zh
ou, J., & Woodman, R. W. (2003). Managers ’recognition of employees ’creative ideas: A social-cog-
nitive model. In V. L. Shavinina (Ed.), The international handbook on innovation (pp. 631 –640).
Oxford: Elsevier.324 M. Engen and P. Magnusson