ORIGINAL PAPER
The Contextual Impact of Nonproﬁt Board
Composition and Structure on Organizational
Performance: Agency and Resource Dependence
Perspectives
Jeffrey L.
 Callen • April Klein • Daniel Tinkelman
Published online: 10 November 2009
 International Society for Third-Sector Research and The John’s Hopkins University 2009
Abstract
We study the relation between stability of the nonproﬁt organization’s
environment and its board structure and the impact of this relation on organizational
performance from the perspectives of both Agency Theory and Resource Depen-
dence (Boundary Spanning) Theory.
 Speciﬁcally, we predict and show for a sample
of U.
 nonproﬁts that board mechanisms related to monitoring are more likely to be
effective for stable organizations, whereas board mechanisms related to boundary
spanning are more effective for less stable organizations.

Resumen
Estudiamos la relacio´n entre la estabilidad del entorno de las orga-
nizaciones sin a´nimo de lucro y la estructura de sus juntas, ası´ como el impacto de
esta relacio´n sobre el rendimiento organizativo desde la perspectiva de dos teorı´as:
la de agencias y la de dependencia de recursos (expansio´n de fronteras).
 El impacto
de las caracterı´sticas de las juntas sobre el rendimiento organizativo es contextual.

En concreto: predecimos y demostramos con una muestra de ONG estadounidenses
que los mecanismos de juntas relacionados con la supervisio´n tienen ma´s posi-
bilidad de ser eﬁcaces para organizaciones estables, mientras que los mecanismos
de juntas relacionados con la expansio´n de fronteras son ma´s eﬁcaces para las
organizaciones
menos
estables.

Keywords
Nonproﬁt boards  Agency theory  Resource dependency theory
Introduction
The United States is home to a large and varied group of nonproﬁt organizations.
5 million
organizations registered in 2006 with the Internal Revenue Service.
 Of these, about
347,000 are ‘‘operating public charities,’’ registered under IRS Code Section 501 (c)
(3), organized for religious, charitable, scientiﬁc, educational, or certain other
purposes.
 A key characteristic of these organizations is that they do not operate for
the beneﬁt of private owners, but are responsible to various stakeholders.
1 Therefore, proﬁt
maximization is not the sole measure of performance.

This study employs a sample of operating public charities to test hypotheses
suggested by both Agency Theory and Resource Dependence Theory regarding the
relation between board characteristics and two different measures of organizational
performance.
 We add to the relatively limited empirical literature on nonproﬁt
boards by considering board characteristics related to both theories and by relating
the effectiveness of board characteristics to the stability of the organization’s
funding environment.
 Also, the following types of nonproﬁt organizations have their own
categories, and are not 501 (c) (3) organizations: cooperatives; civic leagues; business leagues and
chambers of commerce; labor and agricultural organizations; social and recreational clubs; and war
veterans’ organizations (National Center for Charitable Statistics 2007).

Voluntas (2010) 21:101–125
103
123
One important aspect of nonproﬁt ‘‘performance’’ is management’s responsible
stewardship of organizational funds.
 It
emphasizes the responsibility of the board in hiring and monitoring senior
management so that management interests do not conﬂict with those of the
organization.

A second important aspect of performance is securing the necessary resources to
perform the organization’s mission.
 Resource dependence theory, which emphasizes
that the acquisition and maintenance of human, ﬁnancial, and other resources is
essential for organizational survival, is relevant to this aspect of performance.
 The
primary functions of the board, according to this theory, are to facilitate exchanges
that reduce organizational resource dependencies, to increase the ﬂow of a variety of
kinds of resources through personal and professional contacts, and to represent the
organization to external constituencies.
 Agency theory focuses primarily on containing
management costs, and on preventing the misallocation or diversion of resources
away from satisfying the goals of the organization toward the pockets of
management.

Broadly construed, we test empirically the hypothesis that nonproﬁt board
characteristics interact with the operating characteristics and environment of the
organization in driving nonproﬁt performance as reﬂected in revenue growth and
in controlling the level of administrative expenses.
 The sections that follow describe the data, our empirical
ﬁndings, our conclusions and the limitations of this study.
 Stone
and Ostrower (2007) note ‘‘Very few studies, however, have asked whether and how
board composition affects measures of organizational performance…’’ and they go
on to state ‘‘We cannot at this point, therefore, speak with any certainty on the
question of whether or how the composition of boards makes a difference to
nonproﬁts or the broader communities they serve.
’’
Performance, or organizational effectiveness, has been a difﬁcult concept to
deﬁne and study, in part because it can be deﬁned in various ways.
 These include the organization’s
success in obtaining resources, its efﬁciency in using these inputs, and the degree to
which it attains its service provision goals.
 (2001) discuss
three models for viewing effectiveness: a ‘‘natural systems model’’, which deals
with the organization’s ability to obtain the resources it needs to survive and grow; a
‘‘decision process model,’’ which looks at the board’s use of high-quality processes
as an end in itself; and a ‘‘goals model,’’ which looks at the attainment of particular
output goals.

Not surprisingly, prior empirical research has used a variety of proxies and
techniques to measure organizational performance.
 (1992) studied
417 Canadian nonproﬁt organizations.
 They employed four proxies for organiza-
tional effectiveness, including: the growth in the budget; the size of any budget
deﬁcit; and two subjective measures of effectiveness based on respondents’
assessment of the organization’s performance with regard to a variety of functions.
 (1992) found that board size and composition had little power to
explain differences in organizational effectiveness.
 (1992) in using survey responses to construct subjective measures of
organizational or board effectiveness, but, unlike Bradshaw et al.
, did not use any
objective ﬁnancial measures of organizational effectiveness.
 Cornforth (2001) used
1999 data for over 700 organizations from a national survey in England and Wales
to relate board inputs, board structures and board processes to board effectiveness in
2 For an introduction to the for-proﬁt literature on the relation between board composition and structure
and organizational performance, see the meta-analyses by Dalton et al.
 Green and Griesinger (1996) related the
quality of certain board processes and organizational performance (measured using
survey responses) for 16 nonproﬁt organizations dealing with developmentally
disabled young adults.
 Their organizational performance criteria primarily focus on
achieving service goals, but also consider the organization’s ability to raise
resources.
 They found signiﬁcant relations between certain board processes and
organizational performance in, among other areas, ‘‘resources development’’ and
‘‘ﬁnancial planning.
’’ Their study was also not designed to test
associations between board composition and structure variables and organizational
performance.

The extant governance literature strongly suggests that the links between board
structure and composition and organizational performance are likely to be mediated
by a variety of factors (Cornforth and Edwards 1999).
 Stone and Ostrower
(2007) cite prior literature indicating that the power balance between boards and
CEO’s depends upon a variety of ‘‘individual, organizational, and environmental
factors,’’ such as ‘‘CEO seniority, organizational size, and external stability.
 Iecovich (2005) studied 161
nonproﬁt organizations in Israel, and found links between the organizations’ task
environment and features of board structure.
 To cite one example, she found a
signiﬁcant correlation between organizational deﬁcits and the amount of time the
board devoted to fundraising.

Our paper adds to this literature by relating objective ﬁnancial measures of
organizational performance to certain aspects of board structure and composition,
taking into consideration the important mediating effect of organizational revenue
stability.
 The use of objective ﬁnancial organizational measures of performance is
rare in the literature.
 Our
measures of ﬁnancial performance include one (growth in donations) related to the
‘‘natural systems’’ or to the ‘‘resource dependency literature’’, and one (the
administrative expense percentage) that relates to the efﬁciency of converting inputs
into outputs, and is directly related to the Agency perspective.
 Nonproﬁt organizations differ from for-proﬁt ﬁrms in that they have no
residual owners of the entity’s assets.
 However, as Fama and Jensen (1983a, b)
argue, for a nonproﬁt organization to survive and be successful, there must be
assurances that the donations received will be used effectively and not expropriated.
 Consistent with this argument, the board must provide
mechanisms that separate its monitoring function from management’s implemen-
tation of the organization’s goals.

The agency perspective suggests that board monitoring will have an impact
upon organizational costs.
 To mitigate the small denominator
problem, average administrative expenses for each ﬁrm is computed as total
administrative expenses over the sample period divided by total revenues over the
sample period (adjusted for missing data).