measurement, the 
measurement of ESP is still in the exploratory stage due to the 
small amount of empirical research literature on sustainable 
performance. Although this study draws on relevant literature, the 
questionnaire adopted in this study only considers the 
characteristics of manufacturing SMEs and the perceptions of 
sustainable performance by enterprise decision-makers. The 
questionnaire was also modified based on the opinions of experts 
and managers of manufacturing SMEs. Therefore, the questionnaire 
used in this paper is only suitable for manufacturing SMEs.
Secondly, in terms of data acquisition, we used a combination 
of interviews and questionnaires, and try to focus on the 
representativeness of the variables and indicators, as well as the 
representativeness of the sample. But questionnaires always have 
individual differences in perceptions. In the future, we  can 
further adopt data analysis across time stages, selecting corporate 
reported financial data, environmental information data, and 
data on social responsibility contributions to represent ESP.
Thirdly, in terms of the research model, this study explores the 
impact mechanism of GEO on ESP based on a micro-competency 
perspective. It mainly portrays the individual “work” experience 
of senior managers. In the future, we can draw on related research 
to further consider the impact of the behavioral characteristics of 
the top management team on ESP.
Data availability statement
The original contributions presented in the study are included 
in the article/Supplementary material, further inquiries can 
be directed to the corresponding author.
Author contributions
FY wrote the first draft of the paper and built the theoretical 
model. YY participated in the writing of the paper. YS and HX 
participated in surveys. XG organized surveys. JS suggested 
innovative revisions to the paper. All authors contributed to the 
article and approved the submitted version.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the 
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the 
authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated 
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the 
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or 
claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or 
endorsed by the publisher.
Supplementary material
The Supplementary material for this article can be found 
online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2022.
978274/full#supplementary-material
Ye et al.
10.3389/fpsyg.2022.978274
Frontiers in Psychology
16
frontiersin.org
References
Alwakid, W., Aparicio, S., and Urbano, D. (2021). The influence of green 
entrepreneurship on sustainable development in Saudi Arabia: the role of formal 
institutions. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public H