Method
Sample and data collection
We collected data from new product development 
(NPD) teams in 10 high-tech companies in Shaanxi 
and Henan provinces in China. The products developed 
by these NPD teams are hardware-related such as elec-
tronic sensor and semi-conductor chip. This survey 
lasted eight months, from October 2018 to July 2019. 
One of the authors introduced this survey to the top 
management of the companies, who along with the 
human resource management departments provided 
their help. We assured the respondents of the confiden -
tiality of the survey to increase the participation and 
response rate. To decrease the possibility of common 
method bias (Podsakoff, MacKenzie, Lee, & Podsakoff, 
2003 ), we collected data from multiple sources (i.e., team 
leaders and team members). Team leaders/supervisors 
evaluated their team’s level of creative idea generation, 
their own performance-prove goal orientation and com -
prehensive boundary-spanning behaviors, and provided 
basic data such as team size and team tenure, and their 
own demographics such as gender, age, and tenure. It 
should be noted that each team leader/supervisor in our 
study was only in charge of one NPD team. Team 
members evaluated their team’s level of idea implemen -
tation. At least three key informants from each team 
evaluated the level of idea implementation, which 
should be sufficient to provide accurate information on 
the team’s function and output (Bresman, 2010 ). We 
distributed questionnaires to 102 NPD team leaders 
and 389 team members. After deleting questionnaires 
that were incomplete or had obvious mistakes, we 
obtained a sample set consisting of 83 teams (team 
leaders) and 305 team members. The response rate is 
83% at the team level, and 78.4% at the individual level. 
We used a t-test to compare the demographics (such as 
tenure and age) between respondents and non- 
respondents and do not find any significant difference 
between these two groups (p > .1). Therefore, non- 
respondent bias is not an issue in our research.
Measurements
Idea generation
Rather than counting the number and frequency of 
creative ideas, we adopted a scale of team creativity to 
measure the degree to which teams generate novel and 
useful ideas (Baer, 2012 ). We adopted the four-item 
scale of team creativity developed by Shin and Zhou 
(2007 ). Sample items were “How well does your team 
produce new ideas?” and “How useful are those ideas?” 
We used a 7-point scale ranging from 1 (poorly) to 7 CREATIVITY RESEARCH JOURNAL
 415
(very much). Following the suggestion of Shin and Zhou 
(2007 ), team leaders were asked to rate the level of idea 
generation of their team. Cronbach α = 0.91.
Idea implementation
We used the scale developed by Baer (2012 ) to measure 
idea implementation at the team level with the referent- 
shift method, replacing “employee” with “your team.” At 
least three key informants in the teams who had a good 
understanding of the situation were asked to evaluate the 
level of team idea implementation. This scale had three 
items: “Please rate the frequency with which, in the past, 
your team’s creative ideas (1) have been approved for 
further development; (2) have been transformed into 
usable products; (3) have been successfully brought to 
market or successfully implemented at your organiza -
tion.” Team members were asked to indicate their level 
of agreement with five statements using a 7-point Likert- 
type scale (1 = never , 7 = always ). Three statistical indexes 
had to be calculated before the aggregation of individual- 
level data on idea implementation up to the team level: (1) 
The test of within-team inter-rater agreement rwg (James, 
Demaree, & Wolf, 1993 ) yielded a minimum value of 0.89 
for idea implementation. (2) ICC (1), which describes the 
extent to which individual-level variability on a given 
measure is explained by higher-level units (Bliese, 2000 ), 
was 0.25 for idea implementation. (3) ICC (2), which 
provides the estimate of the reliability of group means 
(Bliese, 2000 ), was 0.71 for idea implementation. These 
indices justified the aggregation of individual-level data to 
the team level (Bliese, 2000 ). Cronbach α = 0.88.
Leader performance-prove goal orientation
We adopted the scale developed by Vandewalle (1997 ) 
to assess team leaders’ performance-prove goal orienta -
tion, that is, to measure their desire to prove their 
competence and obtain favorable judgments about it. 
This four items were: “I am concerned with showing 
I can perform better than others,” “I try to figure out 
what it takes to prove my ability to others at work,” “I 
prefer to work on projects where I can prove my ability 
to others,” and “I enjoy it when others at work are aware 
of how well I am doing.” This scale has frequently been 
used in past research and validated in both Western and 
Eastern cultural contexts (Dragoni & Kuenzi, 2012 ; 
Gong et al., 2013 ). Leaders were asked to indicate their 
level of agreement with seven statements using a 7-point 
Likert-type scale (1 = strongly disagree , 7 = strongly 
agree ). Cronbach α = 0.90.
Leader comprehensive boundary-spanning strategy
Following Ancona and Caldwell (1992 ), we used the self- 
evaluation method to ask team leaders to evaluate their level of boundary-spanning behaviors. Typical items 
concerning ambassadorial activities were: “To what 
extent did you persuade outsiders to support team deci-
sions?” and “To what extent did you keep other groups 
in the company informed of your team’s activities?” 
Typical items concerning task coordination were: “To 
what extent did you coordinate activities with external 
groups?” and “To what extent did you resolve design 
problems with external groups?” Leaders were asked to 
indicate their level of agreement with seven statements 
using a 7-point Likert-type scale (1 = poorly , 7 = very 
much ). Cronbach α = 0.91 and 0.89 for ambassadorial 
and task coordination activities, respectively.
Control variables
To obtain the unique effect of leader performance-prove 
goal orientation and boundary-spanning behaviors, we 
controlled for leader sex, leader tenure, team tenure, and 
team size. Team size and tenure have been found to 
influence the level of idea generation/team creativity 
and team innovation (Gong et al., 2013 ; Vandewalle & 
Cummings, 1997 ). Furthermore, previous studies have 
shown that sex and tenure may have distinct effects on 
individual performance goal orientation (Button & 
Mathieu, 1996 ). Tenure is also related to the social net-
work of leaders, which may influence their boundary- 
spanning behaviors within organizations (Ancona & 
Caldwell, 1992 ). These control variables were obtained 
from the basic demographic data in the questionnaires.
Confirmatory factor analysis (CFA)
We conducted CFA to verify the convergent and diver -
gent validity of our constructs. Our research focused on 
the team level, and the critical variables in our theore -
tical model such as leader performance-prove goal 
orientation and ambassadorial and task coordination 
activities were evaluated by team leaders, and were 
thus inherently team-level constructs. Therefore, it was 
appropriate to use team-level CFA to test the fit between 
our theoretical model and the data (Chen, Mathieu, & 
Bliese, 2004 ). To increase the robustness of team-level 
CFA, we used the item parceling approach to create 
three parcels for each latent variable by averaging the 
aggregated items with the highest and lowest loadings 
(Landis, Beal, & Tesluk, 2000 ). The CFA 