Strategic Management Journal
Strat. Mgmt. J., 21: 217–237 (2000)
LEARNING AND PROTECTION OF PROPRIETARY
ASSETS IN STRATEGIC ALLIANCES: BUILDINGRELATIONAL CAPITAL
PRASHANT KALE1, HARBIR SINGH2* and HOWARD PERLMUTTER2
1University of Michigan Business School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, U.S.A.
2The Wharton School of Business, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, U.S.A.
One of the main reasons that ﬁrms participate in alliances is to learn know-how and capabilitiesfrom their alliance partners. At the same time ﬁrms want to protect themselves from theopportunistic behavior of their partner to retain their own core proprietary assets. Mostresearch has generally viewed the achievement of these objectives as mutually exclusive. Incontrast, we provide empirical evidence using large-sample survey data to show that whenﬁrms build relational capital in conjunction with an integrative approach to managing conﬂict,they are able to achieve both objectives simultaneously. Relational capital based on mutualtrust and interaction at the individual level between alliance partners creates a basis forlearning and know-how transfer across the exchange interface. At the same time, it curbsopportunistic behavior of alliance partners, thus preventing the leakage of critical know-howbetween them. Copyright Ó2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
INTRODUCTION
Studies on alliances conﬁrm a signiﬁcant increase
in their use as a strategic device (Hergert and
Morris, 1987; Anderson, 1990; Ahuja, 1996).
Firms use alliances for a variety of reasons: to
gain competitive advantage in the marketplace,
to access or internalize new technologies andknow-how beyond ﬁrm boundaries, to exploit
economies of scale and scope, or to share risk
or uncertainty with their partners, etc. (Powell,1987; Bleeke and Ernst, 1991). Learning
alliances, in which the partners strive to learn or
internalize critical information or capabilities fromeach other, constitute an important class of such
alliances (Prahalad and Hamel, 1990; Hamel,
1991; Khanna, Gulati, and Nohria, 1998). Yet,these alliances also raise an interesting dilemma,
Key words: strategic alliances; relational capital;
learning; proprietary assets
*Correspondence to: Professor H. Singh, Wharton School of
Business, University of Pennsylvania, Suite 2000, SteinbergHall–Dietrich Hall, Philadelphia, PA 19104, U.S.A.
CCC 0143–2095/2000/030217–21 $17.50
Copyright Ó2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.as a ﬁrm that uses them also risks losing its
own core proprietary capabilities to its partners,
especially when these partners behave opportu-nistically.
The transaction costs literature has emphasized
the relevance of partner opportunism in inter-
organizational relationships. Building upon it,
subsequent literature on learning alliances dubbedthem as a ‘learning race’ (Khanna et al., 1998)
in which partners often engaged in opportunistic
attempts to outlearn each other. This ‘race’ cre-ates a signiﬁcant tension for ﬁrms. On the one
hand, alliances may help a ﬁrm absorb or learn
some critical information or capability from itspartner. On the other, they also increase the
likelihood of unilaterally or disproportionately
losing one’s own core capability or skill to thepartner. Thus, ﬁrms are faced with the challenging
task of managing the balance between ‘trying to
learn and trying to protect.’ In contrast to thetransaction cost literature, recent alliance research
has highlighted the existence, and importance, of
inter-personal relationships and trust in allianceor exchange situations (Ring and Van de Ven,
218P. Kale, H. Singh and H. Perlmutter
1992; Gulati, 1995; Zaheer, McEvily, and Per-
rone, 1998). We use this work to develop thenotion of relational capital, which refers to the
level of mutual trust, respect, and friendship that
arises out of close interaction at the individuallevel between alliance partners. We suggest that
relational capital can help companies successfully
balance the acquisition of new capabilities withthe protection of existing proprietary assets in
alliance situations. On the one hand, relational
capital facilitates learning through close one-to-
one interaction between alliance partners. On the
other hand, it minimizes the likelihood that analliance partner will engage in opportunistic
behavior to unilaterally absorb or steal infor-
mation or know-how that is core or proprietaryto its partners.
Conﬂict is inherent in alliances because of
partner opportunism, goal divergence (Doz, 1996)and cross-cultural differences, and using explicit
mechanisms to manage conﬂict will help ﬁrms to
deal with these difﬁculties. There has been ageneral tendency in the alliance literature to link
formal governance mechanisms with the man-
agement of conﬂicts (Williamson, 1985). Butmore recently, there is recognition that a combi-
nation of contractual and organizational mecha-
nisms (formal and informal) is more effective inmanaging conﬂict (Doz, 1996; Dyer and Singh,
1998). In the context of alliances—areas rife with
potential opportunism—organizational mecha-
nisms to manage conﬂict can be particularly
important in addressing the dilemma discussedearlier. First, effective conﬂict management could
enable partners to build relational capital that not
only facilitates learning but also limits partneropportunism. Second, these processes can help in
protecting proprietary assets owing to their ability
to monitor and control partner behavior.
Relational capital, which is seen to be so
important at the dyadic level in alliances, can
be equally important in the context of alliancenetworks. Scholars (Gulati and Gargiulo, 1999)
have argued that strong interpersonal ties between
two organizations provide channels through whichpartners learn about other ﬁrms’ competencies
and reliability. From this perspective, relational
capital that rests upon close interpersonal ties atthe dyadic level can also play an important role
in creating and building larger alliance networks.
First, it increases the probability that partners will
form more alliances with each other in the future.
Copyright Ó2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 21: 217–237 (2000)Second, it allows each ﬁrm to form new alliances
with other ﬁrms based on referrals that its part-ners are ready to provide for it. Eventually, a
larger and richer alliance network can evolve on
the basis of strong relational capital at the dyadiclevel between two partners.
LITERATURE REVIEW AND
RESEARCH QUESTION
Strategic alliances can be deﬁned as purposive
strategic relationships between independent ﬁrmsthat share compatible goals, strive for mutual
beneﬁts, and acknowledge a high level of mutual
dependence (Mohr and Spekman, 1994). Gulati(1995) deﬁnes an alliance as any independently
initiated interﬁrm link that involves exchange,
sharing, or co-development.
Three streams of research typify most of the
academic work on alliances. The ﬁrst stream that
attempts to explain the motivations for allianceformation has put forth three rationales: strategic,
transaction costs related, and learning related.
Strategic considerations involve using alliances toenhance a ﬁrm’s competitive position through
market power or efﬁciency (Kogut, 1988). Trans-
action cost explanations view alliance formationas a means to reduce the production and trans-
action costs for the ﬁrms concerned (Williamson,
1985; Hennart, 1988). Learning explanations view
alliances as a means to learn or absorb critical
skills or capabilities from alliance partners. Thesecond stream of research focuses on the choice
of governance structure in alliances. Informed
largely by transaction cost economics, it arguesthat governance in alliances mirrors the underly-
ing transaction costs associated with an exchange,
and that equity-based structures are more likelyunder conditions of high transaction costs
(Pisano, Russo, and Teece, 1988; Pisano, 1989).
The third stream of research examines the effec-tiveness and performance of alliances. It seeks
to identify factors that enhance or impede the
performance of either the alliance itself, or of thealliance’s parent ﬁrms that are engaged in one
(Beamish, 1987; Harrigan, 1985; Koh and Venka-
traman, 1991; Merchant, 1997).
Despite their different emphases, existing
alliance research has begun to focus increasingly
on the phenomenon of learning in alliance situ-
ations. Learning in terms of accessing and acquir-
 10970266, 2000, 3, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(200003)21:3<217::AID-SMJ95>3.0.CO;2-Y by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Learning and Protection of Proprietary Assets in Alliances 219
ing critical information, know-how, or capabilities
from the partner is oft stated to be one of theforemost motivations for alliance formation
(Hamel, 1991; Khanna et al., 1998). Alliances
are seen not only a means of trading accessto each others’ complementary capabilities—what
might be termed quasi-internalization—but also
as a mechanism to fully acquire or internalizepartner skills. Yoshino and Rangan (1995) state
that such learning is always an implicit strategic
objective for every ﬁrm that uses alliances. Given
the importance that ﬁrms place on forming
alliances to exploit learning opportunities,researchers have begun to examine various factors
that might impact the learning process (Khanna
et al., 1998) and learning success (Hamel, 1991).
For example, it has been argued that equity-
based governance structures are better suited for
learning critical know-how or capabilities fromthe partner (Mowery, Oxley, and Silverman,
1996). Such alliances are especially seen as effec-
tive vehicles for learning tacit know-how andcapabilities as compared to nonequity-based con-
tractual arrangements because the know-how
being transferred or learnt is more organi-zationally embedded (Kogut, 1988). Using case-
based research, Hamel (1991) also shows that
ﬁrms that possess a strong learning intent andcreate an appropriate learning environment win
the so-called ‘Learning Race.’ Khanna et al.,
(1998) extend this stream of research to provide
an excellent analytical framework that describes
the dynamics of the learning process in such a‘Learning Race.’ They show that ﬁrms’ incentives
to learn are driven by their expected pay-offs
that have complex, interdependent and dynamicstructures. Learning success is determined by the
amount of resources that ﬁrms allocate to learn
from their alliance partner. The resource allo-cation is itself dependent upon the expected pay-
offs associated with such learning. The magnitude
of these pay-offs is also linked to the degreeof overlap between alliance scope and parent
ﬁrm scope.
We believe that there is sufﬁcient opportunity
to extend current research on learning alliances.
Current alliance research has failed to sufﬁciently
address, theoretically and empirically, animportant dilemma that often exists in learning
alliances. Participants in learning alliances would
not only like to access some useful information
or know-how from the partner, but also inter-
Copyright Ó2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 21: 217–237 (2000)nalize some complementary capabilities and skills
possessed by the partner. At the same time, theywould also like to protect some of their own core
proprietary capabilities from being unilaterally
absorbed or appropriated by the partner. Thusthere is an underlying tension between ‘trying to
learn and trying to protect.’ The dilemma arises
because conditions that might facilitate the learn-ing process are likely to expose ﬁrms to the
danger of losing some of their crown jewels to
the partner. The NUMMI alliance between Gen-
eral Motors and Toyota is a classic example of
such an alliance (Badaracco, 1988). GeneralMotors was keen to learn some of Toyota’s
manufacturing management practices through the
alliance, whereas Toyota wanted to learn how tomanage U.S. labor and how to run a manufactur-
ing plant in the United States from GM. However,
both partners were also keen to prevent leakageof some of their core proprietary skills to the
other. Toyota was keen to protect its skills of
small car design and effective supplier man-agement and GM its capabilities of managing
dealerships in the United States.
Current alliance research fails to sufﬁciently
examine how ﬁrms can balance the apparent
duality or tension between learning and protect-
ing. In this context, we seek to address the fol-lowing question: What factors enable a ﬁrm to
not only learn critical skills or capabilities from
its alliance partner(s), but also protect itself from
losing its own core proprietary assets or capabili-
ties to the partner? In the following sections, wedevelop hypotheses that address these questions
and test the hypotheses using large-sample survey
data from alliances of U.S.-based ﬁrms.
Before we move on to the next section, we
would like to stress a few important points about
the learning phenomenon in alliances. Learningin alliance situations can be of several kinds and
we focus on just one of them in our paper.
First, we have learning that essentially involvesaccessing and/or internalizing some critical infor-
mation, capability, or skill from the partner. This
is the kind of learning that has been most referredto in the alliance literature and our paper exam-
ines the tension associated with balancing some
of the dynamics involved in such learning. Suchlearning is often a private beneﬁt that potentially
accrues to ﬁrms that participate in alliances
(Khanna et al., 1998). Second, researchers have
also referred to learning wherein the alliance
 10970266, 2000, 3, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(200003)21:3<217::AID-SMJ95>3.0.CO;2-Y by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

220P. Kale, H. Singh and H. Perlmutter
partners in the context of their existing alliance
‘learn’ how to manage the collaboration processand work better with each other as their relation-
ship evolves (Doz, 1996; Arino and de la Torre,
1998). It involves learning about the partners’intended and emergent goals, how to redeﬁne
joint tasks over time, how to manage the alliance
interface, etc. Such learning is equally criticalto sustaining successful cooperation in alliances.
Third, we have learning that looks at how an
individual ﬁrm might learn how to manage its
alliances better, and build what has been referred
to as alliance capability (Anand and Khanna,2000; Kale and Singh, 1999). Alliance capability
as referred to above may be built over time by
accumulating more alliance experience, i.e. byforming more and more alliances (Anand and
Khanna, 2000). However, it could also be
developed by pursuing a set of explicit processesto accumulate and leverage the alliance man-
agement know-how associated with the ﬁrm’s
prior and ongoing alliance experience (Kale andSingh, 1999). Our paper focuses only on the
ﬁrst type of learning, namely the accessing and
internalizing of critical information or capabilitiesfrom alliance partner(s). Here, we do not examine
the other two, equally important types of learning
in alliances. Thus henceforth, whenever we talkabout learning in alliances, we are essentially
referring to learning that involves the acquisition
or internalization of some critical information,
know-how, or capability possessed by the partner.
THEORY AND HYPOTHESES
Relational capital
The alliance literature has focused extensively on
partner opportunism and most researchers haveadopted the theoretical stance informed by trans-
action cost economics to examine this aspect
(Hennart, 1988; Kogut, 1988; Pisano, 1989; Wil-liamson, 1991). Firms’ concerns about opportun-
istic behavior by their partners are likely to lead
to high transaction costs and it has been suggestedthat ﬁrms can adopt appropriate contractual agree-
ments or governance structures to address these
concerns. Using transaction cost economics,scholars have identiﬁed two sets of governance
properties through which equity alliances can
effectively alleviate the transaction costs involved.
One is the property of a ‘mutual hostage’ situ-
Copyright Ó2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 21: 217–237 (2000)ation, in which shared equity aligns the interests
of the partners involved. Since partners arerequired to make ex ante commitments to an
equity alliance, their concern for their investments
reduces the possibility of opportunistic behaviorover the course of the alliance (Pisano, 1989).
Second, in equity alliances, the investing partners
create a hierarchical supervision not only tooversee the day-to-day functioning of the alliance,
but also to address contingencies as they arise
(Kogut, 1988).
Numerous researchers have criticized the trans-
action cost economics perspective on alliances forits singular focus on partner opportunism and its
advocating the use of contractual agreements or
equity to resolve it. This approach fails to capturean important element in alliance partnerships,
namely the role of interﬁrm trust and the evolu-
tion of interpartner relationships (Gulati, 1995).‘Trust’ has been referred to in several ways in
the literature. First, it is considered ‘a type of
expectation that alleviates the fear that one’sexchange partner will act opportunistically’
(Bradach and Eccles, 1989). Offering a slightly
different emphasis, Madhok (1995), suggests thattrust between exchange partners has two compo-
nents: a structural component which is fostered
by a mutual hostage situation, and a behavioralcomponent, which refers to the degree of conﬁ-
dence that individual partners have in the
reliability and integrity of each other. Similarly,
Gulati (1995) differentiates knowledge-based trust
from deterrence-based trust. Knowledge-basedtrust emerges between two ﬁrms as they interact
with each other and learn about each other, to
develop trust around norms of equity. Deterrence-based trust is based on utilitarian considerations
which lead a ﬁrm to believe that a partner will
not engage in opportunistic behavior owing tothe costly sanctions that are likely to arise. Over-
all, there is an emerging consensus among
alliance scholars that mutual trust creates thebasis for an enduring and effective relationship
between contracting ﬁrms. For example, Gulati
(1995) shows how trust enables ﬁrms to reducedependence on equity structures to govern the
relationships. Zaheer et al., (1998) demonstrate
how trust reduces negotiating costs in alliancesand also enhances alliance performance.
Trust between organizations has often been
conceived as the agglomeration of trust between
individuals in the two organizations. Numerous
 10970266, 2000, 3, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(200003)21:3<217::AID-SMJ95>3.0.CO;2-Y by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Learning and Protection of Proprietary Assets in Alliances 221
examples highlight the existence of stable obliga-
tory relationships based on trust between individ-ual members of the partnering ﬁrms. Accounts of
the industrial districts in Italy (Piore and Sabel,
1984), of subcontracting relationships in theJapanese textile industry (Dore, 1983), and those
in the Japanese automobile industry (Dyer, 1996)
highlight this aspect. The premise is that as ﬁrmswork with each other trust is built among individ-
ual members of the contracting ﬁrms because of
the close personal ties that develop between them
(Macaulay, 1963). Such trust is based upon close
interaction and relationships that develop at thepersonal level. It is akin to the knowledge-based
trust referred to by Gulati (1995) or the
behavioral-based trust referred to by Madhok(1995). A history of close relationships helps
individual members develop such trust in their
counterparts in the partnering ﬁrm. Relationalexchange theory (Dore, 1983) in economic soci-
ology also discusses how personal relationships
based on trust arise and exist between ﬁrms.Palay (1985) and Ring and Van de Ven (1992)
have also pointed out the important role of per-
sonal connections and relationships between con-tracting ﬁrms. We refer to such mutual trust,
respect, and friendship that reside at the individ-
ual level between alliance partners as relationalcapital. Relational capital, as deﬁned, resides
upon close interaction at the personal level
between alliance partners. We believe that
relational capital has important performance
implications for the alliance partners. More speci-ﬁcally, we argue that it may signiﬁcantly impact
the ability of a ﬁrm to successfully manage the
dual objectives of learning from its alliance part-ners and also protecting its own core proprietary
assets from them.
The role of relational capital in learning
alliances
Learning from the alliance partner primarily
involves the acquisition of two types of knowl-
edge: (a) information and (b) know-how (Kogutand Zander, 1992). Information is deﬁned as
easily codiﬁable knowledge that can be trans-
mitted without loss of integrity, once the syntacti-cal rules required for deciphering it are known.
It includes facts, axiomatic propositions, and sym-
bols. On the other hand, know-how involves
knowledge that is tacit, sticky, complex, and dif-
Copyright Ó2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 21: 217–237 (2000)ﬁcult to codify (Nelson and Winter, 1982; Szulan-
ski, 1996). Von Hippel (1988) deﬁnes know-howas the accumulated practical skill or expertise that
allows one to do something smoothly and
efﬁciently.
Firms that wish to learn critical information or
know-how from their alliance partner must ﬁrst
understand where the relevant information or ex-pertise resides in its partner and who possesses
it (Dyer and Singh, 1998). Close personal inter-
action between the partnering entities enables
individual members to develop this understanding.
Learning or transfer of such know-how is thencontingent upon the exchange environment and
mechanisms that exist between the alliance part-
ners. Know-how, as discussed earlier, is generallymore sticky, tacit, and difﬁcult to codify than
information and thus more resistant to easy trans-
fer, both within and across ﬁrms (Szulanski,1996). But von Hippel (1988) and Marsden
(1990) have argued that close and intense inter-
action between individual members of the con-cerned organizations acts as an effective mech-
anism to transfer or learn sticky and tacit know-
how across the organizational interface. Learningsuccess also rests upon an iterative process of
exchange between the member ﬁrms and the
extent to which personnel from the two ﬁrmshave direct and intimate contact to further an
exchange (Arrow, 1974; Badaracco, 1991). A
social exchange approach provides the basis for
such interaction and exchange. Strong relational
capital usually engenders close interactionbetween alliance partners. It can thus facilitate
exchange and transfer of information and know-
how across the alliance interface.
A ﬁrm is also able to learn from alliance
partners more easily when the level of trans-
parency or openness between them is high(Hamel, 1991; Doz and Hamel, 1998). The pri-
mary hindrance to such openness or transparency
is the mutual suspicion of opportunistic behaviorbetween alliance partners which generally causes
them to be less willing to share information
and know-how with each other. Existing researchsuggests that mutual trust between partners
reduces the fear of such opportunistic behavior
(Gulati, 1995; Zaheer et al., 1998), allowing for
greater transparency between the exchange. Build-
ing upon it, we could argue that trust-based
relational capital can contribute to a freer and
greater exchange of information and know-how
 10970266, 2000, 3, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(200003)21:3<217::AID-SMJ95>3.0.CO;2-Y by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

222P. Kale, H. Singh and H. Perlmutter
between committed exchange partners. This is
because decision-makers do not feel that theyhave to protect themselves from the others’
opportunistic behavior (Blau, 1977; Jarillo, 1988,
Inkpen, 1994). Without its existence, the infor-mation and know-how exchanged would be low
in accuracy, comprehensiveness, and timeliness.
Overall, we believe that strong relational capital
between alliance partners facilitates greater learn-
ing across the alliance interface. Thus,
Hypothesis 1a: The greater the relational
capital that exists between the alliance part-ners, the greater will be the degree of learn-
ing achieved.
Nevertheless, certain scholars have suggested that
pronouncements such as ‘build relationships to
create harmony and learning’ are fraught withcomplications owing to the inherent contradiction
among the different strategic objectives that ﬁrms
seek in alliances (Yoshino and Rangan, 1995).A potential danger in alliance situations is the
risk of unilaterally losing core proprietary know-
how or capabilities to the partner (Hladik, 1988).A ﬁrm derives its competitive strength from its
proprietary assets and will be protective about
losing them to the alliance partner. Partnershipsare fraught with hidden agendas driven by the
opportunistic desire to access and internalize the
partner’s core proprietary skills much faster than
the partner. These ‘learning races’ often leave a
ﬁrm in a Catch-22 situation: if it contributes toolittle to building the relationship, the alliance may
be doomed to fail (Khanna et al., 1998); on the
other hand, if it contributes too much and tooopenly, its partner will gain the upper hand
(Doz, 1988).
Although the transaction cost perspective rec-
ommends a variety of contractual mechanisms to
guard against partner opportunism, scholars from
other perspectives have suggested alternate meansfor minimizing it. Dyer and Singh (1998) propose
alternatives of self-enforcing agreements, which
are sometimes referred to as ‘private ordering’ inthe economics literature or ‘trust’ in the sociologi-
cal literature. Sociologists, anthropologists, and
legal scholars have long argued that informalsocial controls supplement and often supplant
formal controls (Macaulay, 1963; Granovetter,
1985). These self-enforcing agreements rely on
relational capital or reputation as governance
Copyright Ó2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 21: 217–237 (2000)mechanisms and are often a more effective and
less costly means of protecting specialized invest-ments and proprietary assets (Sako, 1991; Hill,
1995). Relational capital creates a mutual conﬁ-
dence that no party to an exchange will exploitothers’ vulnerabilities even if there is an oppor-
tunity to do so (Sabel, 1993). This conﬁdence
arises out of the social controls that such capitalcreates. Partners in an alliance often specify what
is core or proprietary to each party and develop
informal or formal codes of conduct to restrict
behavior or action that leads to the appropriation
of such assets. Relational capital reduces the ten-dency of alliance partners to break such informal
existing agreements that might be in place. Parties
to the exchange make a good-faith effort not totake excessive and unilateral advantage of the
other, even when the opportunity is available.
Thus overall, we can argue that trust-basedrelational capital can counteract the potential of
opportunistic or self-serving behavior by the
alliance partner(s) and thus mitigate the possi-bility of losing one’s core proprietary assets to
the partner.
Hypothesis 1b: The greater the relational
capital between alliance partners, the greater
will be the ability to protect core proprietaryassets from each other .
Conﬂict management
A critical aspect of any partnership is the poten-
tial for conﬂict between the alliance partners and
how they deal with it. Conﬂict often exists in any
alliance relationship on account of the inherentdependencies involved in such interactions. Given
that a certain amount of conﬂict is expected, how
such conﬂict is managed is important (Borys andJemison, 1989), as the impact of conﬂict reso-
lution on the relationship can be productive or
destructive (Deutsch, 1969).
A number of factors are associated with man-
aging conﬂicts integratively. Integrative conﬂict
management entails joint management of conﬂictwith mutual concern for ‘win-win’ for all con-
cerned (Bazerman and Neal, 1984). It engenders
a communication- and contact-intensive processof conﬂict management. Strong two-way com-
munication is a key element of successful conﬂict
resolution (Cummings, 1984). MacNeil (1981)
and others acknowledge the importance of honest
 10970266, 2000, 3, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(200003)21:3<217::AID-SMJ95>3.0.CO;2-Y by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Learning and Protection of Proprietary Assets in Alliances 223
and open lines of communication to the continued
growth of close ties and resolution of potentialconﬂict situations. Our ﬁeldwork also shows the
importance that experienced managers give to
easy and open communication for addressingalliance-related conﬂicts. Besides communication,
readiness to engage in joint problem solving and
a mutual concern for ‘win–win’ outcomes willoften produce mutually satisfactory solutions.
Joint problem solving fosters closer collaboration
between the alliance partners, thereby creating a
more conducive environment for future
cooperation. On the other hand, use of destructiveconﬂict resolution techniques like domination,
coercion (Deutsch, 1969), and an attitude portray-
ing a ‘win–lose’ perspective are seen ascounterproductive and are likely to strain the
fabric of the alliance.
Sometimes the method of conﬂict management
is institutionalized, with partners setting up formal
joint mechanisms to ‘monitor’ potential conﬂict
situations. Monitoring not only provides eachpartner with a better understanding of mutual
concerns but also enables prompt recognition of
potential conﬂict situations. An equally importantelement of most conﬂicts is the organizational or
cultural distance between the alliance partners
(Harrigan, 1988b; Parkhe, 1993). Attempts toaddress cultural obstacles in an explicit and inte-
grative manner should lower the potential for
conﬂict and enhance the likelihood of alliance
success.
We believe that an integrative process of con-
ﬂict management signiﬁcantly impacts both the
nature of the relationship that exists between
alliance partners and the speciﬁc outcomes ofinterest, namely learning and the protection of
proprietary assets. An integrative method of con-
ﬂict resolution engenders feelings of proceduraljustice between the alliance partners, whereby
partners view the decision process to be fair and
just. Such feelings affect individuals’ higher-order attitudes of trust and commitment (Kim
and Mauborgne, 1998) as well as lead to the
development of positive psychological feelingstowards individuals from the other side. Our
ﬁeldwork with companies like Hewlett Packard
or Corning also demonstrates the importance ofintegrative conﬂict management towards build-
ing a stronger relationship between alliance part-
ners. Thus, effective and integrative conﬂict
management can be an important catalyst in
Copyright Ó2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 21: 217–237 (2000)building relational capital between the alliance
partners.
The communication- and contact-intensive
process of conﬂict management also aids the
learning process. Learning from the alliance part-ner is strongly conditioned by the closeness of
interaction between the partners, especially the
degree to which personnel from the partner ﬁrmshave direct and intimate contact with each other.
Two-way communication and joint problem solv-
ing, both of which are key aspects of managing
conﬂicts integratively, involve close interaction
between individuals across the alliance interface.Thus it creates a potentially useful channel to
learn or transfer critical information or know-how
between them. Second, perceptions of proceduraljustice that result from integrative conﬂict man-
agement induce easier exchange of knowledge
and ideas between the partners (Kim and Mau-borgne, 1998). Thus,
Hypothesis 2a: The greater the extent to
which conﬂicts are managed in an integrative
fashion, the greater will be the relational capi-
tal between alliance partners.
Hypothesis 2b: The greater the extent to
which conﬂicts are managed in an integrativefashion, the greater will be the degree of
learning achieved.
Integrative conﬂict management can also impact
each ﬁrm’s ability to protect its proprietaryassets. Conﬂicts in alliances are often centered
upon issues of asymmetrical contributions by
respective alliance partners and the returns tothem (Khanna et al., 1998). The communi-
cation-intensive process of conﬂict management
helps alliance partners to clearly deﬁne whateach partner contributes or gets from the
relationship and what is ‘off-limits.’ Contact-
intensive mechanisms help alliance partners tomonitor not only potential conﬂict situations but
also instances of opportunistic (or secretive)
attempts by either party to unilaterally absorbcore proprietary assets of the other. As discussed
earlier, integrative conﬂict management also
engenders feelings of procedural justice andtrust between the partners to minimize selﬁsh
or opportunistic behavior on the part of any
partner. Collectively, these attributes of in-
tegrative conﬂict management enable alliance
 10970266, 2000, 3, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(200003)21:3<217::AID-SMJ95>3.0.CO;2-Y by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

224P. Kale, H. Singh and H. Perlmutter
partners to better protect their core proprietary
assets from each other. Thus,
Hypothesis 2c: The greater the extent to
which conﬂicts are managed in an integrativefashion, the greater will be partners’ ability
to protect core proprietary assets from each
other.
On the other hand, an integrative approach to
conﬂict management requires partner ﬁrms to
engage in close and intense interaction at multiple
levels across the alliance interface. Communi-cation is also undertaken more closely, frequently,
and openly to recognize and eliminate potential
conﬂict situations. All of these activities may notbode well for the ﬁrm’s ability to control the
ﬂow of important and critical information and
know-how across the alliance interface. Althoughinstitutionalized means of monitoring conﬂict may
alleviate this threat partially, they may still be
ineffective at preventing unwanted leakage andthe loss of some important proprietary know-how
to the partner ﬁrm.
Controls
Organizational ﬁt: Compatibility and
complementarity
In studying alliances, academics and practitioners
have usually emphasized some of the ex ante
structural characteristics of the alliance (Harrigan,1988b). Speciﬁc importance has been given to
the organizational ﬁt between alliance partners,
with the following dimensions of ﬁt beingregarded the most critical: complementarity and
compatibility between the partners (Harrigan,
1988b; Tucchi, 1996).
Complementarity between the alliance partners
refers to the lack of similarity or overlap between
their core businesses or capabilities—the lowerthe similarity, the greater the complementarity
(Mowery et al., 1996b). Harrigan (1988a) shows
that ventures and partnerships are more likely tosucceed when partners possess complementary
missions and resource capabilities. Comp-
lementarity ensures that both partners bring differ-ent but valuable capabilities to the relationship.
It also creates the potential for each ﬁrm to learn
from its partner. Mowery et al., (1996) ﬁnd that
complementarity (i.e., less overlap) between the
Copyright Ó2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 21: 217–237 (2000)alliance partners correlates positively with inter-
partner learning across the alliance interface.
Researchers have also argued that compatibility
of partners is an important aspect of ﬁt that
affects alliance outcomes. In a study of 90 jointventures, Geringer (1988) demonstrates how part-
ner compatibility correlates with alliance success.
He also discusses how ﬁrms employ nine ﬁrm-speciﬁc related criteria to assess ex antepartner
compatibility along several dimensions. Compati-
bility of partners has been assessed in several
ways: operating strategy, corporate cultures, man-
agement styles, nationality (Parkhe, 1993), andat times even ﬁrm size. Compatibility between
partners fosters the ‘chemistry’ between them. It
also facilitates the reconciliation of differencesbetween partners (De la Sierra, 1995) to enable
open and easy exchange between them. Compati-
bility between the partners allows the ﬁrms toactually capitalize on the learning potential
offered by the complementarity of capabilities
between them. Overall, ﬁt in terms of compati-bility and complementarity is expected to posi-
tively impact both relational capital and learning
between partners.
Alliance governance (equity vs. nonequity). As
mentioned earlier, a large body of the allianceliterature based on the transaction cost perspective
explains the presence and impact of equity in
alliances. The presence of equity not only aligns
the interests of the partner ﬁrms but also provides
a basis for monitoring partner behavior (Kogut,1988; Hennart, 1988; Pisano, 1989) so as to
reduce the possibility of opportunistic behavior
by any of the partner(s). Alignment of interestsdue to equity is expected to result in much closer
interaction between the partners. This interaction
should facilitate learning and exchange of infor-mation and know-how, especially of tacit knowl-
edge, across loosely connected ﬁrms (Badaracco,
1991). Various studies have shown that equityarrangements promote greater interﬁrm knowl-
edge transfers than do mere contractual ones
(Kogut, 1988; Mowery et al., 1996). In addition,
since equity alleviates the hazard of partner
opportunism, equity alliances are expected to
minimize the likelihood of a ﬁrm losing its coreproprietary know-how to the partner.
Prior alliances. Current research has highlighted
the important role of trust in alliances (Gulati,
 10970266, 2000, 3, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(200003)21:3<217::AID-SMJ95>3.0.CO;2-Y by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Learning and Protection of Proprietary Assets in Alliances 225
1995; Dyer and Singh, 1998; Zaheer et al., 1998).
Since trust itself is difﬁcult to observe and meas-ure, researchers have used a factor that likely
produces trust as its proxy, namely prior alliances
between the ﬁrms (Gulati, 1995). The underlyingintuition is that two ﬁrms with prior alliances are
likely to trust each other more than other ﬁrms
with whom they have had no alliances (Ring andVan de Ven, 1989). By generating a high degree
of trust and interaction, repeat alliances should
facilitate a high degree of learning and infor-
mation or know-how exchange between partners.
At the same time, the presence of a prior cooper-ative history between the two ﬁrms also limits
the possibility of opportunistic behavior between
them, thus reducing the threat that one of theﬁrms will lose its core proprietary assets to its
partner.
Nationality. If alliance partners are of different
nationalities, problems related to cultural differ-
ences, opinions, beliefs, and attitudes are accentu-ated. Language can also be a problem, especially
if the interface managers cannot speak the part-
ner’s language (Killing, 1982). Harrigan (1988b)ﬁnds differences in national origins to have a
signiﬁcantly negative relationship with expected
outcomes. Parkhe (1993) also ﬁnds that allianceoutcomes and performance are strongly linked to
partner nationalities. Speciﬁc to learning, Mowery
et al. (1996) argue that the forbidding barriers
of culture, language, educational background, and
distance with cross national partners should resultin lower levels of learning and knowledge trans-
fer. These barriers have also been noted to accen-
tuate partner tendencies to engage in opportunisticbehaviors (Reich and Mankin, 1986).
Age.We have also included a control to capture
the impact of alliance duration on the variables
of interest. This is because it could be argued
that the greater the duration of the alliance, thegreater would be the learning from the alliance
partner. At the same time, longer duration would
also increase the likelihood of losing one’s pro-prietary assets to the partner ﬁrm.
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
To understand the dynamics in learning alliances,
we not only studied extant literature in the areas
Copyright Ó2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 21: 217–237 (2000)of strategic alliances and organizational learning
but also supplemented this knowledge withﬁeldwork in a few companies. We used these
two sources to develop the theoretical model that
addresses the research question. This exercise alsoprovided richness of contextual detail permitting
grounded speciﬁcation of the framework and con-
structs. We then collected data that would allowus to test our framework and hypotheses.
Data collection and sample
The level of analysis is an alliance between two
partners. Alliance-related data on aspects such as
relational capital or conﬂict management are
almost impossible to get through archival sources.One could collect these data through interviews
with or surveys of managers who are responsible
or knowledgeable about their ﬁrm’s alliance(s).Although in-depth interviews provide a rich tap-
estry of information, it was beyond the scope of
this project to collect data through interviewsfrom a large sample. Instead, we decided to
collect the data through survey questionnaires
administered to relevant managers across a largesample of alliances formed by U.S.-based com-
panies.
Given our research question, it was necessary
to study ﬁrms that have engaged in alliances and
that operate in industries where alliances are a
critical means of competing. Past research shows
that industries such as pharmaceuticals, chemi-
cals, computers (hardware and software), elec-tronics, telecommunications, and services fall
within this category (Culpan and Eugene, 1993).
To select the sample, we ﬁrst identiﬁed com-panies with more than $50 million annual sales
for the year 1994, in each of these industries. We
then identiﬁed appropriate respondents in each ofthese ﬁrms. Although most survey-based studies
on alliances have generally relied on sending the
surveys to the CEO (Mohr and Spekman, 1994;Simonin, 1997), our ﬁeldwork suggested that
there may be other people in companies to whom
we could send the questionnaire. For example,companies often have executives with focal
corporate responsibility for strategic alliances,
corporate development, or mergers and acqui-sitions. These executives are more directly
responsible or knowledgeable about their ﬁrms’
alliances. These individuals, whom we refer to
as the primary recipients, were identiﬁed in two
 10970266, 2000, 3, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(200003)21:3<217::AID-SMJ95>3.0.CO;2-Y by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

226P. Kale, H. Singh and H. Perlmutter
different ways. First, we used secondary data
sources, such as the Standard & Poors’ digest oncompany executives, to create a preliminary list
of executive names and contact details. In cases
where we did not have enough information, wecalled up the company to collect or reconﬁrm
this information. In some cases we were directed
to send the survey to an executive or managerwho was different from the one we had in our
original list. We dropped cases where we failed to
get sufﬁciently clear information. We eventually
mailed our survey to 592 companies.
The primary recipient in each company was
requested to select any one alliance that the com-
pany had been involved with and forward the
questionnaire to a manager who was directlyassociated with that alliance. This latter individual
was the primary respondent to the survey ques-
tionnaire. In certain cases, the primary recipientselected an alliance for which he/she was also
the primary respondent. We received responses
from 278 companies, of which 212 were completein all respects. With respect to the companies’
sales and employees, no signiﬁcant differences
were observed between the respondent and nonre-spondent groups.
Measurement
Multi-item scales were used to collect data on
most of the key constructs. Since little empirical
precedent existed to develop these measures, we
relied on extant literature and our ﬁeldwork toselect individual items for our scales. Simplicity
in scoring was sought by using a balanced 7-
point Likert-type scale that is easy to master.Basically, each respondent was asked to indicate
the extent to which he/she disagreed or agreed
with the given statement, such that 1 =Strongly
Disagree and 7 =Strongly Agree. We pretested
the survey instrument with a small group of
managers from different companies before send-ing out the ﬁnal version. Pretesting helped us
modify the language suitably and reject items
that were difﬁcult to understand, or involvedunnecessary repetition. The Appendix provides
details of individual items used to measure each
theoretical construct.
The dependent variables, ‘learning’ and ‘pro-
tection of proprietary assets,’ and the key
explanatory variables, ‘conﬂict management’ and
‘relational capital,’ are all measured using multi-
Copyright Ó2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 21: 217–237 (2000)item scales. Among the controls, ‘partner ﬁt’ in
terms of complementarity and compatibility isalso measured with a multi-item scale. However,
for the rest of the control variables, we relied on
categorical measures to obtain the responses. Foralliance structure, respondents had to indicate
whether the alliance was an equity alliance or
not and the responses were coded as ‘Yes =1’
and ‘No =0.’ Similarly, respondents provided a
‘Yes/No’ answer to indicate the existence of prior
alliances between the partners, where existence
of prior alliances was coded as ‘1’ and ‘0’ other-
wise. For partner nationality, respondents had togive a ‘Yes/No’ response to whether the alliance
partners belonged to same nationality and the
coding was such that ‘Yes =1’ and ‘No =0.’
Alliance duration is a simple count of the number
of years since the alliance was formed.
RESULTS AND ANALYSES
The analyses have been conducted in multiplestages such that results from these can collectively
help assess the proposed framework and hypoth-eses. When multiple-item scales are used to meas-
ure latent constructs and a composite score based
on these items is used in further analyses, it isimportant to assess the validity and reliability of
the scales used (Gerbing and Anderson, 1988).
Selection of scale items on the basis of prior
literature, ﬁeldwork, and pretesting of the survey
instrument helped ensure content or face validity.To assess scale reliability, we computed Cronbach
alphas for each multiple scale item and found
these to be well above the cut-off value of 0.7in each case (Nunnally, 1978). Table 1 provides
the results of this analysis. Table 2 provides the
descriptive statistics and correlation matrix of thekey variables.
We ﬁrst used ordinary least-squares regression
Table 1. Reliability of scales used to measure latent
constructs
Construct Cronbach aItems Valid N
Partner ﬁt 0.8165 4 239
Relational capital 0.9063 5 252Conﬂict 0.9160 6 231management
 10970266, 2000, 3, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(200003)21:3<217::AID-SMJ95>3.0.CO;2-Y by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Learning and Protection of Proprietary Assets in Alliances 227
Table 2. Descriptive statistics and correlation matrix
Variable Mean S.D. PP CM RC DUR LER PC
PP 4.33 1.76 1.00 0.51 0.49 0.13 0.41 0.39
CM 4.16 1.68 1.00 0.67 0.10 0.64 0.56
RC 4.00 1.63 1.00 0.18 0.68 0.45
DUR 3.70 3.88 1.00 0.07 -0.02
LER 4.13 1.89 1.00 0.39
PC 3.98 1.58 1.00
*Figures in italics are signiﬁcant at the 0.05 level
PP, partner ﬁt; CM, conﬂict management; RC, relational capital; DUR, alliance duration; LER, learning; PC, protection of
proprietary assets or crown jewels
Table 3. OLS regression
Model 1a/1b—dependent variable: Learning from the alliance partner
Model 2a/2b—dependent variable: Protection of proprietary assets
Explanatory variables Model 1a Model 1b Model 2a Model 2b
Relational capital 0.432* 0.498* 0.401** 0.328**Conﬂict management 0.374* 0.335** 0.186** 0.184***Partner ﬁt 0.129 0.110
Previous alliances 0.077 -0.067
Alliance duration 0.035 -0.037
Partner nationality 0.112 0.101Alliance governance 0.124 -0.120
R
20.594 0.647 0.316 0.354
Number of observations 212 178 200 178
*p,0.01; **p,0.05; *** p,0.10
to test the hypotheses. Separate models, the
results of which are shown in Table 3, wereestimated for each of the two dependent variables:
degree of learning achieved and protection of
proprietary assets.
The results of Models 1a and 1b in Table 3
provide strong support for Hypotheses 1a and 2b.
Relational capital shares a signiﬁcant and positiverelationship with the degree of learning achieved.
These results underscore the importance of having
strong relational capital with the alliance partnerin order to enhance learning in alliance situations.
Conﬂict management also has a signiﬁcant and
positive relationship with the dependent variable.A communication- and contact-intensive process
of managing conﬂicts relates positively to learn-
ing success. Despite relatively high correlationbetween the two explanatory variables, concerns
about unstable regression coefﬁcients are mini-
mized since each of them has a strong and sig-
niﬁcant relationship with the respective dependent
Copyright Ó2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 21: 217–237 (2000)variables. Tests for multicollinearity also show
that each of these variables has signiﬁcantexplanatory power by itself and that the extent
of collinearity is well within generally acceptable
limits. The tolerance values for each explanatoryvariable are well above the cut-off value of 0.1,
and the variance inﬂation factor values are well
below the cut-off value of 10 (Hair et al., 1998).
Of the control variables, we observe that only
partner ﬁt is marginally signiﬁcant in explaining
variation in learning success.
Results of Models2a and 2b, which have ‘pro-
tection of proprietary assets’ as the dependent
variable, provide support for Hypotheses 1b and2c. The signiﬁcant and positive relationship
between relational capital and protection of pro-
prietary assets highlights the importance of infor-mal self-enforcing governance mechanisms in
alliances. Relational capital, based on mutual
trust, friendship, and respect between the alliance
partners, effectively curbs partner opportunism to
 10970266, 2000, 3, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(200003)21:3<217::AID-SMJ95>3.0.CO;2-Y by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

228P. Kale, H. Singh and H. Perlmutter
protect against leakage of core proprietary assets.
None of the other variables, including the con-trols, shows any signiﬁcant relationship with pro-
tection of proprietary assets. This result is quite
surprising, given the emphasis placed by priorresearch on aspects like equity governance or
prior ties.
Instead of conducting the analyses separately
as above, we can use methods that combine
these techniques as well as provide additional
advantages. Structural modeling is one such tech-
nique that can be used. It consists of two stages:
(a) a measurement model that assesses reliabilityand validity of the scales used to measure each
latent construct, and (b) a structural model that
lays out and estimates multiple dependentrelationships between the constructs of interest.
The true value of structural equation modeling
comes from the beneﬁt of analyzing the structuraland measurement models simultaneously. An
additional advantage of this technique lies in
its ability to estimate a series of dependencerelationships, wherein one dependent variable
becomes the explanatory variable in subsequent
relationships. It also allows researchers to assessthe impact of explanatory variables on two or
more dependent variables, at the same time (Hair
et al., 1998).
In our theory section, we had suggested that
conﬂict management and partner ﬁt could have
both a direct impact on the two dependent vari-
ables (learning and the protection of proprietary
assets), as well as an impact on the relationalcapital between partners. Thus, relational capital
would be a dependent variable with respect to
conﬂict management and partner ﬁt and anexplanatory variable with respect to learning and
protection of proprietary assets. Structural model-
ing is well equipped to handle such multipledependent relationships. We also believe that in
alliance situations ﬁrms face the tension of trying
to achieve the two focal objectives, learning andprotecting proprietary assets, simultaneously.
Thus instead of estimating separate models for
the relationships between the explanatory vari-ables and each of the dependent variables, as
done earlier, we can use structural modeling to
estimate the two sets of relationships si-multaneously. Finally, since we are measuring
each of the theoretical constructs using a number
of manifest items, the measurement model can
also help us examine the validity and reliability
Copyright Ó2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 21: 217–237 (2000)of these constructs, even as we examine the
dependence relationships between them.
Figure1 provides the path diagram for the
model that includes the multiple dependent
relationships that we propose and Tables4 and 5provide the equations for the measurement and
structural models based on the path diagram.
In the model that we estimate we have omitted
all control variables, except partner ﬁt, for several
reasons. First, structural modeling is better suited
to examine relationships between constructs that
are measured using interval or ratio scales. Most
current techniques are not well suited toadequately handle categorical explanatory vari-
ables such as all of our controls, with the excep-
tion of partner ﬁt. Second, our initial analysesshow that none of those controls is in any way
signiﬁcantly related to the dependent variables.
Thus, dropping them from our model should notconstitute severe problems. We estimate the
model using the maximum likelihood estimation
procedure of LISREL 7, which is robust, efﬁcient,and unbiased, when the assumption of multi-
variate normality is met (Joreskog and Sorbom,
1988). Results of the analysis are discussed inthe following section.
Overall model ﬁt
The ﬁrst step in structural modeling is to assess
overall model ﬁt with one or more goodness-of-
ﬁt measures. Goodness-of-ﬁt is a measure of the
correspondence of the actual or observed input
Figure 1. Path diagram (structural modelling)
 10970266, 2000, 3, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(200003)21:3<217::AID-SMJ95>3.0.CO;2-Y by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Learning and Protection of Proprietary Assets in Alliances 229
Table 4. Measurement model
(a) Measurement model (exogenous constructs)
Exogenous Exogenous constructs Error
indicator
j1 j2
X1= l11j1 +d1
X2= l21j1 +d2
X3= l31j1 +d3
X4= l41j1 +d4
X5= l12j2+d5
X6= l22j2+d6
X7= l32j2+d7
X8= l42j2+d8
X9= l52j2+d9
X10= l62j2+d10
X1–X4: indicators for ‘partner ﬁt’ ( j1) corresponding to PP1–
PP4 in Figure1.
X5–X10: indicators for ‘conﬂict management’ ( j2) corre-
sponding to CM1–CM6 in Figure1.
l11–l62: parameters estimating the relationship between
manifest indicators and latent constructs.
d1–d10: error terms for indicators X1–X10.
(covariance or correlation) matrix with that pre-
dicted from the proposed model. If the proposed
model has acceptable ﬁt, by whatever criteriaapplied, the researcher has not ‘proved’ the pro-
posed model, but has only conﬁrmed that it is
one of the several possible acceptable models
(Hairet al., 1998).
The ﬁrst measure we report is the likelihood
ratio chi-square statistic. For the proposed model,
we get a chi-square of 316.19 (d.f. =177). If the
model is to provide a satisfactory representationof the data, it is important for the chi-square
value to be nonsigniﬁcant ( p.0.05). The sig-
niﬁcance level of 0.02 for the chi-square of ourmodel is close to the usually acceptable threshold
of 0.05, indicative of partially acceptable ﬁt. The
second measure we report is the normed chi-square (Joreskog, 1969), where the chi-square is
adjusted by the degrees of freedom to assess
model ﬁt. Models with adequate ﬁt should havea normed chi-square less than 2.0 or 3.0
(Carmines and McIver, 1981). With a normed
chi-square of 1.78, the proposed model providesa fairly satisfactory representation of the data.
The third measure reported is the GFI index,
which is the most popular goodness-of-ﬁt measure
provided by LISREL analysis (Joreskog and Sor-
Copyright Ó2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 21: 217–237 (2000)(b) Measurement model (endogenous constructs)
Endogenous Endogenous constructs Error
indicators
h1 h2 h3
Y1= l11h1 +e1
Y2= l21h1 +e2
Y3= l31h1 +e3
Y4= l41h1 +e4
Y5= l51h1 +e5
Y6= l12h2 +e6
Y7= l22h2 +e7
Y8= l32h2 +e8
Y9= l13h3+e9
Y10= l23h3+e10
Y1–Y5: indicators for ‘relational capital’ ( h1) corresponding
to RC1–RC5 in Figure1.
Y6–Y8: indicators for ‘Learning’ ( h2) corresponding to L1–
L3 in Figure1.
Y9–Y10: indicators for ‘protection of proprietary assets’ ( h3)
corresponding to PC1–PC2 in Figure 1.
l11–l23: parameters estimating the relationship between
manifest indicators and latent constructs.
e1–e10: error terms for Y1–Y10.
Table 5. Structural model
Endogenous Exogenous Endogenous Error
constructs constructs constructs
j1 j2 h1 h2 h3
h1=l11j1+l12j2 +z1
h2=l21j1+l22j2+b21h1+z2
h3=l31j1+l32j2+b31h1+z3
h1=construct representing ‘relational capital’
h2=construct representing ‘learning’
h3=construct representing ‘protection of proprietary assets’
j1=construct representing ‘partner ﬁt’
j2=construct representing ‘conﬂict management’
g11–g32=parameters estimating the relationship between
exogenous and endogenous constructs
b21–b31=parameters estimating the relationship between
various endogenous constructs
z1–z3=error terms
bom, 1988). It is a nonstatistical measure ranging
in value from 0 (poor ﬁt) to 1.0 (perfect ﬁt).
We get a GFI of 0.89 for our model, which issufﬁciently close to the generally acceptable level
of 0.90 (Hair et al., 1998. We also assessed the
incremental ﬁt of the model compared to the null
model by examining the Normed Fit Index. The
 10970266, 2000, 3, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(200003)21:3<217::AID-SMJ95>3.0.CO;2-Y by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

230P. Kale, H. Singh and H. Perlmutter
Normed Fit Index of 0.91 is above the desired
threshold level of 0.90. Overall, the differentgoodness-of-ﬁt measures indicate partial support
Table 6. (a). Measurement model: Parameter esti-
mates
Construct Parameter t-statistic
indicators estimate
Partner ﬁt (PP)PP1 0.912 14.22*PP2 0.870 13.92*PP3 0.453 6.23*PP4 0.619 9.11*
Conﬂict
management(CM)CM1 0.857 14.68*CM2 0.889 15.63*CM3 0.848 14.24*CM4 0.891 15.85*CM5 0.735 11.69*CM6 0.848 14.21*
Relational capital
(RC)RC1 1.00RC2 0.810 9.41*RC3 0.872 11.36*RC4 0.883 11.73*RC5 0.851 10.47*
Learning (L)
L1 1.00L2 0.921 14.24*L3 0.835 9.08*
Protection of
proprietary assets(PC)PC1 1.00PC2 0.683 6.412*
*p-value ,0.001
(b). Measurement model: Construct reliability
Construct Reliability estimates
Partner ﬁt 0.826
Conﬂict management 0.912Relational capital 0.902Learning 0.905Protection of prop. assets 0.848
Note: Threshold levels for acceptability—construct
reliability .0.70
Copyright Ó2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 21: 217–237 (2000)for the proposed model. Although not perfect, the
level of ﬁt seems sufﬁcient enough to proceedwith the assessment of the measurement and
structural models.
Measurement model ﬁt
In the measurement model, the ﬁrst step is to
examine the loading of the manifest indicators
on the underlying theoretical constructs and to
focus on nonsigniﬁcant loadings, if any. As we
see in Table 6a, all the indicators are signiﬁcantly
related with their respective underlying constructs(t-values .2.0 andp,0.05).
Since none of the indicators have a loading
that is so low or nonsigniﬁcant that they shouldbe deleted, we can proceed to assess the validity
and reliability of the construct scales. The sig-
niﬁcance of the factor loadings provides supportfor the convergent validity of the respective scales
(Anderson and Gerbing, 1988). Discriminant va-
lidity was assessed by comparing a model withthe correlation between two explanatory con-
structs constrained to equal one with an uncon-
strained model. A signiﬁcantly lower chi-squarefor the model with unconstrained correlation pro-
vides support for discriminant validity (Joreskog,
1971). Table 6b provides results for scalereliability. We see that the reliability estimates
exceed the suggested level of 0.70, in all cases.
Together, the results suggest that the manifest
indicators are signiﬁcant and reliable measures of
the latent constructs being used. Our analysisalso revealed signiﬁcant correlation ( p,0.05)
between the measurement errors for some of the
indicators within constructs (e.g.,
d1 and d2;d5
and d6;d7 and d8;e2 and e3;e5 and e6).
Correlated measurement errors suggest the exis-
tence of consistent response bias across certainindicators within constructs that needs to be con-
trolled for while estimating the model.
Structural model ﬁt
Having assessed the overall model ﬁt and the
measurement model, we can now examine the
theoretical relationships between the underlying
constructs. The most obvious examination in thestructural model involves the signiﬁcance of the
estimated coefﬁcients. Structural modeling
methods provide not only estimated coefﬁcients
but also standard errors and t-values for each
 10970266, 2000, 3, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(200003)21:3<217::AID-SMJ95>3.0.CO;2-Y by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Learning and Protection of Proprietary Assets in Alliances 231
coefﬁcient. Table 7 contains the results for the
various structural equations.
1. Both relational capital and conﬂict man-
agement show a statistically signiﬁcant ( t–
value .2.0 andp-value ,0.05) and positive
relationship with ‘learning.’ This result pro-
vides support for the results of the multipleregression conducted earlier.
2. For ‘protection of proprietary assets,’ conﬂict
management is the only signiﬁcant explanatory
variable ( t=2.318 and p=0.020). Relational
capital is, however, just outside the signiﬁ-cance range.
3. Besides having a positive and signiﬁcant
relationship with the two core dependent vari-ables, conﬂict management also has a positive
and signiﬁcant association with the relational
capital that exists between the alliance partners(t=3.50 and p=0.001). This result may
explain why the relationship between relational
capital and protection of proprietary assetsbecomes less signiﬁcant when we use multi-
stage structural modeling as compared to using
ordinary OLS regression.
Obtaining an acceptable level of ﬁt suggests that
the proposed model explains or ﬁts the data quitesatisfactorily. However, other models, based on
alternate theories, may provide equal or better ﬁt.
Thus, a stronger test of the proposed model is to
test competing models that estimate other theo-
retically plausible relationships between the con-structs. In our case, we estimated two other com-
peting models. In the ﬁrst of these models, we
considered conﬂict management to be anendogenous construct rather than an exogenous
one the way we have hypothesized. This is
Table 7. Structural model: Parameter estimates
Construct relationship Parameter t-statistic p-value
estimate
Partner ﬁt !learning 0.037 0.826 0.409
Conﬂict management !Learning 0.290 2.629 0.009
Relational capital !Learning 0.607 4.003 0.000
Partner ﬁt !Protecting prop. assets 0.090 1.568 0.119
Conﬂict management !Protecting prop. assets 0.332 2.318 0.020
Relational capital !Protecting prop. assets 0.130 1.493 0.131
Partner ﬁt !Relational capital 0.026 0.907 0.364
Conﬂict management !Relational capital 0.519 3.500 0.001
Copyright Ó2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 21: 217–237 (2000)because theoretically it could be plausible to
argue that better relational capital betweenalliance partners would allow them to manage
conﬂicts more integratively. To test this alterna-
tive argument we estimated a model whereinwe introduced a unidirectional relationship from
relational capital to conﬂict management, while
retaining most of the other relationships in ourproposed model. However, this model, with a GFI
of 0.83 and a signiﬁcant chi-square ( x
2=385,
p,0.00), was an inferior ﬁt as compared to the
original model. We also estimated a model
wherein we dropped both the intermediaterelationships from partner ﬁt and conﬂict man-
agement to relational capital while retaining all
the direct relationships between the explanatoryand dependent variables. This model too, with a
GFI of 0.63 and a signiﬁcant chi-square
(x
2=487,p,0.00), indicated poor ﬁt. The
inferior ﬁt of the other models increased the
overall acceptance of the proposed model.
Statistically, it is possible to estimate several
more models to examine which of them explains
the data best. However, in this paper our primary
goal in using structural modeling is to assess thebasic adequacy of a model that simultaneously
accounts for the multiple dependent relationships
that we theoretically propose, rather than to ex
postidentify the best-ﬁtting model that had not
been theoretically proposed ex ante. It is likely
that other interesting and important relationships
may exist among some of our constructs. For
example, it can be argued that success with learn-ing and/or protection of core assets inﬂuences
relational capital or the ability to manage con-
ﬂicts. However, these relationships address verydifferent questions from the one posed here and
future research would need to develop the theo-
 10970266, 2000, 3, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(200003)21:3<217::AID-SMJ95>3.0.CO;2-Y by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

232P. Kale, H. Singh and H. Perlmutter
retical arguments associated with these relation-
ships in greater detail before estimating the corre-sponding models.
DISCUSSION
Overall our results provide some importantinsights into the dynamics and implications of
alliance management. Although most extant litera-
ture emphasizes structural factors such as partner
ﬁt and equity to explain alliance success, the
results of this study highlight the need to paygreater attention to how a ﬁrm manages the
alliance, post formation, especially with regard to
building relational capital and managing conﬂicts.These aspects of alliance management play a
greater role in explaining and determining key
alliance objectives such as learning and protectingcritical capabilities and skills—objectives that
quite often have been regarded as mutually exclu-
sive. Learning, especially the acquisition ofdifﬁcult-to-codify competencies, is best achieved
through wide-ranging, continuous and intense
contact between individual members of thealliance partners. Relational capital based on mu-
tual trust and respect fosters learning by encour-
aging and facilitating such contact. It alsoincreases the willingness and ability of partners
to engage in a mutual exchange of information
and know-how to achieve reciprocal learning.
Highlighting the role of relational capital, our
results complement the work of other scholarswho have stressed the role of trust and personal
interaction in interorganizational relationships
(Gulati, 1995; Zaheer et al., 1998). We show,
however, that relational capital is linked not only
to alliance success in general, but also to very
speciﬁc and important objectives such as learningand limiting partner opportunism.
Although some alliance research has suggested
that conﬂict management is an inherent andimportant part of most alliances, evidence of effec-
tive outcomes based on conﬂict management is
limited. Our study, however, highlights its impor-tance in enabling the outcomes of interest discussed
here. We see that managing conﬂicts integratively
appears to foster learning in alliances in differentways. The communication and contact-rich manner
of resolving conﬂicts creates a channel for sharing
and learning other useful information and know-
how from the alliance partner. More importantly,
Copyright Ó2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 21: 217–237 (2000)it also seems to inﬂuence the relational capital
between alliance partners, which in turn helps learn-ing. Most theory also suggests that alliances often
raise the possibility of losing critical information
and competencies to the partner. Such losses mayoccur, either because of deliberate and opportunistic
attempts by the partner to absorb such learning, or
because of unexpected leakage through personalinteraction across the alliance interface. Our results
show that integrative conﬂict management helps in
minimizing such occurrence. Close monitoring of
interorganizational interaction to identify potential
conﬂict situations also helps detect and preventpartner behavior that might be directed towards
such goals. Further, we see that conﬂict man-
agement also enhances the relational capitalbetween the alliance partners, which acts as an
informal mechanism to check the leakage or steal-
ing of core proprietary information or know-howacross the alliance interface. It reduces the moti-
vation of each partner to engage in opportunistic
acquisition and internalization of its partners’ skills.
Our ﬁndings are consistent with the relational
view of competitive advantage offered by Dyer
and Singh (1998), who suggest that trust-basedgovernance is an important source of interorgani-
zational rents, because it provides alliance partners
with appropriate incentives to share valuableknowledge with each other. Such rents are sus-
tainable because the relational safeguards are resist-
a n tt oe a s yi m i t a t i o nb yc o m p e t i t i o no w i n gt ot h e
socially complex and idiosyncratic nature of the
exchange relationship. Dyer and Singh (1998) andDyer and Nobeoka (2000) have also argued that
the existence of trust and relational capital between
partners encourages ﬁrms to set up idiosyncraticknowledge-sharing routines to further facilitate the
learning of speciﬁed and agreed-upon information
and know-how between them. In fact, we feel thatinclusion of variables that represent such knowl-
edge-sharing routines will empirically improve
overall model ﬁt quite substantially.
Besides having an impact at the dyadic level
between alliance partners, we believe that
relational capital can also play a signiﬁcant roleat the network level. Certain scholars have argued
that strong interpersonal ties among existing part-
ners create a basis for larger alliance networksto evolve (Gulati and Gargiulo, 1999). Relational
capital that rests upon such ties engenders greater
trust between partners, thereby inducing them to
form more alliances with each other in the future.
 10970266, 2000, 3, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(200003)21:3<217::AID-SMJ95>3.0.CO;2-Y by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Learning and Protection of Proprietary Assets in Alliances 233
It also facilitates each partner to form alliances
with other companies, based on the referrals oftrustworthiness that each partner is ready to give
for its current partners owing to the strong
relational capital between them. Thus relationalcapital opens up greater opportunities for the
ﬁrms concerned to form new linkages and collab-
orations with each other and with other companiesand thereby increase the network of alliances in
which they are embedded (Ahuja, 2000; Gulati
and Gargiulo, 1999).
Relational capital can also inﬂuence the per-
formance of individual ﬁrms embedded in alliancenetworks in several ways. Afuah (2000) argues
that a ﬁrm’s competitive advantage is often ham-
pered when technological change renders thecapabilities of its network of co-opetitors obso-
lete. He goes on to suggest that companies can
potentially minimize damage if they have a meansof detecting such changes in a timely and correct
manner. We have seen that strong relational capi-
tal between partners can foster timely and accur-ate exchange of information across the interface.
It should thus enable individual ﬁrms to identify,
better and faster, technological discontinuities thatmight hamper their co-opetitors and act accord-
ingly to minimize the damage that may result.
Similarly in the context of startups, Baum, Cala-brese, and Silverman (2000) have suggested that
their performance is signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by
the size, composition, and diversity of their
alliance network. Startups with larger and more
diverse networks are expected to enjoy superiorearly performance, because of greater and richer
access to relevant information and capabilities of
such a network. We would like to suggest thatwhile network size and diversity provide a greater
potential for accessing and learning important
information and capabilities, it is the quality ofthe relationship between network partners that
enables true and full realization of this potential.
Startups that build a stronger relational capitalwith their network partners would exhibit higher
performance, all other aspects of the network
remaining the same. Essentially relational capitalat the dyadic level acts as a lubricant for poten-
tially useful and important information to travel
quickly and accurately through the network. Thus,having empirically established the role of
relational capital with respect to learning in a
dyadic exchange, we believe that future research
can further examine its role and impact in net-
Copyright Ó2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 21: 217–237 (2000)work situations, as described in some of the
above situations.
In the network context, Gulati and Lawrence
(1999) have examined value chain alliances
(VCAs), which are vertical links between inde-pendent ﬁrms operating at successive stages in
the production chain. The authors argue that
VCAs are superior to arm’s-length arrangementsor even to vertically integrated ﬁrms because of
their ability to provide high levels of differen-
tiation and integration simultaneously, especially
under conditions of high task and environmental
uncertainty. Integration, which refers to unity ofeffort and information exchange between VCA
partners (Gulati and Lawrence, 1999), enables
them to leverage their differentiated and special-ized capabilities more effectively. Based on our
research, we believe that relational capital and
integrative conﬂict management can play a keyrole in enhancing such integration in VCAs. Mu-
tual interaction and trust that engender relational
capital not only will enable VCA partners towork more unitedly, but also facilitate easier ﬂow
of information and skills between them.
Before we conclude we would like to highlight
several important limitations of this paper. Owing
to practical considerations, like most large-sample
survey research on alliances we too haveresponses, for both the dependent and independent
variables, from just one of the alliance partners.
Ideally it would be beneﬁcial to get an assessment
from all/both partners on aspects like relational
capital or conﬂict management since they relateto aspects concerning both/all partners. It would
be equally interesting to examine how these vari-
ables impact learning opportunities and successof both partners. While strong relational capital
can enhance the learning potential for both part-
ners, actual learning may perhaps differ becauseof differential learning abilities of the concerned
partners. Our data do not allow us to examine
this issue. Second, in this research, we have reliedonly on perceptual measures to assess learning
and protection of core assets. It would be useful
to develop alternative measures for these variablesusing more objective data and examine how they
relate to their corresponding perceptual measures
as well as to the explanatory variables. Forexample, Mowery et al. (1996) have used patent
cross-citations to assess learning in alliances.
Future research could beneﬁt by combining such
objective measures of learning with survey-based
 10970266, 2000, 3, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(200003)21:3<217::AID-SMJ95>3.0.CO;2-Y by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

234P. Kale, H. Singh and H. Perlmutter
perceptual measures to investigate the important
tension that we have highlighted in this paper.Third, it is important to recognize that aspects
like relational capital and learning evolve over
time; so might the relationship between them.Yet, in the current study, we have only cross-
sectional data on these aspects, which limits our
ability to understand the full richness of theirdynamic nature and interaction and to infer strong
causal links between them.
We also believe that there is scope to improve
upon and reﬁne some of the measures that have
been used. This study is one of the few that triesto examine and measure postformation alliance
management aspects like relational capital and
conﬂict management, using survey-basedresearch, and there was little empirical precedent
to develop most of the measures that were used.
Future research can also work towards includingother important variables that might have an impact
upon the dependent variables examined here. For
example, research suggests that learning in allianceswould also be inﬂuenced by the learning/absorptive
capacity of the ﬁrms concerned (Cohen and Levin-
thal, 1990), or the extent to which the partnersestablish knowledge-sharing or learning routines
(Dyer and Singh, 1998) between them. Inclusion of
these variables will improve model ﬁt considerablycompared to some of the models estimated here.
Besides including additional variables, future
research could also examine other theoretical
relationships that might exist between some of the
constructs considered here and estimate whethermodels corresponding to alternate theories provide
better explanation of our data.
CONCLUSION
This paper is one of the few empirical studiesthat explores alliance dynamics at a cross-industry
level and provides some empirical evidence tohighlight the signiﬁcance of alliance management
practices such as managing conﬂicts integratively
and building relational capital. It shows that thesepractices can, in fact, help ﬁrms simultaneously
achieve alliance objectives that are often believed
to be mutually exclusive, i.e., learning criticalskills, capabilities, or information from the partner
and at the same time protecting one from losing
core proprietary assets to the partner.
To the extent that building relational capital
Copyright Ó2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 21: 217–237 (2000)and managing conﬂicts in an integrative manner
are important to the success of alliances, com-panies can beneﬁt substantially by possessing a
superior capability of managing these aspects of
alliance management. Research shows, however,that ﬁrms are quite heterogeneous with respect to
their alliance capabilities and that this heterogen-
eity is linked both to the amount of prior allianceexperience they have had (Anand and Khanna,
2000) and how they learn and leverage from that
experience (Kale and Singh, 1999). It has been
observed that the prior alliance experience of the
ﬁrm is important in being able to build or utilizeappropriate routines and mechanisms to build
relational capital and manage conﬂicts. Future
research needs to explore these important researchquestions in greater detail.
REFERENCES
Afuah, A. (2000). ‘How much do your co-opetitors’
capabilities matter in the face of technologicalchange?’, Strategic Management Journal , Special
Issue,21, pp. 387–404.
Ahuja, G. (1996). ‘Collaboration and innovation: A
longitudinal study of inter-ﬁrm linkages and ﬁrmpatenting in the global advanced materials industry’,Ph.D. dissertation, University of Michigan.
Ahuja, G. (2000). ‘The duality of collaboration: Induce-
ments and opportunities in the formation of interﬁrmalliances’, Strategic Management Journal , Special
Issue,21, pp. 317–343.
Anand, B. and T. Khanna (2000). ‘Do ﬁrms learn to
create value? The case of alliances’, Strategic Manage-
ment Journal , Special Issue, 21, pp. 295–315.
Anderson, E. 1990. Two ﬁrms, one frontier: On
assessing joint venture performance. Sloan Manage-
ment Review ,31(2), pp. 19–30.
Anderson, J. C. and D. W. Gerbing (1988). ‘Structural
modeling in practice: A review and recommendedtwo-step approach’, Psychological Bulletin ,103(3),
pp. 411–423.
Arino, A. and J. de la Torre (1998). ‘Learning from
failure: Towards an evolutionary model of collabo-rative ventures’, Organization Science ,9(3),
pp. 306–325.
Arrow, K. J. (1974). The Limits of Organization . Nor-
ton, New York.
Badaracco, J. L. (1988). General Motor’s Asian Alliances .
Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA.
Badaracco, J. L. (1991). The Knowledge Link . Harvard
Business School Press, Boston, MA.
Bazerman, M. and M. Neal (1984). Negotiating Ration-
ally. Free Press, New York.
Baum, A. C., T. Calabrese and B. Silverman (2000).
‘Don’t go it alone: Alliance network compositionand startups’ performance in Canadian biotechnolo-
 10970266, 2000, 3, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(200003)21:3<217::AID-SMJ95>3.0.CO;2-Y by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Learning and Protection of Proprietary Assets in Alliances 235
gy’,Strategic Management Journal , Special Issue,
21, pp. 267–294.
Beamish, P. J. (1987). ‘Joint ventures in LDCs: Partner
selection and performance’, Management Inter-
national Review ,27, pp. 23–37.
Blau, P. (1977). ‘A macrosociological theory of social
structure’, American Journal of Sociology ,83,
pp. 26–54.
Bleeke, J. and D. Ernst (1991). ‘The way to win in
cross-border alliances’, Harvard Business Review ,
69(6), pp. 127–135.
Borys, B. and D. Jemison (1989). ‘Hybrid arrangements
as strategic alliances: Theoretical issues in organi-zational combinations’, Academy of Management
Review,14, pp. 234–249.
Bradach, J. L. and R. G. Eccles (1989). ‘Markets
versus hierarchies: From ideal types to plural forms’,Annual Review of Sociology ,15, pp. 97–118.
Carmines E. and J. McIver (1981). ‘Analyzing models
with unobserved variables: Analysis of covariance
structures’. In G. Bohrnstedt and E. Borgatta (eds.),Social Measurement: Current Issues . Sage, Beverly
Hills, CA, pp. 61–73.
Cohen, W. and D. Levinthal (1990). ‘Absorptive capacity:
A new perspective on learning and innovation’, Admin-
istrative Science Quarterly ,35, pp.128–152.
Culpan, R. and K. A. Eugene (1993). ‘Cross-national
corporate partnerships: Trends in alliance formation’.In R. Culpan (ed.), Multinational Strategic
Alliances. Hayworth Press, New York, pp. 153–171.
Cummings, T. (1984). ‘Trans-organizational develop-
ment’,Research in Organizational Behavior ,6,
pp. 367–422.
De la Sierra, C. M. (1995). Managing Global Alliances:
Key Steps for Successful Collaboration . Addison-
Wesley, New York.
Deutsch, M. (1969). ‘Conﬂicts: Productive and destruc-
tive’,Journal of Social Issues ,25, pp. 7–41.
Dore, R. (1983). ‘Goodwill and the spirit of market
capitalism’, British Journal of Sociology ,34,p .4 .
Doz, Y. L. (1988). ‘Technology partnerships between
larger and smaller ﬁrms: Some critical issues’. InF. K. Contractor and P. Lorange (eds.), Cooperative
Strategies in International Business . Lexington
Books, Lexington, MA, pp. 169–186.
Doz, Y. (1996). ‘The evolution of cooperation in stra-
tegic alliances: Initial conditions or learning proc-esses’,Strategic Management Journal , Summer Spe-
cial Issue, 17, pp. 55–84.
Doz, Y., and G. Hamel (1998). Alliance Advantage:
The Art of Creating Value through Partnering . Har-
vard Business School Press, Boston, MA.
Dyer, J. (1996). ‘Specialized supplier networks as a
source of competitive advantage: Evidence from theauto industry’, Strategic Management Journal ,
17(4), pp. 271–292.
Dyer, J., and K. Nobeoka (2000). ‘Creating and manag-
ing a high performance knowledge-sharing network:The Toyota case’, Strategic Management Journal ,
Special Issue, 21, pp. 345–367.
Dyer, J. and H. Singh (1998). ‘The relational view:
Cooperative strategy and sources of interorgani-
Copyright Ó2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 21: 217–237 (2000)zational competitive advantage’, Academy of Man-
agement Review ,23(4), pp. 660–679.
Gerbing, D. W. and J. C. Anderson (1988). ‘An
updated paradigm for scale development incorporat-ing unidimensionality and its assessment’, Journal
of Marketing Research ,25, pp. 186–192.
Geringer, J. M. (1988). ‘Partner selection criteria for
developed country joint ventures’, Business Quar-
terly,53, pp. 55–62.
Granovetter, M. (1985). ‘Economic action and social
structure: A theory of embeddedness’, American
Journal of Sociology ,91, pp. 481–510.
Gulati, R. (1995). ‘Does familiarity breed trust? The
implications of repeated ties for contractual choicein alliances’, Academy of Management Journal ,38,
pp. 85–112.
Gulati, R., and M. Gargiulo (1999). ‘Where do inter-
organizational networks come from?’, American
Journal of Sociology , March, pp. 177–231.
Gulati, R. and P. Lawrence (1999). ‘Organizing vertical
networks: A design perspective’, paper presented atthe Special Issue Conference on Strategic Networksat the Kellogg School, Northwestern University.
Hair, J., R. Anderson, R. Tatham, and W. Black (1998).
Multivariate Data Analysis . Macmillan, New York.
Hamel, G. (1991). ‘Competition for competence and
inter-partner learning within international strategicalliances’, Strategic Management Journal , Summer
Special Issue, 12, pp. 83–103.
Harrigan, K. R. (1985). Managing for Joint Venture
Success. Praeger, New York.
Harrigan, K. R. (1988a). ‘Joint ventures: Linking for
a leap forward’, Planning Review ,14, pp. 10–14.
Harrigan, K. R. (1988b). ‘Strategic alliances and partner
asymmetries’, Management International Review ,
28, pp. 53–72.
Hennart, J. (1988). ‘A transaction costs theory of equity
joint ventures’, Strategic Management Journal ,9(4),
pp. 361–374.
Hergert, M. and D. Morris (1987). ‘International
collaborative agreements’, Columbia Journal of
World Business ,22(2), pp. 15–21.
Hill, C. W. L. (1995). ‘National institutional structure,
transaction cost economizing and competitive advan-
tage: The Case of Japan’, Organization Science ,5,
pp. 594–607.
Hladik, K. J. (1988). ‘R&D and international joint
ventures’. In F. J. Contractor and P. Lorange (eds.),Cooperative Strategies in International Business .
Lexington Books, Lexington, MA, pp. 15–21.
Inkpen, A. (1994). ‘The characteristics and performance
of Japanese–North American joint ventures in NorthAmerica’. In S. B. Prasad and R. B. Peterson (eds.),Advances in International Comparative Manage-ment, Vol. 9. JAI Press, Greenwich, CT, pp. 83–108.
Jarillo, C. (1988). ‘On strategic networks’, Strategic
Management Journal ,9(1), pp. 31–41.
Joreskog, K. G. (1969). ‘A general approach to con-
ﬁrmatory maximum likelihood factor analysis’, Psy-
chometrika ,34, pp. 183–202.
Joreskog, K. G. (1971). ‘Statistical analysis of coge-
neric tests’, Psychometrika ,36, pp. 109–133.
 10970266, 2000, 3, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(200003)21:3<217::AID-SMJ95>3.0.CO;2-Y by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

236P. Kale, H. Singh and H. Perlmutter
Joreskog, K. G. and D. Sorbom (1988). LISREL 7 .
SPSS, Chicago, IL.
Kale, P. and H. Singh. (1999). ‘Building alliance capa-
bilities: A knowledge-based approach’, Academy ofManagement Best Paper Proceedings, Chicago, IL.
Khanna, T., R. Gulati and N. Nohria (1998). ‘The
dynamics of learning alliances: Competition,cooperation and relative scope’, Strategic Manage-
ment Journal ,19(3), pp. 193–210.
Killing, J. P. (1982). ‘How to make a global joint
venture work’, Harvard Business Review ,60(3),
pp. 120–127.
Kim, W. C. and R. Mauborgne (1998). ‘Procedural
justice, strategic decision making and the knowledgeeconomy’, Strategic Management Journal ,19(4),
pp. 323–338.
Kogut, B. (1988). ‘A study of the life cycle of joint
ventures’. In F. K. Contractor and P. Lorange (eds.),Cooperative Strategies in International Business .
Lexington Books, Lexington, MA, pp. 169–186.
Kogut, B. and U. Zander (1992). ‘Knowledge of the
ﬁrm, combinative capabilities and the replication oftechnology’, Organization Science ,3, pp. 383–397.
Koh, J. and N. Venkatraman (1991). ‘Joint venture
formations and stock market reactions: An assess-ment in the information technology sector’, Academy
of Management Journal ,34, pp. 869–892.
Macaulay, S. (1963). ‘Non-contractual relations in busi-
ness: A preliminary study’, American Sociological
Review,28, pp. 55–67.
MacNeil, I. (1981). ‘Economic analysis of contractual
relations’, Northwestern University Law Review ,75,
pp. 1018–1063.
Madhok, A. (1995). ‘Opportunism and trust in joint
venture relationships: An exploratory study and amodel’, Scandinavian Journal of Management ,
11(1), pp. 57–74.
Marsden, P. V. (1990). ‘Network data and measurement’,
Annual Review of Sociology ,16, pp. 435–463.
Merchant, H. (1997). ‘International joint venture per-
formance of ﬁrms in the non-manufacturing sector’.In P. Beamish and A. Inkpen (eds.), Cooperative
Strategies . Lexington Books, Lexington, MA,
pp. 428–456.
Mohr, J. and R. Spekman (1994). ‘Characteristics of
partnership success’, Strategic Management Journal ,
15(2), pp. 135–152.
Mowery, D. C., J. E. Oxley and B. S. Silverman
(1996). ‘Strategic alliances and interﬁrm knowledgetransfer’, Strategic Management Journal , Winter
Special Issue, 17, pp. 77–92.
Nelson, R. and S. Winter (1982). An Evolutionary
Theory of Economic Change . Belknap Press, Cam-
bridge, MA.
Nunnally, J. C. (1978). Psychometric Theory (2nd ed.).
McGraw-Hill, New York.
Palay, T. (1985). ‘Avoiding regulatory constraints: Con-
tractual safeguards and the role of informal agree-ments’,Journal of Law, Economics and Organiza-
tions,1, pp. 155–175.
Parkhe, A. (1993). ‘Strategic alliance structuring: A
game theoretic and transaction cost examination of
Copyright Ó2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 21: 217–237 (2000)interﬁrm cooperation’, Academy of Management
Journal,36(4), pp. 794–829.
Piore, M. J. and C. F. Sabel (1984). The Second
Industrial Divide . Basic Books, New York.
Pisano, G. P. (1989). ‘Using equity participation to
support exchange: Evidence from the biotechnologyindustry’, Journal of Law, Economics, and Organi-
zation,5, pp. 109–126.
Pisano, G. P., M. V. Russo and D. Teece (1988). ‘Joint
ventures and collaborative agreements in the telecom-munications equipment industry’. In D. Mowery (ed.),International Collaborative Ventures in US Manufac-turing. Ballinger, Cambridge, MA, pp.23–70.
Powell, W. (1987). ‘Hybrid organizational arrange-
ments: New form or transitional development’, Cali-
fornia Management Review ,30, pp. 67–87.
Prahalad C. K. and G. Hamel (1990). The core com-
petence of the corporation,’ Harvard Business
Review,68(3), pp. 79–91.
Reich, R. B. and E. D. Mankin (1986). ‘Joint ventures
with Japan give away our future’, Harvard Business
Review,64(2), pp. 78–86.
R i n g ,P .S .a n dA .V a nd eV e n( 1 9 8 9 ) .‘ F o r m a la n d
informal dimensions of transactions’. In A. Van deVen, H. Angel, and M. S. Poole (eds.), Research on
the Management of Innovation: The Minnesota Studies .
Ballinger/Harper Row, New York, pp. 171–192.
Ring, P. S. and A. Van de Ven (1992). ‘Structuring
cooperative relationships between organizations’,Strategic Management Journal ,13(7), pp. 483–498.
Sabel, C. (1993). ‘Studied trust: Building new form of
cooperation in a volatile economy’, Human
Relations ,46(9), pp. 1133–1170.
Sako, M. (1991). ‘The role of trust in Japanese buyer–
supplier relationships’, Ricerche Economiche ,45,
pp. 449–474.
Simonin, B. L. (1997). ‘The importance of collaborative
know-how: An empirical test of the learning organi-zation’,Academy of Management Journal ,40(5),
pp. 1150–1174.
Szulanski, G. (1996). ‘Exploring internal stickiness:
Impediments to the transfer of best practice withinthe ﬁrm’, Strategic Management Journal , Winter
Special Issue, 17, pp. 27–43.
Tucchi, C. L. (1996). ‘Firm heterogeneity and perform-
ance of international strategic technology alliances’,working paper, MIT Sloan School of Management.
von Hippel, E. (1988). The Sources of Innovation .
Oxford University Press, New York.
Williamson, O. E. (1985). The Economic Institutions
of Capitalism . Free Press, New York.
Williamson, O. E. (1991). ‘Comparative economic
organization: The analysis of discrete structural alter-natives’, Administrative Science Quarterly ,36,
pp. 269–296.
Yoshino, M. and U. S. Rangan (1995). Strategic
Alliances: An Entrepreneurial Approach to Globali-zation. Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA.
Zaheer, A., B. McEvily and V. Perrone (1998). ‘Does
trust matter? Exploring the effects of interorgani-zational and interpersonal trust on performance’,Organization Science ,9, pp. 1–20.
 10970266, 2000, 3, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(200003)21:3<217::AID-SMJ95>3.0.CO;2-Y by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Learning and Protection of Proprietary Assets in Alliances 237
APPENDIX: List of items used to measure each theoretical construct
Note: Respondents used a 7-point Likert scale to provide responses on each item, such that
‘1=Strongly Disagree and 7 =Strongly Agree’
Reference source
(a) Independent variables
Relational capital (RC)1. There is close, personal interaction between the partners at multiple levels Dyer and Singh (1998);2. The alliance is characterized by mutual respect between the partners at Madhok (1995); Dyer
multiple levels (1996); Gulati (1995);
3. The alliance is characterized by mutual trust between the partners at multiple Inkpen (1994); Badaracco
levels (1991); Mohr and Spekman
4. The alliance is characterized by personal friendship between the partners at (1994)
mulitple levels
5. The alliance is characterized by high reciprocity among the partners
Conﬂict management (CM)
1. An explicit mechanism has been established and used to address or resolve Parkhe (1993); MacNeil
conﬂicts (1981); Mohr and Spekman
2. Managerial interaction between partners is closely monitored for identifying (1994)
potential conﬂicts
3. There is strong two-way communication while resolving conﬂicts4. Great emphasis is placed on dealing with cultural obstatcles while resolving
conﬂicts
5. The partners engage in joint problem solving while resolving conﬂicts6. Top management from both sides is involved in resolving conﬂicts
(B) Controls
Partner ﬁt: Complementarity and compatibility (PP)1. There is high Complementarity between the resources/capabilities of the two Beamish (1987); Harrigan
partners (1988b); Tucchi (1996);
2. There is high similarity/overlap between the core capabilities of each partner Geringer (1988); Parkhe3. The organizational cultures of the two partners are compatible with each (1993); Dyer and Singh
other (1998); De la Sierra (1995)
4. The management and operating styles of the partners are compatible with
each other
Other controls (these three items were not measured with a Likert scale)
1. What was the structure of this alliance (choose one): equity or nonequity?2. Did the partners have other alliances between them, prior to this relationship
(choose one): Yes/No?
3. Do the partners belong to the same nationality (choose one): Yes/No?
(C) Dependent variables
Learning (L)1. Your company learnt or acquired some new or important information from
the partner
2. Your company learnt or acquired some critical capability or skill from the
partner
3. This alliance has helped your company to enhance its existing
capabilities/skills
Protection of proprietary assets (PC)
1. Your company has been able to protect its core capabilities or skills from the
partner
2. Your company has been successful in protecting its crown jewels from being
appropriated by the partner
Copyright Ó2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 21: 217–237 (2000)
 10970266, 2000, 3, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(200003)21:3<217::AID-SMJ95>3.0.CO;2-Y by University College London UCL Library Services, Wiley Online Library on [29/05/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
