TITLE AND ABSTRACT:
Journal of Occupational and Organizational Psychology (2015), 88, 726–749
©2014 The British Psychological Society
www.wileyonlinelibrary.com
Applicant attraction to ﬂexible work
arrangements: Separating the inﬂuence of ﬂextime
and ﬂexplace
Rebecca J. Thompson1*, Stephanie C. Payne2and Aaron B. Taylor3
1University of Baltimore, Maryland, USA
2Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA
3Independent Contractor, Worthington, Ohio, USA
Flexible work arrangements (FWAs) are widely implemented for organizational purposes
including recruitment. Theoretically, these arrangements alter temporal and physical
boundaries around work. However, the time and place dimensions are frequently
confounded in research, making the separate and joint effect of each on various outcomesunclear. To determine the relative importance of FWA dimensions as anticipated
resources, this study experimentally manipulates discretion over when (ﬂextime) and
where (ﬂexplace) one is expected to work on anticipated organizational support (AOS)and organization attraction. Prospective employees ( N=130) participated in a 3 93
within-subject experiment in which they rated nine hypothetical organizations that varied
in ﬂextime and ﬂexplace. Results indicated main effects for both ﬂextime and ﬂexplace on
both AOS and organization attraction with ﬂextime having the stronger impact. Althoughthe combination of a high level of both ﬂextime and ﬂexplace yielded the highest ratings of
AOS and organization attraction, the interaction between ﬂextime and ﬂexplace was not
statistically signiﬁcant, suggesting ﬂextime and ﬂexplace have independent effects onrecruitment outcomes. Relationships between ﬂextime and ﬂexplace and organizational
attraction were slightly stronger for individuals who prefer to integrate their work and
non-work roles. Managerial implications and directions for future research are discussed.
Practitioner points
/C15Potential applicants rate ﬂextime without a required core time as signiﬁcantly more supportive and
attractive than ﬂextime with core time.
/C15Potential applicants rate ﬂextime with a required core time as signiﬁcantly more supportive and
attractive than no ﬂextime.
/C15Potential applicants rate working from home 2 to 3 days a week as signiﬁcantly more supportive and
attractive than not being able to work from home at all.
/C15The supportiveness and attractiveness of ﬂextime does not depend on the supportiveness or
attractiveness of ﬂexplace or vice versa.
*Correspondenc

BOUNDARY SPANNING MATCHES:
[]

LOOKING FOR MEASURES:
['Measures', 'of Eisenberger, Cummings,Armeli, and Lynch’s (1997) Perceived Organizational Support Scale, AOS was measuredwith the following three items: ‘This organization would really care about my well-being’,', 'Organization attraction was measured using three items used in other recruitment studies(Aiman-Smith, Bauer, & Cable, 2001; Harold & Pl', 'models. The multilevel structure was used to take into account the clustering of repeatedmeasures within individuals. For hierarchical random effects models, explained varianceis calculated as the', '4Perceived discretion over where and when one would be able to work was measured with one item each (Kossek et al. , 2006,']