three opening phrases. Table 2 shows the items included in
the final factor solution along with their factor loadings.
The results of the study strongly support the three
dimensions of directive modification intention that we have
set forth. Because the same three ending phrases emerged
in each factor, we have substantial evidence that each
dimension indicated by the opening phrases create a sign ‐
ificant difference in the mind of the respondents. Further
testing was conducted through a confirmatory analysis and
an examination of scale validity.
Study 3B: confirmatory factor analysis and validity tests
In Study 3B, we seek to further confirm and validate a scale
for empirically capturing the three distinct dimensions of
Table 2. Exploratory factor analysis results.
Factor
loading
Factor 1: Self-focused directive modification intentions Compared to my individual goals , including those assigned by
my employer (e.g. quotas) and those I have personally set for myself, I would treat the directive to promote this
product as …
A rule to be broken …… .A rule to be followed 0.60578
Something to be circumvented …… .Something to be accepted 0.58006
A loose guideline …… .A rule set in stone 0.64018
Factor 2: Customer-focused directive modification intentions Compared to my role as an advocate for this customer ,I
would treat the directive to promote this product as …
A rule to be broken …… .A rule to be followed 0.78768
Something to be circumvented …… .Something to be accepted 0.80083
A loose guideline …… .A rule set in stone 0.73971
Factor 3: Organization-focused directive modification intentions Compared to my role as an employee that looks out for
the best interests of my organization, I would treat the directive to promote this product as …
A rule to be broken …… .A rule to be followed 0.81175
Something to be circumvented …… .Something to be accepted 0.83019
A loose guideline …… .A rule set in stone 0.79365212 G. McAmis et al.
directive modification intentions (from within the same
sample as Study 2). The 9-item, 3-factor structure that
emerged in the exploratory factor analysis was submitted to
a confirmatory factor analysis. An inspection of model fit
revealed reasonable, if mixed, results. GFI is 0.8929,
RMSEA is 0.1391, CFI is 0.9523, NNI is 0.9285, and χ2
is 304.8931. Although the RMSEA is noticeably higher
than the generally accepted cut-off of 0.08 (Hatcher 1994 ),
other indices such as CFI and NNI indicate a good fit for the
model. Additionally, each item loaded significantly on its
designated factor.
To further test the legitimacy of our findings, a number
of other validity tests were run on the factor analysis resu ‐
lts. The composite reliability of each factor, factor load ‐
ings of each item in the model, and Cronbach ’s alpha are
displayed in Table 3 . The numbers indicate that the three
dimensions are reliable and that each item significantly
loads onto its dimension. The composite reliability for each
factor exceeds 0.918, well above the generally accepted
minimum of 0.7 (Fornell and Larcker 1981 ; Hatcher 1994 ).
Content validity and construct validity were used as the
criteria for determining the validity of the scale aimed at
capturing directive modification (Ping 2004 ). Construct
validity is composed of two parts: discriminant validity and
convergent validity. Based on the high inter-item correla-
tions, the proposed measures for directive modification
appear to be content valid.
Discriminant validity was tested in two ways. First, a
chi-square difference test was conducted (Anderson and
Gerbing 1988 ). The chi-square of the standard measure ‐ment model in which all factors are allowed to co-vary was
compared to the chi-square of measurement models in
which the correlation between two of the factors was fixed.
This test was run for each possible pair of factors. In each
instance, the difference between chi-square values for the
standard model and modified model were significant at the
p< 0.001 level, indicating discriminant validity. Second,
the factors were subjected to a variance extracted test in
which the average variance extracted for two factors is
compared to the square of the correlation between them
(Fornell and Larcker 1981 ). For each possible pairing, the
variance extracted of both variables exceeded the squared
correlation between them, also suggesting discriminant
validity.
Convergent validity was subjected to multiple analyt-
ical tests as well. First, the average variance extracted of
each dimension was calculated. Each of these values
exceeded the recommended 0.50 threshold, signifying that
the measure explains significantly more variance than
does measurement error (Fornell and Larcker 1981 ). This
indicates convergent validity. Additionally, the t-tests for
each factor loading were assessed. In all cases, the
calculated t-values were 26.5929 or higher also suggesting
convergent validity.
Study 3 provides strong evidence confirming the stre ‐
ngth of the directive modification measurement items.
Although the confirmatory factor analysis yielded some
inconsistent findings, the rest of the tests provide robust
results supporting the validity of the three proposed dim ‐
ensions.
Table 3. Composite reliability (CR), Average variance extracted (AVE), and factor loadings.
CR AVECronbach ’s
AlphaFactor
loading
Factor 1: Self-focused directive modification intentions Compared to my individual goals ,
including those assigned by my employer (e.g. quotas) and those I have personally set for
myself, I would treat the directive to promote this product as …0.918 0.898 0.922
A rule to be broken …… .A rule to be followed 0.8928
Something to be circumvented …… .Something to be accepted 0.8981