B2B digital platform capability and sustainable positioning: Do knowledge 
depth, knowledge breadth, and agility matter?
Adeel Khalid a, Muhammad Usman b, Huda Khan c,d,*, Muhammad Waheed Akhtar e
a Business School, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK
b College of Business Administration, University of Sharjah, United Arab Emirates
c Africa Asia Centre for Sustainability, Business School, MacRobert Building, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen AB24 3FX, UK
d InnoLab, University of Vaasa, Finland
e Rabat Business School, International University of Rabat, Morocco
A R T I C L E  I N F O
Keywords:
Digital platform capabilities
Digital platform integration capability
Digital platform reconfiguration capability
Sustainable positioning
Knowledge depth
Knowledge breadth
Organizational agility
Leader boundary-spanning behavior
A B S T R A C T
Given the growing importance of B2B digital platform capabilities for competitive advantage, research on its 
antecedents and outcomes in the business-to-business context remains scarce. To address this gap, we built on 
dynamic capability theory to examine how B2B organizations’ digital platform capabilities contribute to sus­
tainable positioning. Specifically, we examined the direct and indirect associations (via organizational knowl­
edge depth, breadth, and agility) between digital platform capabilities and sustainable positioning. Additionally, 
we explored the moderating role of leader boundary-spanning behaviors in the relationship between digital 
platform capabilities and organizational knowledge depth and breadth. Our study based on two-source survey 
data from top management in Chinese manufacturing firms. The findings fully support all our proposed hy­
potheses. Digital platform capabilities significantly enhance sustainable positioning, both directly and through 
improved organizational knowledge depth, breadth, and agility. Furthermore, leader boundary-spanning be­
haviors strengthen the impact of digital platform capabilities on both knowledge depth and breadth. These in­
sights offer practical implications for B2B firms seeking to leverage digital platform capabilities to enhance 
knowledge depth, breadth, agility, and sustainable market positioning.
1. Introduction
Sustainability is a current area of attention for academics, practi­
tioners, and policymakers alike (Gogia, Gupta, & Rathi, 2023; Van Loo 
et al., 2015). In the business-to-business (B2B) domain, environmental 
concerns are crucial because the firms involved use more resources and 
their manufacturing processes place a greater burden on the environ­
ment than their business-to-consumers (B2C) counterparts (Kapitan, 
Kennedy, & Berth, 2019). Due to mounting pressure from the govern­
ment, environmental organizations, and stakeholders. According to 
Usman, Del Giudice, Papa, Singh, and Khalid (2025), most consumers 
consider the environmental consequences of their buying decisions. 
Therefore—and due to mounting pressure from governments, environ­
mental organizations, and stakeholders—the majority of B2B buyers 
prefer to buy products and services from organizations that integrate 
and promote sustainable business practices in their business operations 
(Casidy & Lie, 2023; Gogia et al., 2023). As such, B2B firms focus more 
on sustainable positioning, which has emerged as an important mar­
keting and strategic tool suited to exhibit their commitment to sustain­
able practices and to differentiate themselves from their rivals (Costa & 
Azevedo, 2024; Kapitan et al., 2019).
In response to competitive pressure, many B2B enterprises adopt and 
use digital platforms to achieve market advantage. The literature high­
lights how digital platforms are integral to firms’ value propositions, 
transforming the way they succeed by providing global reach and 
enabling connections with customers, partners, and suppliers (Shree, 
Singh, Paul, Hao, & Xu, 2021). Digital platforms have revolutionized the 
ways in which organizations function and have enabled the establish­
ment of distinct communities through streamlined online marketplaces 
(Bonina, Koskinen, Eaton, & Gawer, 2021). Notably, digital plat­
forms—which make it possible for firms to easily communicate with 
external partners (Cenamor, Parida, & Wincent, 2019)—are key tools for 
the implementation of sustainable and innovative strategies (Wang, 
Wan, Ma, Zhou, & Chen, 2023). Prior studies have revealed that digital 
* Corresponding author at: Africa Asia Centre for Sustainability, Business School, MacRobert Building, University of Aberdeen, AB24 3FX, UK
E-mail address: huda.khan@abdn.ac.uk (H. Khan). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Industrial Marketing Management
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/indmarman
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2025.08.005
Received 13 November 2024; Received in revised form 27 July 2025; Accepted 21 August 2025  
Industrial Marketing Management 130 (2025) 46–59 
Available online 10 September 2025 
0019-8501/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 

platforms can improve sustainable development by fostering networks, 
knowledge exchange, and value co-creation (Hellemans, Porter, & 
Diriker, 2022; Wang et al., 2023). According to 
Hellemans et al. 
(2022), digital platforms can assist in striking a balance between envi­
ronmental goals and economic gains, enabling businesses to optimize 
their operations in sustainable ways; as such, they serve as channels 
suited to create awareness about environmental initiatives and help 
businesses to integrate sustainable practices into their operations, pro­
cedures, and processes. Overall, sustainable positioning is important in 
fostering the growth of platform-based B2B enterprises and in creating 
long-term value for stakeholders.
Previous studies have made valuable contributions by revealing 
some of the significant outcomes of sustainable firm positioning. For 
instance, they have suggested that sustainable positioning influences 
buyer willingness to pay premium prices and switching intentions 
(Casidy & Lie, 2023; Casidy & Yan, 2022). Additionally, it enhances 
brand image, consumer loyalty, and sustainability promotion (Cantele & 
Zardini, 2018; Casidy & Lie, 2023). Sustainable positioning offers op­
portunities for firms in relation to developing new product offerings 
(Costa & Azevedo, 2024; Shashi, Centobelli, Cerchione, & Mittal, 2021) 
for business success (Lee & Park, 2016). Sustainable positioning plays a 
key role in the survival and long-term success of firms because it helps 
them stand out and gain competitive advantage as a result of their 
sustainable actions (Bocken, Short, Rana, & Evans, 2014; Casidy & Yan, 
2022). Studies have also indicated that incorporating sustainable actions 
and activities into firms’ business operations, strategies, and stakeholder 
communication is important for sustainable positioning (Hu, Chong, & 
Wang, 2019; Rahman, Bag, Gupta, & Sivarajah, 2023). Contrasting the 
prevailing scholarly focus on the outcomes of firms’ sustainable posi­
tioning, relatively little research has hitherto been conducted on the 
antecedents of sustainable firm positioning in the B2B context. 
Addressing this gap is important because a lack of understanding of how 
sustainable positioning can be achieved may impede organizations’ 
competitive advantage (Shashi et al., 2021) and inhibit their endeavors 
to protect the natural environment (Bocken et al., 2014; Casidy & Yan, 
2022). Moreover, without a comprehensive of these antecedents, firms 
may find it challenging to drive sustainability-focused innovations, 
enhance resource efficiency, and build stakeholder trust.
Based on the aforementioned knowledge gaps and in response to 
recent calls (Liao, Chen, Chen, & Song, 2024; Liu, Long, Fan, Wan, & Liu, 
2023; Wang et al., 2023), we drew from the dynamic capability theory 
perspective (Teece, Pisano, & Shuen, 1997) to propose a positive rela­
tionship between digital platform capabilities and sustainable posi­
tioning. Digital platform capabilities refer to the skills whereby 
organizations build connections with other businesses via online plat­
forms (Cenamor et al., 2019; Liao et al., 2024; Wang, Tian, Li, & Xiao, 
2022). According to Cenamor et al. (2019), digital platform capabilities 
comprise those pertaining to integration and reconfiguration. Digital 
platform integration capabilities are explained as the skills needed to 
share distinctive information within and across firms, which, in turn, 
enhances communication and collaboration (Cenamor et al., 2019; Liao 
et al., 2024). Digital platform reconfiguration capabilities refer to the 
skills required to reorganize platform resources using standardized in­
terfaces and modular design in procedures, functions, and applications 
(Cenamor et al., 2019; Liao et al., 2024).
Specifically, we considered digital platform capabilities (i.e., inte­
gration and reconfiguration skills) because dynamic capability theory 
underlines their strong potential to bring change to current firm re­
sources, external environments, and ecosystems (Barreto, 2010). Addi­
tionally, dynamic capability theory posits that firms sense and seize 
opportunities and reconfigure resources and structures to make market- 
oriented and timely decisions (Teece, 2007). The main focus of digital 
platform capabilities (i.e., integration and reconfiguration) is on inte­
grating valuable firm resources to deal with changing market environ­
ments, leading to improved firm performance (Cenamor et al., 2019; Liu 
et al., 2023). As such, we contended that digital platform integration and 
reconfiguration capabilities enable B2B firms to respond to customer 
preferences for green products and to international pressure to reduce 
their carbon footprints.
Furthermore, in explaining how digital platform capabilities lead to 
sustainable positioning in the B2B context, organizational knowledge 
depth and breadth and organizational agility are proposed as mediation 
mechanisms in the relationship between digital platform capabilities 
and sustainable positioning. Knowledge breadth is understood as the 
range of areas or domains within which an organization is knowledge­
able, such as target markets, technologies, and customers (Laursen & 
Salter, 2006; Yao, Li, & Liang, 2021). Knowledge depth is explained as 
the amount of knowledge held by an organization within the specific 
domains or fields that make up its key business focus (Laursen & Salter, 
2006; Xu, 2015; Yao et al., 2021). We considered knowledge breadth 
and depth because previous studies have indicated that they comple­
ment each other and play a central role in firm performance (Moorthy & 
Polley, 2010; Yang, Jin, & Sheng, 2017) and innovation (Xu, 2015). 
Knowledge depth is important because it is deeply ingrained in orga­
nizational processes and is hard to decontextualize and emulate, 
enabling mastery and groundbreaking advancements. At the same time, 
knowledge breadth widens organizational perspectives, encouraging 
cross-disciplinary insights and the ability to pivot in evolving market 
dynamics (Kim, Im, & Slater, 2013). Collectively, knowledge depth and 
breadth enable the development of robust foundations, allowing firms to 
navigate complexities, innovate continuously, and remain agile amid 
ever-changing business landscapes (Claudy, Peterson, & Pagell, 2016; Li 
& Calantone, 1998; Wang, Yin, Coles, & Chen, 2024).
Organizational agility represents a firm’s ability to rapidly change or 
adapt in response to changing environments and market forces (Tallon & 
Pinsonneault, 2011; Zahoor, Khan, Donbesuur, Khan, & Rajwani, 2024). 
More precisely, organizational agility is explained as the close coordi­
nation among a business and its stakeholders that enables it to respond 
to unpredictable and continuously changing market dynamics (Cegarra- 
Navarro, Soto-Acosta, & Wensley, 2016; Khan, 2020; Khan, Khan, & 
Knight, 2025; Van Oosterhout, Waarts, & Van Hillegersberg, 2006). We 
considered organizational agility because it is crucial in enabling orga­
nizations to achieve their objectives in uncertain environments (Van 
Oosterhout et al., 2006). Studies have suggested that organizational 
agility enables firms to develop superior products and services (Cegarra- 
Navarro et al., 2016) and enhance their performance (Khan, 2020; 
Salehzadeh, Pool, Mohseni, & Tahani, 2017) in highly dynamic envi­
ronments (Nijssen & Paauwe, 2012). Furthermore, organizational agil­
ity has the potential to enable firms to efficiently redirect and redeploy 
their resources, strategies, and structures, ensuring that they remain 
aligned with any evolving trends and opportunities (Teece, Peteraf, & 
Leih, 2016). Consequently, firms seize emerging prospects and chal­
lenges, such as increasing stakeholder pressure and demands for eco- 
friendly products and services. As such, we contended that knowledge 
depth and breadth make firms more agile, ultimately aiding them in 
positioning themselves as more sustainable and eco-friendlier.
Finally, we contended that the influence of digital platform capa­
bilities on knowledge depth and breadth is contingent on leader 
boundary-spanning behaviors. Leader boundary-spanning behavior re­
fers to the efforts made by leaders to develop long-term relationships 
with key external market actors—such as other firms, suppliers, and 
customers—to the end of obtaining valuable information, resources, and 
support suited to achieve work unit tasks and objectives (Kim, Lee, & 
Yun, 2022; Marrone, Tesluk, & Carson, 2007). We considered leader 
boundary-spanning behavior because individuals highly capable of 
engaging in them are particularly suited to contribute to creative firm 
performance (Zheng & Ahmed, 2022) and innovative behaviors (Zhu, 
Xin, & Li, 2023). Further, as they comprise unique and broad ranges of 
externally oriented activities, leader boundary-spanning behavior assist 
firms in acquiring resources (e.g., organizational knowledge), mapping 
their external environments, and organizing tasks with other entities 
(Guo, Heidl, Hollenbeck, Yu, & Howe, 2022). Consequently, such 
A. Khalid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Industrial Marketing Management 130 (2025) 46–59 
47 

unique behaviors contribute to the survival and overall success of firms 
(Marrone, Quigley, Prussia, & Dienhart, 2022). Prior research has 
indicated that leader boundary-spanning behavior yield various positive 
outcomes such as cross-boundary collaborations, collaborative innova­
tion, and interfirm performance (Liu, Jiang, Chen, Pan, & Lin, 2018). As 
such, we inferred that, compared to others, leaders capable of engaging 
in boundary-spanning behaviors may develop and maintain relation­
ships with external entities and acquire any support they need to more 
effectively use and integrate digital platform capabilities, ultimately 
contributing to the enhancement of organizational knowledge depth and 
depth.
Our study contributes to four important literature streams in the B2B 
context. First, it offers key insights for research on sustainable firm 
positioning in the B2B domain. Whereas previous studies have high­
lighted the intra-firm factors that contribute to sustainable positioning 
(Gogia et al., 2023; Kapitan et al., 2019), ours shows that digital plat­
form capabilities can play a key role in sustainable firm positioning, 
extending the literature on its antecedents in the B2B context. Second, 
the literature on digital platform capabilities has largely focused on how 
they influence firm innovation performance, sustainability-oriented in­
novations, and economic outcomes (Cenamor et al., 2019; Jiang, Yang, 
& Gai, 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023). However, the role 
played by digital platforms or inter-firm-related factors has hitherto 
received little attention (Casidy & Lie, 2023; Casidy & Yan, 2022; Gogia 
et al., 2023). To the best of our knowledge, prior studies have pre­
dominantly neglected to investigate how digital platform capabilities 
help B2B firms to achieve sustainable positioning. Thus, our study ex­
tends the literature on the nomological network of the outcomes of 
digital platform capability (Casidy & Lie, 2023; Casidy & Yan, 2022). 
Third, our study highlights the important yet overlooked role played by 
organizational knowledge depth and breadth and organizational agility 
as serial mediators in the relationship between digital platform capa­
bilities and sustainable firm positioning. In doing so, it contributes to the 
literature on organizational knowledge depth and breadth (Claudy et al., 
2016; Yang et al., 2017), as well as to that on organization agility 
(Hoonsopon & Puriwat, 2019; Pulakos, Kantrowitz, & Schneider, 2019). 
Finally, our study underlines the role played by leader boundary- 
spanning behavior in enhancing the effectiveness of digital platform 
capabilities for organizational knowledge depth and breadth. While the 
literature has demonstrated that leader boundary-spanning behavior is 
associated with several positive outcomes, such as interfirm collabora­
tion, innovation, and economic performance (Liu et al., 2018), we 
contribute to it by identifying leader boundary-spanning behavior as a 
boundary condition in the relationship between digital platform capa­
bilities and organizational knowledge. Our proposed model is depicted 
in Fig. 1.
2. Theory and hypotheses development
2.1. Dynamic capability view
To illuminate the relationships proposed in our study, we drew in­
sights from dynamic capability theory (Teece et al., 1997), since it is 
more robust, strategic, and flexible framework over resource-based view 
(Wu, 2010). Dynamic capability view is deemed more appropriate in 
uncertain, complex, and constantly changing settings due to its focus on 
the firm ability to adapt, reconfigure, and innovate over time (Vogel & 
Güttel, 2013). It highlights the importance of adaptability, reconfiguring 
existing resources, developing new expertise and skills to address 
changing business landscapes (Teece et al., 1997). However, resource- 
based view is more appropriate in stable settings, where the focus of 
the firm is more on existing capabilities and resources rather than the 
ongoing process of transformation (Wu, 2010).
The dynamic capability view underlines the importance of any 
competencies and capabilities suited to transform a firm’s current re­
sources, operations, procedures, and business environment (Ambrosini 
& Bowman, 2009; Teece et al., 1997); more precisely, a company’s ca­
pacity to innovate and adjust in response to internal and external 
changes (Bowman & Ambrosini, 2003; Wu, 2010). Dynamic capabilities 
emerge from a firm’s procedures, practices, and activities intended to 
integrate, develop, and reconfigure its internal and external compe­
tencies to deal with evolving and constantly changing business settings 
(Bogers, Chesbrough, Heaton, & Teece, 2019; Teece et al., 1997). Bar­
reto (2010) defined a firm’s dynamic capabilities as the problem-solving 
skills that stem from its inclination to identify opportunities and chal­
lenges, make timely and market driven decisions, and continuously 
improve its resource base.
Dynamic capabilities are made up of three fundamental elements: 
sensing, seizing, and reconfiguring (Teece, 2007). Sensing is viewed as 
an organization’s ability to uncover and recognize opportunities both 
internally and across its entire business value network and ecosystem. 
(Teece, 2007). It includes activities such as identifying customers and 
business needs, developing R&D and technology, staying up to date, and 
paying attention to any innovations introduced by business partners 
(Teece, 2007). To attain a competitive edge and foster expansion, 
companies proactively seek out business prospects across their internal 
and external networks (Teece, 2007). Seizing, which occurs once a 
company has sensed an opportunity, is described as the act of realizing 
that opportunity’s potential and value (Teece, 2007). More specifically, 
it involves determining enterprise boundaries and taking proactive ac­
tions aimed at capitalizing new trends, changes in the industry, and 
evolving business needs (Teece, 2007). Finally, reconfiguring entails the 
adaptation, modification, adjustment, and reorganization of a firm’s 
resources, capabilities, and structure in response to any changes in 
external settings (Teece, 2007). Indeed, reconfiguration is required to 
ensure that a company efficiently takes advantage of any identified 
opportunities and mitigates any sensed risks. To put it briefly, the dy­
namic capability view emphasizes the importance of staying updated 
about opportunities, taking the proactive steps needed to seize them, 
and modifying the organizational structure, operational procedures, and 
processes to take full advantage of any identified business prospects.
2.2. Digital B2B platform capabilities and sustainable firm positioning
In this study, we drew upon dynamic capability theory to explain the 
relationship between digital platform capabilities (i.e., integration and 
reconfiguration) and sustainable firm positioning. According to dynamic 
capability theory, firms should identify any opportunities and novel 
trends that present themselves in both the internal and external settings 
that support their survival and success, plan proactive strategic initia­
tives, and make changes to their structures and procedures in order to 
take advantage of such opportunities (Teece, 2007). Notably, organi­
zational capabilities play a role in creating and delivering the superior 
Fig. 1. The conceptual model.
A. Khalid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Industrial Marketing Management 130 (2025) 46–59 
48 

technological value suited to enable businesses to innovate, adapt to 
changes, and enhance competitiveness and performance to achieve 
strategic goals in dynamic business settings (Nasution & Mavondo, 
2008). In this study, we chose digital platform capabilities because of 
their suitability to aid firms in achieving sustainable goals by fostering 
technological innovation, operational efficiency, and sustainability- 
driven process innovation (Wang et al., 2023). Dynamic capability 
theory suggests that, to achieve long-term success and a sustainable 
competitive advantage, a firm must recognize any business opportu­
nities, develop plans to take advantage of them, and adjust and align its 
procedures and practices with the changing business environment 
(Ambrosini & Bowman, 2009).
Digital platform integration capabilities encompass seamlessly con­
necting IT systems, enabling real-time data sharing, and aggregating 
sustainability-related information (Hellemans et al., 2022). Firms 
endowed with digital platform integration capabilities successfully 
develop data-driven decision-making processes, enhance automation, 
and optimize resource utilization to achieve organizational goals (Liao 
et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2022). As such, digital platform integration 
capabilities allow firms to access updated data and precise 
sustainability-related insights, facilitating their achievement of sus­
tainable positioning. By enhancing internal data integration and 
streamlining sustainability efforts, businesses can optimize internal re­
sources, reduce inefficiencies, and enhance sustainability outcomes 
(Inigo, Ritala, & Albareda, 2020; Wang et al., 2023). Digital platform 
capabilities also strengthen firms’ ability to track, coordinate, and 
respond to sustainability challenges using digital tools, ensuring timely 
adaptation to environmental opportunities (Hellemans et al., 2022).
Digital platform reconfiguration capabilities, meanwhile, enable 
firms to continuously adapt and refine their digital resources, ensuring 
alignment with evolving sustainability demands (Wang et al., 2023). 
From a dynamic capability perspective, digital platform reconfiguration 
capabilities empower firms to upgrade IT infrastructure, reconfigure 
technological resources, and implement new digital solutions in 
response to emerging market and environmental changes (Hellemans 
et al., 2022). In other words, technological resource reconfiguration 
fosters sustainability-driven process optimization, enabling firms to 
enhance eco-friendly practices and implement energy-efficient digital 
solutions, thereby driving sustainable firm positioning. Notably, digital 
platform reconfiguration capabilities allow businesses to deploy and 
integrate emerging technologies, refine internal workflows, and opti­
mize digital tools (Cenamor et al., 2019) to enhance sustainability ef­
forts. Firms that adopt modular IT applications, implement 
sustainability tracking tools, and continuously refine their technological 
infrastructure can position their business as more sustainable (Wang 
et al., 2023). Indeed, digital platform reconfiguration capabilities assist 
businesses in rethinking and optimizing internal sustainability opera­
tions and processes, contributing to sustainable positioning. Thus, we 
argue that digital platform capabilities enable firms to integrate tech­
nological solutions, optimize sustainability practices, and enhance dig­
ital adaptability, thereby improving their sustainable positioning. Based 
on the above arguments, we formulated the following hypotheses. 
Hypothesis 1a.
. There is a positive relationship between B2B digital 
platform integration capabilities and sustainable positioning.
Hypothesis 1b.
. There is a positive relationship between B2B digital 
platform reconfiguration capabilities and sustainable positioning.
2.3. Digital platform capabilities and organizational knowledge depth and 
breadth
Using the lens of dynamic capability theory, we explicated how 
digital platform capabilities (i.e., integration and reconfiguration) 
contribute to organizational knowledge depth and breadth. According to 
Teece (2007), dynamic capability theory focuses on an organization’s 
ability to manage, integrate, and leverage resources to successfully 
navigate and quickly adapt to changing business situations. Dynamic 
capability theory posits that digital platform integration and reconfi­
guration capabilities are significant resources suited to enhance market 
knowledge and achieve sustainable goals and long-term success. Digital 
platform capabilities enhance dynamic capabilities by strengthening a 
firm’s ability to acquire, integrate, and apply knowledge. Grounded in 
dynamic capability theory, businesses with strong digital platform ca­
pabilities can identify key knowledge trends through data-driven in­
sights, capitalize on them by analysing and applying domain-specific 
information, and adapt their knowledge base to sustain expertise in key 
area. Digital platform integration and reconfiguration capabilities 
enable firms to access and exploit market data and information from 
various internal and external sources (Cenamor et al., 2019). By inte­
grating these diverse data, a firm can gain in-depth knowledge in 
particular areas of expertise and acquire a broader perspective on 
market trends, customer attitudes and behaviors, and technological 
advancements, thereby enriching its organizational knowledge depth 
and breadth. Indeed, digital platform integration and reconfiguration 
capabilities enable firms to rapidly adapt to evolving business situations, 
make informed decisions, and collaborate with other firms, thus 
enhancing the exchange of ideas, expertise, skills, and professional 
practices that can enhance knowledge depth and breadth.
Prior research has suggested that digital platform capabilities (i.e., 
integration and reconfiguration) enhance service innovation (Wang 
et al., 2022) and positively contribute to small and medium-sized en­
terprises’ (SMEs) network capabilities and performance (Cenamor et al., 
2019). According to Liu et al. (2023), digital platform capabilities drive 
organizational, technological innovation and enable firms to respond 
better to highly changeable market needs. Further, firms can develop or 
integrate digital platform capabilities to design innovative and novel 
strategies in fast-changing environments (Liu et al., 2023), which ulti­
mately facilitates them in expanding their knowledge bases. As such, we 
contended that digital platform integration and reconfiguration capa­
bilities contribute to organizational knowledge breadth and depth. 
Hypothesis 2a.
. The B2B digital platform integration capability is 
positively related to organizational knowledge depth.
Hypothesis 2b.
. The B2B digital platform integration capability is 
positively related to organizational knowledge breadth.
Hypothesis 3a.
. The B2B digital platform reconfiguration capability 
is positively related to organizational knowledge depth.
Hypothesis 3b.
. The B2B digital platform reconfiguration capability 
is positively related to organizational knowledge breadth.
2.4. Organizational knowledge depth and breadth and organizational 
agility
Dynamic capability theory (Teece, 2007) underscores the pivotal 
role played by organizational adaptation in securing competitive ad­
vantages in dynamic environments, suggesting that organizations 
continuously evolve and adjust to changing circumstances. The theory 
suggests that organizations develop dynamic capabilities, i.e., processes 
and routines that enable them to integrate, build, and reconfigure their 
internal and external competencies in order to address rapidly changing 
environments (Teece, 2007). Based on the dynamic capability view, we 
conceptualized organizational agility as a significant dynamic capability 
suited to enable firms to adapt to changing market conditions and re­
quirements. Scholars investigating dynamic capabilities have acknowl­
edged that knowledge is pivotal in developing them (Easterby-Smith & 
Prieto, 2008). They have asserted that the foundation of a firm’s capa­
bilities (e.g., its organizational agility) is continually formed by its ca­
pacity to generate, assimilate, transfer, and apply knowledge (Easterby- 
Smith & Prieto, 2008; Teece, 2007). Knowledge facilitates the integra­
tion, development, and reconfiguration of both internal and external 
competencies, enabling organizations to effectively respond to evolving 
A. Khalid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Industrial Marketing Management 130 (2025) 46–59 
49 

market conditions, technological advancements, and competitive pres­
sures (Easterby-Smith & Prieto, 2008; Khalid et al., 2025). Through the 
lens of dynamic capability theory, firms with deep domain-specific 
knowledge can better identify industry trends, anticipate challenges, 
and adapt to disruptions, enabling informed decision-making, proactive 
responses, and sustained competitive advantage. Moreover, knowledge 
depth and breadth enhance a firm’s ability to capitalize on opportunities 
by developing specialized solutions and optimizing resource allocation 
for greater adaptability. Through continuous learning and expertise 
refinement, firms can evolve their internal capabilities to sustain agility 
in dynamic markets. Studies have suggested that the possession of deep 
knowledge within specific domains enables organizations to refine their 
processes, enhance efficiency, and capitalize on their core competencies, 
thereby fostering agility in responding to familiar challenges or oppor­
tunities (Moorthy & Polley, 2010; Yang et al., 2017). By continually 
refining and expanding their depth of knowledge in key areas, organi­
zations can thus develop the capacity to quickly adapt to changes in their 
operating environments.
Knowledge breadth complements knowledge depth by fostering dy­
namic capabilities related to exploration and innovation. A broad 
knowledge base equips an organization with a set of perspectives, in­
sights, and resources that enable it to explore new markets, technolo­
gies, and strategic directions (Moorthy & Polley, 2010; Xu & Cavusgil, 
2019). Organizations endowed with wide-ranging knowledge can 
identify emerging opportunities, anticipate potential threats, and adapt 
their strategies by actively seeking out and experimenting with novel 
ideas and approaches (Xu, 2015). This capacity for exploration and 
experimentation enhances organizational agility by enabling organiza­
tions to navigate uncertainty, capitalize on new opportunities, and 
effectively respond to disruptive forces in the market landscape. Indeed, 
organizational knowledge depth and breadth improve problem-solving 
skills, encourage creativity and adaptation, facilitate learning, skills, 
and information exchanges, and shape business processes, procedures, 
and structures (Claudy et al., 2016; Li & Calantone, 1998). Conse­
quently, organizations can gain the ability to respond to market op­
portunities and challenges in rapidly changing environments. As such, 
drawing on dynamic capability theory, we argued that knowledge depth 
and breadth play important roles in developing organizational agility. 
Thus, we formulated the following hypotheses. 
Hypothesis 4a.
. There is a positive relationship between knowledge 
depth and organizational agility.
Hypothesis 4b.
. There is a positive relationship between knowledge 
breadth and organizational agility.
2.5. Organizational agility and sustainable positioning
Dynamic capability theory underscores the pivotal role played by 
dynamic capabilities as the mechanisms through which organizations 
continuously evolve and adjust to changing circumstances (Teece, 
2007). In the context of dynamic capability theory, organizational 
agility can be seen as a manifestation of an organization’s dynamic ca­
pabilities, that assist firms to integrate, build, and reconfigure internal 
and external resources in response to changing circumstances. As a key 
dynamic capability, organizational agility enhances firms’ responsive­
ness to sustainability risks, regulatory changes, and evolving stake­
holder expectations. Leveraging agility, businesses can adopt 
sustainable practices, develop innovative green solutions, and align 
operations with evolving environmental demands. Organizational agil­
ity facilitates the efficient allocation and utilization of resources, 
enabling firms to understand customer demands, competitive threats, 
and market disruptions (Felipe, Rold´an, & Leal-Rodríguez, 2016; Nijssen 
& Paauwe, 2012). As such, it enables organizations to sense any external 
threats and opportunities and quickly align their internal capabilities 
with external market dynamics, driving innovation and maintaining 
relevance in ever-changing business landscapes (Felipe et al., 2016). As 
such, we contend that organizational agility enables organizations to 
identify any emerging environmental risks, such as resource scarcity or 
regulatory shifts, and anticipate evolving demands for eco-friendly of­
ferings. Therefore, agility can expedite an organization’s development 
and deployment of sustainable initiatives—ranging from eco-friendly 
product designs to renewable energy solutions—that can help it posi­
tion itself as an eco-friendly business. In essence, it drives continuous 
transformation, enabling firms to stay resilient and proactive in sus­
taining their positioning over time.
Organizations need to be agile to become competitive and achieve 
their goals in dynamic and hyper-competitive environments (Felipe 
et al., 2016; Ravichandran, 2018). Previous studies have indicated that 
organizational agility improves business functions, practices, opera­
tions, and procedures (Felipe et al., 2016; Nijssen & Paauwe, 2012). 
Importantly, organizational agility is deemed to be a key factor to firm 
performance success (Ravichandran, 2018). According to El-Khalil and 
Mezher (2020), agility is essential to implement and adopt sustainable 
practices, seize environmental opportunities, and adapt to new business 
situations. Furthermore, agile firms have the ability to design novel and 
innovative solutions to manage and mitigate any environmental un­
certainties and risks (El-Khalil & Mezher, 2020). Firms that proactively 
address sustainability challenges are more likely to strengthen their 
market reputation, regulatory compliance, and stakeholder trust, rein­
forcing their sustainable positioning. As such, we argued that, by 
leveraging organizational agility, firms can effectively address any 
sustainability-related risks and challenges and drive positive changes in 
their practices and offerings, contributing to their achievement of a 
sustainable positioning. Thus, we posited: 
Hypothesis 5.
. Organizational agility is positively related to sus­
tainable positioning.
2.6. Organizational knowledge depth and breadth and organizational 
agility as serial mediators
Grounded in dynamic capability theory, we understand that orga­
nizational knowledge depth, breadth, and agility assist and better equip 
firms to deal with emerging challenges and respond to market changes 
(El-Khalil & Mezher, 2020; Moorthy & Polley, 2010; Yang et al., 2017) 
which in turn contribute to the sustainable positioning. Organizational 
knowledge depth, breadth, and agility are complementary tools that 
enable firms to stay ahead of their competitors by driving innovation, 
streamlining processes, and improving business models to meet market 
and environmental needs. As such, organizational knowledge depth and 
breadth enable firms to acquire insights, expertise, capabilities, and 
information (Moorthy & Polley, 2010; Xu & Cavusgil, 2019) related to 
sustainability, advanced green technologies, and key stakeholders, 
while organizational agility enables firms to effectively address 
sustainability-related risks and challenges, and fostering innovative so­
lutions (El-Khalil & Mezher, 2020) that contribute sustainable posi­
tioning. So far, the underlying premise of our arguments has been that 
digital platform integration and reconfiguration capabilities enable 
firms to develop, enhance, and acquire the key capabilities and infor­
mation (i.e., knowledge depth and breadth) that are crucial for them to 
capture business opportunities and make informed decisions. In turn, 
organizational knowledge depth and breadth make firms more agile, 
which ultimately contributes to sustainable positioning. As such, we 
argue that organizational knowledge depth, breadth, and agility act as 
serial mediators through which digital platform integration and recon­
figuration capabilities influence sustainable positioning in B2B settings. 
Thus, we posited: 
Hypothesis 6a.
. Organizational knowledge depth and organizational 
agility act as serial mediators in the relationship between the B2B digital 
platform integration capability and sustainable positioning.
Hypothesis 6b.
. Organizational knowledge depth and organizational 
A. Khalid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Industrial Marketing Management 130 (2025) 46–59 
50 

agility act as serial mediators in the relationship between the B2B digital 
platform reconfiguration capability and sustainable positioning.
Hypothesis 7a.
. Organizational knowledge breadth and organiza­
tional agility act as serial mediators in the relationship between the B2B 
digital platform integration capability and sustainable positioning.
Hypothesis 7b.
. Organizational knowledge breadth and organiza­
tional agility act as serial mediators in the relationship between the B2B 
digital platform reconfiguration capability and sustainable positioning.
2.7. The moderating role of leader boundary-spanning behavior
The dynamic capability view suggests that firms recognize oppor­
tunities, make timely plans, engage in market-driven actions, and 
continuously update their resources to meet business needs and address 
contemporary challenges (Barreto, 2010; Teece, 2007). At the micro 
level, leaders play a key role in enacting dynamic capabilities by iden­
tifying and seizing environmental opportunities and transforming in­
ternal operations to support innovation and acquire competitive market 
position. Studies have suggested that long-term organizational success 
and continued growth is supported by leaders who perceive, identify, 
and seize business opportunities by successfully modifying organiza­
tional procedures and structures (Usman, Khalid, Bo˘gan, Bani-Melhem, 
& Olya, 2025). Accordingly, we contend that leaders significantly in­
fluence how digital platform capabilities are leveraged for sustainable 
positioning by enhancing knowledge depth and breadth, and organiza­
tional agility. Specifically, we propose leader boundary-spanning 
behavior as a relevant moderator.
Studies have suggested that leaders proficient in boundary-spanning 
behaviors are more determined, more capable of building relationships, 
and more effective in communicating with different external stake­
holders, which enables them to gain enhanced access to various valuable 
resources (Zheng & Ahmed, 2022; Zhu et al., 2023). Leaders who engage 
in boundary-spanning behaviors, such as networking with external 
stakeholders, collaborating across functional departments, or promoting 
knowledge-sharing initiatives, can enhance the firm’s ability to recon­
figure and integrate digital platform capabilities into existing knowledge 
systems. By breaking down silos and fostering cross-functional collab­
oration, these leaders enable the organization to deepen its expertise in 
specific domains, that align with the reconfiguration and transformation 
dimensions of dynamic capability view. Similarly, leaders who engage in 
boundary-spanning behaviors—e.g., by seeking out diverse perspec­
tives, fostering external partnerships, or encouraging employees to 
explore emerging trends—can broaden their organizations’ knowledge 
bases beyond their existing domains of expertise. By actively promoting 
cross-disciplinary collaborations and knowledge exchanges, these 
leaders can ensure that digital platform capabilities contribute to 
expanding the breadth of their organizations’ knowledge. More deter­
mined and resourceful leaders engaging in higher levels of boundary- 
spanning behaviors are likely to be more effective in helping their or­
ganizations to benefit from digital platform capabilities and to 
contribute more to the depth and breadth of their organizations’ 
knowledge. Thus, we formulated the following hypotheses. 
Hypothesis 8a.
. Leader boundary-spanning behavior moderates the 
association of the B2B digital platform integration capability with 
knowledge depth such that the association is stronger in the presence of 
high levels of leader boundary-spanning behavior.
Hypothesis 8b.
Leader boundary-spanning behavior moderates the 
association of the B2B digital platform integration capability with 
knowledge breadth such that the association is stronger in the presence 
of high levels of leader boundary-spanning behavior.
Hypothesis 9a.
Leader boundary-spanning behavior moderates the 
association of the B2B digital platform reconfiguration capability with 
knowledge depth such that the association is stronger in the presence of 
high levels of leader boundary-spanning behavior.
Hypothesis 9b.
Leader boundary-spanning behavior moderates the 
association of the B2B digital platform reconfiguration capability with 
knowledge breadth such that the association is stronger in the presence 
of high levels of leader boundary-spanning behavior.
3. Method
3.1. Sample and procedure
Although digital platforms are present in both the B2B and B2C 
markets, we specifically focused on industrial platforms in the B2B 
setting. We did so for the following reasons: first, in digital environ­
ments, the B2B setting actors behave differently from their B2C coun­
terparts (Iankova, Davies, Archer-Brown, Marder, & Yau, 2019), and 
second, the B2B digital commerce industrial platforms are almost double 
the size of their B2C counterparts (Jiang, Phang, Tan, & Chi, 2019). To 
test our hypotheses, we employed a questionnaire to collect data from 
various manufacturing firms operating in China.
We collected our study’s data with the support of alumni of a Chinese 
public sector university who hold managerial positions in various Chi­
nese manufacturing firms. The sample manufacturing firms operated 
across diverse industrial sectors, which included automotive, elec­
tronics, chemicals, textiles, pharmaceuticals, heavy machinery, preci­
sion machinery, renewable energy equipment, leather, food and 
beverage manufacturing, and ceramics. These sectors are relevant 
because they rely significantly on organizational knowledge to make 
them agile to maintain their competitive position in the competitive B2B 
markets. This sectoral diversity also strengthens the generalizability of 
our findings across different manufacturing industries.
Through the alumni, we were able to approach the top managers of 
600 organizations (CEOs, general managers, and managing directors) to 
invite them to participate in our study. We provided them with a cover 
letter containing an assurance of anonymity and a brief introduction to 
the study. We also asked if they would agree to participate in our study. 
Out of those 600 senior managers, 476 accepted our invitation.
We collected data on digital platform capabilities, knowledge depth 
and breadth, leader boundary-spanning behavior, and organizational 
agility from our sample firms (in three phases) and data on sustainable 
positioning from their B2B buyers. In the first round, we sent our 476 
sample managers a questionnaire related to digital platform capabilities, 
leader boundary-spanning behavior, and control variables and received 
452 responses. After two weeks, we initiated round two, and we received 
responses from 416 managers. After two further weeks, we initiated 
round three, and we received responses from 372 managers. To maxi­
mize the response rates, we sent several reminders through our contacts 
working in the sample organizations.
After completing the three data collection phases with our sample 
firms, we started the process involving their B2B buyers. The alumni also 
provided the lists of their B2B buyers. We randomly chose five buyers for 
each of the 372 sample companies, the senior managers of which had 
responded in our first three data collection rounds. We asked the sample 
B2B buyers to answer questions pertaining to our sample firms’ sus­
tainable positioning. On average, we received three to four responses 
from the corresponding buyers, which we later aggregated in the anal­
ysis stage to match them to our sample firms’ responses. After matching 
the data from our two sample sources and different rounds, the final 
dataset we retained and used for data analysis pertained to 365 firms.
We employed a time-lagged design to address the issues related to 
common method bias. Following previous studies (e.g., Bani-Melhem, 
Akhtar, Zahoor, Khalid, & Usman, 2025; Khalid et al., 2025), we used a 
two-week time lag, which is considered sufficient to reduce any poten­
tial bias (Karatepe, 2013). We analyzed the data using structural equa­
tion modeling (SEM) in Mplus (8.8).
A. Khalid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Industrial Marketing Management 130 (2025) 46–59 
51 

3.2. Measures and variables
Unless otherwise stated, we measured all constructs using a five- 
point Likert scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly 
agree).
We assessed the digital platform integration capability by adapting a 
four-item scale (α = 0.84) adapted from Cenamor et al. (2019). Sample 
item: “Our digital platform easily accesses data from our partners’ IT sys­
tems.” We assessed the digital platform reconfiguration capability by 
adapting a four-item scale (α = 0.85) developed by Cenamor et al. 
(2019). Sample item: “Our digital platform can be easily extended to 
accommodate new IT applications or functions.”
We assessed organizational knowledge depth by using a four-item 
scale (α = 0.86) developed by Yang et al. (2017). Sample item: “The 
knowledge of our firm in this industry is thorough.” We assessed organi­
zational knowledge breadth by using a four-item scale (α = 0.84) 
adapted from Yang et al. (2017). Sample item: “We effectively acquire 
market information from a diversified customer portfolio.”
We assessed organizational agility by adapting a four-item scale (α =
0.87) developed by Meli´an-Alzola, Domínguez-Falc´on, and Martín- 
Santana (2020). Sample item: “Our organization has the capacity to 
respond quickly to changes.”
We measured sustainable positioning (buyer-rated) by adapting nine 
items (α = 0.93) from Kapitan et al. (2019). Sample item: “Our supplier is 
actively trying to produce less waste.”
We assessed leader boundary-spanning behavior by adapting six 
items (α = 0.96) from Ancona and Caldwell (1992). Sample item: “I 
reach out to individuals outside of our organization who can offer expertise or 
ideas.”
3.3. Control variables
We controlled for firm size, firm age, and industry because these 
factors can influence organizational knowledge and organizational 
agility, thus potentially confounding our results (Elsayed, 2006). Indeed, 
larger firms may have more resources to invest in digital platform 
integration and reconfiguration, leading to varying levels of knowledge 
and agility. Likewise, older firms may have more established routines 
and knowledge management systems, affecting their ability to adapt to 
digital transformation. Further, different industry sectors may exhibit 
varying levels of adoption of digital platforms. Together, we understand 
that firm age, size, and industry sector can confound the results.
4. Results
4.1. Correlations and descriptive statistics
The descriptive statistics and correlations among the variables are 
presented in Table 1. All the correlations between the main variables of 
the study were found to be in the expected direction.
4.2. Measurement model
To assess the measurement model—consisting of the digital platform 
integration capability, the digital platform reconfiguration capability, 
knowledge depth, knowledge breadth, organizational agility, sustain­
able positioning, and leader boundary-spanning behavior, we performed 
a confirmatory factor analysis in Mplus (8.8). All the items we found to 
be loaded significantly (p < 0.01). The fit indices, χ2 (539) = 1484.45, 
χ2/df = 2.75, TLI = 0.90, CFI = 0.90, SRMR = 0.07, and RMSEA = 0.07, 
were found to show a good fit of the measurement model with the data.
We also calculated the maximum shared variance (MSV), average 
shared variance (ASV), and average variance extracted (AVE) for all 
variables (Table 2). The AVE values were found to exceed 0.50, indi­
cating that more than half of the variance in each construct was 
explained by its indicators. The square roots of the AVE were found to be 
greater than the inter-construct correlations, confirming discriminant 
validity. Furthermore, both the ASV and MSV were found to be lower 
than the AVE for all main variables, suggesting satisfactory levels of 
convergent and discriminant validity for the scales used in our study.
4.3. Hypotheses testing
We tested our model with and without controls and found no sig­
nificant differences between our results in relation to our hypothesized 
relationships. For the sake of parsimony, we present our results without 
controls. As shown in Table 3, the digital platform integration capability 
(B = 0.31, SE = 0.05, p < 0.01) and the digital platform reconfiguration 
capability (B = 0.28, SE = 0.05, p < 0.01) were found to be positively 
related to sustainable positioning. Thus, H1(a) and H1(b) were found to 
be supported. Further, the digital platform integration capability was 
found to be positively related to organizational knowledge depth (B =
0.32, SE = 0.05, p < 0.01) and organizational knowledge breadth (B =
0.29, SE = 0.05, p < 0.01). Thus, H2(a) and H2(b) were found to be 
supported. Likewise, the digital platform reconfiguration capability was 
found to be positively related to organizational knowledge depth (B =
0.23, SE = 0.05, p < 0.01) and to organizational knowledge breadth (B 
= 0.33, SE = 0.05, p < 0.01). Thus, H3(a) and H3(b) were found to be 
supported. In addition, we found positive associations between knowl­
edge depth and organizational agility (B = 0.45, SE = 0.05, p < 0.01) 
and between knowledge breadth and organizational agility (B = 0.23, 
SE = 0.05, p < 0.01). Thus, H4(a) and H4(b) were found to be sup­
ported. Organizational agility was also found to be positively related to 
sustainable positioning (B = 0.28, SE = 0.06, p < 0.01). Thus, H5 was 
found to be supported.
Additionally, we found a significant indirect positive association 
between the digital platform integration capability and sustainable 
positioning via organizational knowledge depth and organizational 
agility (B = 0.03, SE = 0.01, p < 0.01). Likewise, we found a significant 
indirect positive association between the digital platform integration 
capability and sustainable positioning via organizational knowledge 
Table 1 
Means and correlations.
Construct
Mean
SD
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1. DPIC
3.07
0.99
2. DPRC
3.27
1.04
0.39**
3. Knowledge depth
3.19
0.99
0.32**
0.24**
4. Knowledge breadth
3.24
1.00
0.29**
0.35**
0.42**
5. Organizational Agility
3.15
1.12
0.36**
0.29**
0.47**
0.29**
6. Sustainable positioning
3.66
0.97
0.31**
0.30**
0.37**
0.28**
0.41**
7. LBBs
3.48
1.32
0.10*
0.02
0.01
0.02
0.16**
0.02
8. Firm age
14.68
8.39
0.05
0.04
0.10
0.03
0.12*
0.07
−0.11*
9. Firm size
0.10
0.10
0.08
−0.02
0.10
0.08
0.03
−0.05
10. Industry
−0.08
0.05
−0.03
0.01
0.02
0.00
0.02
−0.07
−0.09
Notes. N= 365. * p < 0.05. ** p < 0.01 level (2-tailed). *p < 0.05 level (2-tailed). SD = standard deviation. DPIC = Digital platform integration capability. DPRC =
Digital platform reconfiguration capability. LBBs = Leader boundary-spanning behaviors.
A. Khalid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Industrial Marketing Management 130 (2025) 46–59 
52 

breadth and organizational agility (B = 0.02, SE = 0.007, p < 0.05). 
Thus, H6(a) and H6(b) were found to be supported. Further, we found a 
significant indirect positive association between the digital platform 
reconfiguration capability and sustainable positioning via organiza­
tional knowledge depth and organizational agility (B = 0.03, SE = 0.01, 
p < 0.01). Likewise, we found a significant indirect positive association 
between the digital platform reconfiguration capability and sustainable 
positioning via organizational knowledge breadth and organizational 
agility (B = 0.02, SE = 0.008, p < 0.05). Thus, H7(a) and H7(b) were 
found to be supported.
We tested H8 and H9 by adding the interaction term of and digital 
platform capabilities to the indirect effects model. The moderation re­
sults (Table 3) were found to show that the effect of the interaction of 
leader boundary-spanning behavior and the digital platform integration 
capability on knowledge depth is significant (B = 0.14, SE = 0.03, p < 
0.01). The precise nature of this moderated path is depicted in Fig. 2. 
The simple slope plots at two conditional values of the moderator show 
that the association between the digital platform integration capability 
and knowledge depth was found to be significant (B = 0.49, SE = 0.06, p 
< 0.01) in the presence of high levels of leader boundary-spanning 
behavior, while the relationship was found to be non-significant (B =
0.12, SE = 0.07, ns) in the presence of low levels of leader boundary- 
spanning behavior. Thus, H8(a) was found to be supported.
The moderation results (Table 3) show that the effect of the inter­
action of leader boundary-spanning behavior and the digital platform 
integration capability on knowledge breath was found to be significant 
(B = 0.12, SE = 0.03, p < 0.01). The precise nature of this moderated 
path is depicted in Fig. 3. The simple slope plots at two conditional 
values of the moderator show that the association between the digital 
platform integration capability and knowledge depth was found to be 
significant (B = 0.44, SE = 0.07, p < 0.01) in the presence of high levels 
of leader boundary-spanning behavior, while the relationship was found 
to be non-significant (B = 0.12, SE = 0.07, ns) in the presence of low 
levels of leader boundary-spanning behavior. Thus, H8(b) was found to 
be supported.
The moderation results (Table 3) show that the effect of the inter­
action of leader boundary-spanning behavior and the digital platform 
reconfiguration capability on knowledge depth was found to be signif­
icant (B = 0.11, SE = 0.03, p < 0.01). The precise nature of this 
moderated path is depicted in Fig. 4. The simple slope plots at two 
conditional values of the moderator show that the association between 
the digital platform reconfiguration capability and knowledge depth 
was found to be significant (B = 0.36, SE = 0.06, p < 0.01) in the 
presence of high levels of leader boundary-spanning behavior, while the 
relationship was found to be non-significant (B = 0.08, SE = 0.07, ns) in 
the presence of low levels of leader boundary-spanning behavior. Thus, 
H9(a) was found to be supported.
The moderation results (Table 3) show that the effect of the inter­
action of leader boundary-spanning behavior and the digital platform 
reconfiguration capability on knowledge breath was found to be sig­
nificant (B = 0.17, SE = 0.03, p < 0.01). The precise nature of this 
moderated path is depicted in Fig. 5. The simple slope plots at two 
conditional values of the moderator show that the association between 
the digital platform reconfiguration capability and knowledge depth 
was found to be significant (B = 0.55, SE = 0.06, p < 0.01) in the 
presence of high levels of leader boundary-spanning behavior, while the 
relationship was found to be non-significant (B = 0.10, SE = 0.06, ns) in 
the presence of low levels of leader boundary-spanning behavior. Thus, 
H9(b) was found to be supported.
5. Discussion
The underlying goal of our study was to understand how and when 
digital platform capabilities (i.e., integration and reconfiguration) 
contribute to sustainable firm positioning in the B2B context. For this 
purpose, taking a dynamic capability perspective, we developed a model 
pertaining to digital platform capabilities (i.e., integration and reconfi­
guration), organizational knowledge depth and breadth, organizational 
Table 2 
Discriminant validity and convergent validity.
Construct
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
AVE
MSV
ASV
1. DPIC
0.75
0.57
0.20
0.12
2. DPRC
0.45
0.77
0.60
0.20
0.11
3. Knowledge depth
0.37
0.27
0.77
0.60
0.31
0.15
4. Knowledge breadth
0.34
0.39
0.47
0.76
0.58
0.22
0.11
5. Organizational Agility
0.41
0.33
0.56
0.32
0.79
0.62
0.31
0.15
6. Sustainable positioning
0.33
0.32
0.42
0.29
0.45
0.77
0.59
0.20
0.11
7. LBBs
0.11
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.18
0.02
0.91
0.83
0.03
0.01
Notes. N = 365. AVE = average variance extracted. MSV = maximum variance shared. ASV = average variance shared. Bolded values on the diagonals of columns 2 to 
8 are the square root values of AVE. DPIC = Digital platform integration capability. DPRC = Digital platform reconfiguration capability. LBBs = Leader boundary- 
spanning behaviors.
Table 3 
Hypotheses results.
B
SE
95 %CI
LL
UL
Total effects
DPIC → Sustainable positioning (H1a)
0.31**
0.05
0.21
0.40
DPRC → Sustainable positioning (H1b)
0.28**
0.05
0.19
0.37
Direct Paths
DPIC → Sustainable positioning
0.16**
0.05
0.06
0.25
DPIC → Knowledge depth (H2a)
0.32**
0.05
0.22
0.41
DPIC → Knowledge breadth (H2b)
0.29**
0.05
0.19
0.39
Knowledge depth → Organizational agility 
(H4a)
0.45**
0.05
0.35
0.56
Knowledge breadth → Organizational agility 
(H4b)
0.23**
0.05
0.12
0.34
Organizational agility → Sustainable 
positioning (H5)
0.28**
0.06
0.13
0.36
DPRC → Sustainable positioning
0.15**
0.05
0.06
0.24
DPRC → Knowledge depth (H3a)
0.23**
0.05
0.13
0.32
DPRC → Knowledge breadth (H3b)
0.33**
0.05
0.24
0.43
Indirect Paths
DPIC → Knowledge depth → Organizational 
agility → Sustainable positioning (H6a)
0.03**
0.01
0.01
0.06
DPRC → Knowledge depth → Organizational 
agility → Sustainable positioning (H6b)
0.03**
0.01
0.01
0.05
DPIC → Knowledge breadth → Organizational 
agility → Sustainable positioning (H7a)
0.02*
0.007
0.01
0.03
DPRC → Knowledge breadth → Organizational 
agility → Sustainable positioning (H7b)
0.02*
0.008
0.01
0.04
Moderated Paths
DPIC *LBBs → Knowledge depth (H8a)
0.14**
0.03
0.07
0.21
DPIC *LBBs → Knowledge breadth (H8b)
0.12**
0.03
0.05
0.19
DPRC *LBBs → Knowledge depth (H9a)
0.11**
0.03
0.04
0.17
DPRC *LBBs → Knowledge breadth (H9b)
0.17**
0.03
0.10
0.23
Sample N = 365. B Unstandardized coefficient, SE Standard error, Bootstrapping 
specified at 5000 with 95 % confidence interval. DPIC = Digital platform inte­
gration capability. DPRC = Digital platform reconfiguration capability. LBBs =
Leader boundary-spanning behaviors. CI = Confidence interval. LL = lower 
limit. UL = Upper limit.
A. Khalid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Industrial Marketing Management 130 (2025) 46–59 
53 

agility, leader boundary-spanning behavior, and sustainable posi­
tioning. Notably, we examined the direct and indirect (via organiza­
tional knowledge depth, breadth, and organizational agility) 
associations between digital platform capabilities (i.e., integration and 
reconfiguration) and sustainable positioning. We also tested the 
moderating role played by leader boundary-spanning behavior. Data 
were collected using a time lagged design from the top management of 
various manufacturing organizations. The results demonstrate a direct 
positive association between B2B digital platform capabilities (i.e., 
integration and reconfiguration) and sustainable positioning. Addi­
tionally, the research demonstrated that B2B digital platform capabil­
ities (i.e., integration and reconfiguration) drive sustainable positioning 
via (Organizational knowledge depth, breadth, and agility), which act as 
serial mediators of the digital platform capabilities (i.e., integration and 
reconfiguration)- sustainable positioning link. The study also revealed 
that significantly moderated the influence of digital platform 
Fig. 2. Leader boundary-spanning behaviors as a moderator in the relationship between the digital platform integration capability and knowledge depth.
Fig. 3. Leader boundary-spanning behaviors as a moderator in the relationship between the digital platform integration capability and knowledge breadth.
A. Khalid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Industrial Marketing Management 130 (2025) 46–59 
54 

capabilities (i.e., integration and reconfiguration) on knowledge depth 
and breadth.
5.1. Theoretical contributions
Our research findings contribute to various literature streams in the 
B2B context. First, our research adds to the literature on the antecedents 
of sustainable positioning (Bocken et al., 2014; Casidy & Yan, 2022). 
Existing literature has offered valuable insights, bringing to the fore 
several antecedents of sustainable positioning, such as environmental 
actions, strategies, and stakeholder communication (Hu et al., 2019; 
Rahman et al., 2023). While the existing research has offered valuable 
insights, our study significantly extends it by revealing another critical 
yet hitherto overlooked antecedent of sustainable positioning. Specif­
ically, this study identifies digital platform capabilities (i.e., digital 
platform integration and digital platform reconfiguration) as a critical 
Fig. 4. Leader boundary-spanning behaviors as a moderator in the relationship between the digital platform reconfiguration capability and knowledge depth.
Fig. 5. Leader boundary-spanning behaviors as a moderator in the relationship between the digital platform reconfiguration capability and knowledge breadth.
A. Khalid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Industrial Marketing Management 130 (2025) 46–59 
55 

factor that contributes to sustainable positioning in B2B context.
Second, our study contributes to the growing body of literature 
focused on examining the firm-related outcomes of digital platform ca­
pabilities (i.e., the digital platform integration and digital platform 
reconfiguration) (Cenamor et al., 2019; Jiang et al., 2023; Wang et al., 
2023; Xiao, Tian, & Mao, 2020) in B2B context. The pertinent literature 
has pointed at several outcomes of digital platform capabilities, such as 
improved entrepreneurial SME performance (Cenamor et al., 2019), 
service innovation (Wang et al., 2022), technological innovation (Liu 
et al., 2023), sustainability-oriented innovation (Wang et al., 2023), and 
firm value co-creation (Jiang et al., 2023). Although literature has 
offered key insights, our research notably broadens it by highlighting the 
role played by the digital platform capabilities (i.e., integration and 
reconfiguration capabilities) in driving and strengthening the sustain­
able positioning of B2B businesses.
Third, our study provides evidence of the key role played by orga­
nizational knowledge depth, breadth, and organizational agility as 
imperative mediators in the relationship between digital platform ca­
pabilities (i.e., integration and reconfiguration) and firm sustainable 
positioning. Prior studies have suggested that knowledge depth and 
breadth contribute to firm success (Moorthy & Polley, 2010; Yang et al., 
2017) and foster innovative behavior (Ko & Liu, 2019; Xu, 2015). 
Similarly, previous research has highlighted how organizational agility 
advances business operations and procedures (Felipe et al., 2016; Nijs­
sen & Paauwe, 2012) and empowers firms to implement sustainable 
practices, capture emerging market opportunities, and adapt to new 
business settings (El-Khalil & Mezher, 2020). Our study contributes to 
the literature on organizational knowledge depth, breadth, and orga­
nizational agility by highlighting the significant, yet hitherto overlooked 
roles played by organizational knowledge depth, breadth and organi­
zational agility as serial mediators in the relationship between digital 
platform capabilities (i.e., integration and reconfiguration) and sus­
tainable firm positioning in the B2B context. By highlighting the sig­
nificant role of organizational knowledge depth, breadth, and 
organizational agility as a mechanism underlying the digital platform 
capabilities-sustainable positioning link, we extends the literature on 
organizational resources, skills, and capabilities in the B2B context 
(Bouguerra, Hughes, Rodgers, Stokes, & Tatoglu, 2024; Kapitan et al., 
2019; Zahoor et al., 2024) and goes some way in addressing the call 
made for research on the role of inter-firm factors in driving and 
strengthening sustainable firm positioning (Casidy & Lie, 2023; Casidy 
& Yan, 2022; Gogia et al., 2023).
Last, our study integrates leader boundary-spanning behavior —as 
an important leader-related individual factor—into our framework and 
shows how it moderates the direct effects of the digital platform capa­
bilities (i.e., integration and reconfiguration) on organizational knowl­
edge depth and breadth. Owing to their individual characteristics, 
leaders may exhibit different levels of determination, flexibility, resil­
ience, grit, creativity, and ingenuity to meet the evolving business needs 
(i.e., achieve sustainable firm positioning). Prior studies have indicated 
that boundary-spanning behaviors enhance a firm’s creative perfor­
mance (Zheng & Ahmed, 2022), innovative behaviors (Zhu et al., 2023), 
and job satisfaction and performance (Liu et al., 2018; Zhang & Li, 
2021). Our study is the first to incorporate the leader boundary- 
spanning behavior construct in the B2B and sustainable positioning 
context.
5.2. Practical implications
First, our research findings provide insights into how B2B firms can 
seize environmental opportunities and contribute to sustainable posi­
tioning by developing digital platform capabilities. The findings indicate 
that the development of digital platform capabilities (i.e., integration 
and reconfiguration) plays a key role in driving, implementing, and 
strengthening a firm’s sustainable positioning. To this end, firms can 
invest in activities and initiatives aimed at building and enhancing their 
digital platform capabilities (Wang et al., 2023) — for example, by 
hiring skilled professionals and acquiring essential technology, infra­
structure, and tools. To develop and effectively leverage these capabil­
ities, firms can collaborate with relevant stakeholders, participate in 
shared industry development and technical training programs, and join 
open innovation initiatives that facilitate the sharing of knowledge, re­
sources, structures, best practices, and procedures (Bani-Melhem et al., 
2025). Managers of B2B firms can contribute to sustainable positioning 
by aligning investment in digital platforms with long-term environ­
mental goals and incorporating sustainability metrics into digital 
decision-making frameworks. They can also foster a culture that pro­
motes digital experimentation and assist in developing digital capabil­
ities focused on eco-innovation and resource efficiency.
Notably, our findings highlight the key role of organizational 
knowledge depth and breadth in contributing to sustainable positioning. 
Managers of B2B firms should emphasize acquiring and developing 
organizational knowledge depth and breadth. They should do so 
because market and industry-related insights and information have the 
potential to empower B2B firms to make informed and timely decisions 
in response to emerging environmental and business needs, thus driving 
sustainable positioning (Kapitan et al., 2019). Indeed, capitalizing on 
organizational knowledge depth and breadth can assist firms in identi­
fying emerging trends, shifts in customer preferences, and capturing 
market opportunities. It also enables a broader understanding of in­
dustry dynamics, which in turn supports and strengthens sustainable 
positioning in the B2B context. In this regard, managers should actively 
promote the development of systems and processes that enable firms to 
acquire, retain, and apply deep expertise in core areas while also 
exposing organization to diverse external knowledge sources (Im, 
Vorhies, Kim, & Heiman, 2016). By encouraging structured knowledge 
sharing practices including cross-functional teams, collaborations, and 
digital knowledge databases, managers can ensure that valuable infor­
mation flows across the organization, mitigating market risk and 
improving responsiveness. Additionally, managers should contribute to 
organizational agility by integrating continuous learning practices, 
promoting rapid feedback, and enabling flexible decision-making 
structures (Khan, 2020). B2B firms should foster a learning culture 
suited to aid them in becoming more agile and responsive to changing 
market conditions and emerging business needs, ultimately contributing 
to sustainable positioning. Managers can assist and support firms in 
cultivating more agile mindsets and cultures, enabling them to innovate, 
adapt and prosper in rapidly changing business landscape (Bani-Melhem 
et al., 2025). Moreover, managers should integrate sustainability-related 
learning objectives into employee development programs, ensuring that 
teams not only develop knowledge but implement it through sustain­
ability lens. By linking knowledge development with environmental 
goals, managers can effectively position the firm by meeting both reg­
ulatory and stakeholders demands. In doing so, they turn organizational 
knowledge depth, breadth, and agility into dynamic assets that 
contribute to the firm sustainable positioning and long-term success.
Our findings regarding the moderating role of leader boundary- 
spanning behavior also have key managerial implications. The find­
ings indicate that B2B firms should consider leaders’ individual char­
acteristics. Leaders inclined to engage in high levels of boundary- 
spanning behaviors are more responsible, committed, adaptable, and 
flexible in leveraging networks and mobilizing resources (Khan, Has­
nain, Ullah, & Khalid, 2018). Therefore, they are more likely to achieve 
shared and organizational environmental goals. Such leaders can thus 
have an impact on the development of digital platform capabilities in 
relation to building and developing organizational knowledge, ulti­
mately contributing to sustainable positioning. Thus, it is important for 
B2B firms to employ managers endowed with higher boundary-spanning 
behavior aptitudes. B2B firms could adopt leader boundary-spanning 
behavior scale to investigate boundary-spanning behavior levels 
among their current and potential business leaders or managers. 
Assessing the boundary-spanning behavior aptitudes of their current 
A. Khalid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Industrial Marketing Management 130 (2025) 46–59 
56 

leaders and managers would enable B2B firms to develop appropriate 
and more effective interventions aimed at shaping the activities of their 
business leaders or managers while bearing in mind their boundary- 
spanning behavior aptitudes. Additionally, such leaders can assist 
build knowledge depth by incorporating digital platform insights into 
key business activities and expand knowledge breadth through strategic 
collaborations. Their ability to promote agility across diverse de­
partments assists in effective learning and adaptive responses to 
sustainability-related market changes.
5.3. Limitations and future research directions
Our study has various strengths that should be emphasized. As we 
developed our model employing a multi-respondent sample, we 
considered favorability bias and common method variance. Despite our 
study’s design strength, it is nevertheless affected by potential draw­
backs. First, although we did address the possibility of common method 
bias in our data collection, we could not draw causal inferences. Thus, 
we would encourage scholars to employ longitudinal designs to uncover 
strong causal inferences. Second, we collected data from B2B 
manufacturing firms operating in China. Thus, caution should be exer­
cised in generalizing our findings to other business domains and coun­
tries. Based on this, future studies could explore whether our findings 
hold in other key industries such as service-based or high-tech sectors 
where market dynamics and strategic priorities may be different. Future 
studies could also examine how institutional and cultural variations 
impact firm sustainable positioning, offering a broader perspective on 
international business strategy. Importantly, AI and big data capabil­
ities, (Bani-Melhem et al., 2025; Cenamor et al., 2019), can also drive 
sustainable positioning. Thus, researchers could focus on comparing 
various organizational capabilities in terms of their influence on sus­
tainable firm positioning to offer further insights into the phenomenon 
and facilitate B2B firms in the formulation of more efficient and market- 
oriented strategies. Future research could explore how the leadership 
style including responsible and ethical leadership facilitate the sustain­
able positioning in B2B context. Finally, due to increasing emphasis of 
firms on environmental, social, and governance criteria, future research 
could explore the interplay between environmental strategies and reg­
ulatory pressures.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Adeel Khalid: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, 
Validation, Investigation, Conceptualization. Muhammad Usman: 
Writing – review & editing, Visualization, Validation, Software, Formal 
analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Huda Khan: Writing – re­
view & editing, Validation, Project administration, Conceptualization. 
Muhammad Waheed Akhtar: Writing – review & editing, Visualiza­
tion, Validation, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.
Appendix A. Scale Items
A.1. Digital Platform integration capability
DPIC1. Our digital platform easily accesses data from our partners’ 
IT systems.
DPIC2. Our digital platform provides a seamless connection between 
our partners’ IT systems and our IT systems (e.g., forecasting, produc­
tion, manufacturing, shipment, etc.).
DPIC3. Our digital platform has the capability to exchange real-time 
information with our partners.
DPIC4. Our digital platform easily aggregates relevant information 
from our partners’ databases (e.g., operating information, business 
customer performance, cost information, etc.).
A.2. Digital Platform reconfiguration capability
DPRC1: Our digital platform is easily adapted to include new 
partners.
DPC2: Our digital platform can be easily extended to accommodate 
new IT applications or functions.
DPRC3: Our digital platform employs standards that are accepted by 
most current and potential partners.
DPRC4: Our digital platform consists of modular software compo­
nents, most of which can be reused in other business applications.
A.3. Knowledge depth
KD1: We are highly familiar with this industry.
KD12: We have acquired a great deal of experience about this 
industry.
KD3: The knowledge of our firm in this industry is thorough.
KD4: We have in-depth knowledge about the technology in this 
industry.
A.4. Knowledge breadth
KB1: We effectively acquire market information from a diversified 
customer portfolio.
KB2: We have accumulated knowledge from multiple market 
segments.
KB3: We effectively acquire technological information from various 
sources.
KB4: Our R&D expertise consists of knowledge from a variety of 
backgrounds.
A.5. Organizational agility
OA1: Our organization is capable of adapting to changes.
OA2: Our organization has the capacity to predict and identify 
changes.
OA3: Our organization has the capacity to respond quickly to 
changes.
OA4: Our organization has the capacity to respond flexibly to new 
demands for services that arise, adapting them to the resources and 
means available.
A.6. Leader boundary-spanning behavior
LBBs1: I absorb outside pressures so that organizational members can 
work free of interference.
LBBs2: I persuade outsiders (e.g., clients, stakeholders) to support 
organizational decisions.
LBBs3: I prevent outsiders from overloading organizational members 
with too many requests.
LBBs4: I reach out to individuals outside the organization who can 
provide expertise or ideas.
LBBs5: I proactively seek advice and support from external experts or 
consultants.
LBBs6: I acquire resources (e.g., money, new members, equipment) 
from outside to support the organization.
A.7. Sustainable positioning
SP1: Our supplier clearly takes care of its carbon footprint.
SP2: Environmental concerns are high on our supplier’s priorities.
SP3: Our supplier is actively trying to produce less waste.
SP4: Our supplier is leading initiatives to offset energy use.
SP5: Our supplier is actively trying to lower emissions caused by the 
company.
SP6: Our supplier is leading initiatives to lower emissions.
A. Khalid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Industrial Marketing Management 130 (2025) 46–59 
57 

SP7: Our supplier considers environmental impacts as part of their 
mission.
SP8: Our supplier is concerned with the environmental impact of 
their products.
SP9: Our supplier is concerned with the environmental impact of the 
production process, usage, and disposal of their products.
Right retention statement
For the purpose of open access, the author has applied a Creative 
Commons Attribution (CC BY) [or other appropriate open licence] 
licence to any Author Accepted Manuscript version arising from this 
submission.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
Ambrosini, V., & Bowman, C. (2009). What are dynamic capabilities and are they a 
useful construct in strategic management? International Journal of Management 
Reviews, 11(1), 29–49.
Ancona, D. G., & Caldwell, D. F. (1992). Bridging the boundary: External activity and 
performance in organizational teams. Administrative Science Quarterly, 634–665.
Bani-Melhem, S., Akhtar, M. W., Zahoor, N., Khalid, A., & Usman, M. (2025). Growth 
hacking adoption in focus: Developing scale and enhancing the nomological network 
of its antecedents. Journal of Business Research, 189, Article 115179.
Barreto, I. (2010). Dynamic capabilities: A review of past research and an agenda for the 
future. Journal of Management, 36(1), 256–280.
Bocken, N. M., Short, S. W., Rana, P., & Evans, S. (2014). A literature and practice review 
to develop sustainable business model archetypes. Journal of Cleaner Production, 65, 
42–56.
Bogers, M., Chesbrough, H., Heaton, S., & Teece, D. J. (2019). Strategic management of 
open innovation: A dynamic capabilities perspective. California Management Review, 
62(1), 77–94.
Bonina, C., Koskinen, K., Eaton, B., & Gawer, A. (2021). Digital platforms for 
development: Foundations and research agenda. Information Systems Journal, 31(6), 
869–902.
Bouguerra, A., Hughes, M., Rodgers, P., Stokes, P., & Tatoglu, E. (2024). Confronting the 
grand challenge of environmental sustainability within supply chains: How can 
organizational strategic agility drive environmental innovation? Journal of Product 
Innovation Management, 41(2), 323–346.
Bowman, C., & Ambrosini, V. (2003). How the resource-based and the dynamic 
capability views of the firm inform corporate-level strategy. British Journal of 
Management, 14(4), 289–303.
Cantele, S., & Zardini, A. (2018). Is sustainability a competitive advantage for small 
businesses? An empirical analysis of possible mediators in the 
sustainability–financial performance relationship. Journal of Cleaner Production, 182, 
166–176.
Casidy, R., & Lie, D. S. (2023). The effects of B2B sustainable brand positioning on 
relationship outcomes. Industrial Marketing Management, 109, 245–256.
Casidy, R., & Yan, L. (2022). The effects of supplier B2B sustainability positioning on 
buyer performance: The role of trust. Industrial Marketing Management, 102, 
311–323.
Cegarra-Navarro, J. G., Soto-Acosta, P., & Wensley, A. K. (2016). Structured knowledge 
processes and firm performance: The role of organizational agility. Journal of 
Business Research, 69(5), 1544–1549.
Cenamor, J., Parida, V., & Wincent, J. (2019). How entrepreneurial SMEs compete 
through digital platforms: The roles of digital platform capability, network capability 
and ambidexterity. Journal of Business Research, 100, 196–206.
Claudy, M. C., Peterson, M., & Pagell, M. (2016). The roles of sustainability orientation 
and market knowledge competence in new product development success. Journal of 
Product Innovation Management, 33, 72–85.
Costa, A. S., & Azevedo, A. (2024). Influence of ethically-minded consumer behavior, 
digital citizenship, and retailers’ green positioning on the effectiveness of store flyer 
sales promotions (paper vs. digital). Journal of Promotion Management, 30(4), 
681–705.
Easterby-Smith, M., & Prieto, I. M. (2008). Dynamic capabilities and knowledge 
management: An integrative role for learning? British Journal of Management, 19(3), 
235–249.
El-Khalil, R., & Mezher, M. A. (2020). The mediating impact of sustainability on the 
relationship between agility and operational performance. Operations Research 
Perspectives, 7, Article 100171.
Elsayed, K. (2006). Reexamining the expected effect of available resources and firm size 
on firm environmental orientation: An empirical study of UK firms. Journal of 
Business Ethics, 65(3), 297–308.
Felipe, C. M., Rold´an, J. L., & Leal-Rodríguez, A. L. (2016). An explanatory and 
predictive model for organizational agility. Journal of Business Research, 69(10), 
4624–4631.
Gogia, D., Gupta, S. K., & Rathi, P. (2023). Impact of various structural attributes on B2B 
sustainability positioning. Journal of Business & Industrial Marketing, 39(2), 388–406.
Guo, Z. A., Heidl, R. A., Hollenbeck, J. R., Yu, A., & Howe, M. (2022). When discretionary 
boundary spanning relationships cease becoming discretionary: The impact of closed 
ties on informal leadership perceptions. Journal of Applied Psychology, 107(6), 898.
Hellemans, I., Porter, A. J., & Diriker, D. (2022). Harnessing digitalization for sustainable 
development: Understanding how interactions on sustainability-oriented digital 
platforms manage tensions and paradoxes. Business Strategy and the Environment, 31 
(2), 668–683.
Hoonsopon, D., & Puriwat, W. (2019). Organizational agility: Key to the success of new 
product development. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 68(6), 
1722–1733.
Hu, X., Chong, H. Y., & Wang, X. (2019). Sustainability perceptions of off-site 
manufacturing stakeholders in Australia. Journal of Cleaner Production, 227, 
346–354.
Iankova, S., Davies, I., Archer-Brown, C., Marder, B., & Yau, A. (2019). A comparison of 
social media marketing between B2B, B2C and mixed business models. Industrial 
Marketing Management, 81, 169–179.
Im, S., Vorhies, D. W., Kim, N., & Heiman, B. (2016). How knowledge management 
capabilities help leverage knowledge resources and strategic orientation for new 
product advantages in B-to-B high-technology firms. Journal of Business-to-Business 
Marketing, 23(2), 87–110.
Inigo, E. A., Ritala, P., & Albareda, L. (2020). Networking for sustainability: Alliance 
capabilities and sustainability-oriented innovation. Industrial Marketing Management, 
89, 550–565.
Jiang, H., Yang, J., & Gai, J. (2023). How digital platform capability affects the 
innovation performance of SMEs—Evidence from China. Technology in Society, 72, 
Article 102187.
Jiang, Q., Phang, C. W., Tan, C. H., & Chi, J. (2019). Retaining clients in B2B E- 
marketplaces: What do SMEs demand? Journal of Global Information Management, 27 
(3), 19–37.
Kapitan, S., Kennedy, A. M., & Berth, N. (2019). Sustainably superior versus 
greenwasher: A scale measure of B2B sustainability positioning. Industrial Marketing 
Management, 76, 84–97.
Karatepe, O. M. (2013). High-performance work practices, work social support and their 
effects on job embeddedness and turnover intentions. International Journal of 
Contemporary Hospitality Management, 25(6), 903–921.
Khalid, A., Usman, M., Bani-Melhem, S., Zahoor, N., Palmucci, D. N., & Christofi, M. 
(2025). Reducing feelings of xenophobia through cognitive effort: The role of market 
knowledge, collaborative consumption behavior, and affinity for technology 
interaction. Journal of Business Research, 199, Article 115521.
Khan, H. (2020). Is marketing agility important for emerging market firms in advanced 
markets? International Business Review, 29(5), Article 101733.
Khan, H., Khan, Z., & Knight, G. (2025). International marketing agility and cost 
leadership strategies of frontier emerging market exporters in advanced economy 
markets. International Business Review, 34(3), Article 102422.
Khan, I., Hasnain, S., Ullah, S., & Khalid, A. (2018). Impact of transformational 
leadership on employee’s job satisfaction and well-being through team efficacy in 
PMBMC. International Journal of Human Resource Studies, 8(1), 327–339.
Kim, N., Im, S., & Slater, S. F. (2013). Impact of knowledge type and strategic orientation 
on new product creativity and advantage in high-technology firms. Journal of Product 
Innovation Management, 30(1), 136–153.
Kim, S. L., Lee, D., & Yun, S. (2022). Leader boundary-spanning behavior and creative 
behavior: The role of need for status and creative self-efficacy. Leadership and 
Organization Development Journal, 43(6), 835–846.
Ko, W. W., & Liu, G. (2019). How information technology assimilation promotes 
exploratory and exploitative innovation in the small-and medium-sized firm context: 
The role of contextual ambidexterity and knowledge base. Journal of Product 
Innovation Management, 36(4), 442–466.
Laursen, K., & Salter, A. (2006). Open for innovation: The role of openness in explaining 
innovation performance among UK manufacturing firms. Strategic Management 
Journal, 27(2), 131–150.
Lee, Y. K., & Park, J. W. (2016). Impact of a sustainable brand on improving business 
performance of airport enterprises: The case of Incheon international airport. Journal 
of Air Transport Management, 53, 46–53.
Li, T., & Calantone, R. J. (1998). The impact of market knowledge competence on new 
product advantage: Conceptualization and empirical examination. Journal of 
Marketing, 62(4), 13–29.
Liao, Z., Chen, J., Chen, X., & Song, M. (2024). Digital platform capability, 
environmental innovation quality, and firms’ competitive advantage: The 
moderating role of environmental uncertainty. International Journal of Production 
Economics, 268, Article 109124.
Liu, L., Long, J., Fan, Q., Wan, W., & Liu, R. (2023). Examining the functionality of digital 
platform capability in driving B2B firm performance: Evidence from emerging 
market. Journal of Business & Industrial Marketing, 38(9), 1941–1957.
Liu, S., Jiang, K., Chen, J., Pan, J., & Lin, X. (2018). Linking employee boundary 
spanning behavior to task performance: The influence of informal leader emergence 
and group power distance. The International Journal of Human Resource Management, 
29(12), 1879–1899.
Marrone, J. A., Quigley, N. R., Prussia, G. E., & Dienhart, J. (2022). Can supportive 
coaching behaviors facilitate boundary spanning and raise job satisfaction? An 
indirect-effects model. Journal of Management, 48(5), 1131–1159.
Marrone, J. A., Tesluk, P. E., & Carson, J. B. (2007). A multilevel investigation of 
antecedents and consequences of team member boundary-spanning behavior. 
Academy of Management Journal, 50(6), 1423–1439.
A. Khalid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Industrial Marketing Management 130 (2025) 46–59 
58 

Meli´an-Alzola, L., Domínguez-Falc´on, C., & Martín-Santana, J. D. (2020). The role of the 
human dimension in organizational agility: An empirical study in intensive care 
units. Personnel Review, 49(9), 1945–1964.
Moorthy, S., & Polley, D. E. (2010). Technological knowledge breadth and depth: 
Performance impacts. Journal of Knowledge Management, 14(3), 359–377.
Nasution, H. N., & Mavondo, F. T. (2008). Organisational capabilities: Antecedents and 
implications for customer value. European Journal of Marketing, 42(3/4), 477–501.
Nijssen, M., & Paauwe, J. (2012). HRM in turbulent times: How to achieve organizational 
agility? The International Journal of Human Resource Management, 23(16), 
3315–3335.
Pulakos, E. D., Kantrowitz, T., & Schneider, B. (2019). What leads to organizational 
agility: It’s not what you think. Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research, 
71(4), 305.
Rahman, M. S., Bag, S., Gupta, S., & Sivarajah, U. (2023). Technology readiness of B2B 
firms and AI-based customer relationship management capability for enhancing 
social sustainability performance. Journal of Business Research, 156, Article 113525.
Ravichandran, T. (2018). Exploring the relationships between IT competence, innovation 
capacity and organizational agility. The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 27 
(1), 22–42.
Salehzadeh, R., Pool, J. K., Mohseni, A. M., & Tahani, G. (2017). Factors influencing 
organisational performance: The role of knowledge sharing and organisational 
agility. International Journal of Business Excellence, 11(3), 344–356.
Shashi, Centobelli, P., Cerchione, R., & Mittal, A. (2021). Managing sustainability in 
luxury industry to pursue circular economy strategies. Business Strategy and the 
Environment, 30(1), 432–462.
Shree, D., Singh, R. K., Paul, J., Hao, A., & Xu, S. (2021). Digital platforms for business- 
to-business markets: A systematic review and future research agenda. Journal of 
Business Research, 137, 354–365.
Tallon, P. P., & Pinsonneault, A. (2011). Competing perspectives on the link between 
strategic information technology alignment and organizational agility: Insights from 
a mediation model. MIS Quarterly, 463–486.
Teece, D., Peteraf, M., & Leih, S. (2016). Dynamic capabilities and organizational agility: 
Risk, uncertainty, and strategy in the innovation economy. California Management 
Review, 58(4), 13–35.
Teece, D. J. (2007). Explicating dynamic capabilities: The nature and microfoundations 
of (sustainable) enterprise performance. Strategic Management Journal, 28(13), 
1319–1350.
Teece, D. J., Pisano, G., & Shuen, A. (1997). Dynamic capabilities and strategic 
management. Strategic Management Journal, 18(7), 509–533.
Usman, M., Del Giudice, M., Papa, A., Singh, S. K., & Khalid, A. (2025). The role of 
ethical leadership’s CSR initiatives and leader’s trait mindfulness in consumer well- 
being in multinational hotels. Management International Review, 1–24.
Usman, M., Khalid, A., Bo˘gan, E., Bani-Melhem, S., & Olya, H. (2025). Fulfill obligation 
toward nature and consume together: Unraveling the influence of social media 
opinion leadership on collaborative consumption. Journal of Service Theory and 
Practice, 35(3), 397–419.
Van Loo, E. J., Caputo, V., Nayga, R. M., Jr., Seo, H. S., Zhang, B., & Verbeke, W. (2015). 
Sustainability labels on coffee: Consumer preferences, willingness-to-pay and visual 
attention to attributes. Ecological Economics, 118, 215–225.
Van Oosterhout, M., Waarts, E., & Van Hillegersberg, J. (2006). Change factors requiring 
agility and implications for IT. European Journal of Information Systems, 15(2), 
132–145.
Vogel, R., & Güttel, W. H. (2013). The dynamic capability view in strategic management: 
A bibliometric review. International Journal of Management Reviews, 15(4), 426–446.
Wang, N., Wan, J., Ma, Z., Zhou, Y., & Chen, J. (2023). How digital platform capabilities 
improve sustainable innovation performance of firms: The mediating role of open 
innovation. Journal of Business Research, 167, Article 114080.
Wang, W., Yin, X., Coles, R., & Chen, J. (2024). More knowledge, better innovation? Role 
of knowledge breadth and depth. Management Decision, 62(5), 1576–1597.
Wang, Y., Tian, Q., Li, X., & Xiao, X. (2022). Different roles, different strokes: How to 
leverage two types of digital platform capabilities to fuel service innovation. Journal 
of Business Research, 144, 1121–1128.
Wu, L. Y. (2010). Applicability of the resource-based and dynamic-capability views 
under environmental volatility. Journal of Business Research, 63(1), 27–31.
Xiao, X., Tian, Q., & Mao, H. (2020). How the interaction of big data analytics 
capabilities and digital platform capabilities affects service innovation: A dynamic 
capabilities view. IEEE Access, 8, 18778–18796.
Xu, S. (2015). Balancing the two knowledge dimensions in innovation efforts: An 
empirical examination among pharmaceutical firms. Journal of Product Innovation 
Management, 32(4), 610–621.
Xu, S., & Cavusgil, E. (2019). Knowledge breadth and depth development through 
successful R&D alliance portfolio configuration: An empirical investigation in the 
pharmaceutical industry. Journal of Business Research, 101, 402–410.
Yang, D., Jin, L., & Sheng, S. (2017). The effect of knowledge breadth and depth on new 
product performance. International Journal of Market Research, 59(4), 517–536.
Yao, K., Li, X., & Liang, B. (2021). Failure learning and entrepreneurial resilience: The 
moderating role of firms’ knowledge breadth and knowledge depth. Journal of 
Knowledge Management, 25(9), 2141–2160.
Zahoor, N., Khan, H., Donbesuur, F., Khan, Z., & Rajwani, T. (2024). Grand challenges 
and emerging market small and medium enterprises: The role of strategic agility and 
gender diversity. Journal of Product Innovation Management, 41(2), 473–500.
Zhang, Q., & Li, J. (2021). Can employee’s boundary-spanning behavior exactly promote 
innovation performance? The roles of creative ideas generation and team task 
interdependence. International Journal of Manpower, 42(6), 1047–1063.
Zheng, Z., & Ahmed, R. I. (2022). Humble leadership and employee creative performance 
in China: The roles of boundary spanning behavior and traditionality. Personnel 
Review. https://doi.org/10.1108/PR-10-2021-0775
Zhou, L., Mao, H., Zhao, T., Wang, V. L., Wang, X., & Zuo, P. (2022). How B2B platform 
improves buyers’ performance: Insights into platform’s substitution effect. Journal of 
Business Research, 143, 72–80.
Zhu, J., Xin, L., & Li, M. (2023). How and when is boundary-spanning behaviour related 
to innovative behaviour: Role of intrinsic motivation and organisational support. 
European Journal of Innovation Management. https://doi.org/10.1108/EJIM-11-2022- 
0608
A. Khalid et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
Industrial Marketing Management 130 (2025) 46–59 
59 
