Strategic Management Journal
Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 317–338 (1999)
THE LEVERAGING OF INTERFIRM RELATIONSHIPS
AS A DISTINCTIVE ORGANIZATIONAL CAPABILITY:
A LONGITUDINAL STUDY
GIANNI LORENZONI AND ANDREA LIPPARINI*
Department of Management, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy
In this paper we present a study of the structure of three lead ﬁrm-network relationships at
two points in time. Using data on companies in the packaging machine industry, we study the
process of vertical disintegration and focus on the ability to coordinate competencies and
combine knowledge across corporate boundaries. We argue that the capability to interact with
other companies—which we call relational capability—accelerates the lead ﬁrm’s knowledge
access and transfer with relevant effects on company growth and innovativeness. This study
provides evidence that interﬁrm networks can be shaped and deliberately designed: over time
managers develop a specialized supplier network and build a narrower and more competitive
set of core competencies. The ability to integrate knowledge residing both inside and outside
the ﬁrm’s boundaries emerges as a distinctive organizational capability. Our main goal is to
contribute to the current discussion of cooperative ties and dynamic aspects of interﬁrm
networks, adding new dimensions to resource-based and knowledge-based interpretations of
company performance. Copyright Ó1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
INTRODUCTION
Reliance on strategic alliances and interﬁrm
relationships has grown considerably in recent
years, while partnerships with external actors have
become a central strategy for many organizations
in a wide range of industrial contexts (Mowery,
1988; Badaracco, 1991; Nohria and Eccles, 1992;
Gulati, 1995; Beamish and Killing, 1997). Part-
nerships are motivated, among other things, by
the need to achieve production efﬁciency, share
R&D risks, gain access to new markets and skills,
and achieve time compression in the development
of new products and the search for new techno-
Key words: organizational competencies; interﬁrm
relationships; relational capabilities
*Correspondence to: Professors G. Lorenzoni and A. Lippar-
ini, Dipartimento di Discipline Economico-Aziendali, Univer-
sita`degli Studi di Bologna, Piazza Scaravilli 1, 40126 Bol-
ogna, Italy
CCC 0143–2095/99/040317–22 $17.50 Received 26 June 1996
Copyright Ó1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Final revision received 28 July 1998logical opportunities (Kogut, 1988; Hagedoorn,
1993; Eisenhardt and Schoonhoven, 1996).
The option to share strategies and pool
resources is seen as a variant of the make-or-
buy decision, based largely on transaction cost
economics (Williamson, 1991; Hennart, 1991).
The transaction cost approach emphasizes the
logic of single-party cost optimization but does
not fully encompass other types of costs, e.g.,
learning costs (Ring, 1996a), and coordination
costs (Gulati and Singh, 1998). Furthermore, the
static nature of transaction cost economics, focus-
ing as it does on a single transaction, is not
appropriate for understanding learning and inno-
vative processes when knowledge is broadly dis-
tributed and the locus of innovation is found
in a network of interorganizational relationships
(Zajac and Olsen, 1993; Powell, Koput, and
Smith-Doerr, 1996).
One of the main tenets of organizational
research states that organizations react to uncer-
tainties and dependencies in their environment by

318G. Lorenzoni and A. Lipparini
removing transactions from the market and plac-
ing them in more hierarchical contexts
(Williamson, 1975; Ouchi, 1980), and this has
been regarded as one of the fundamental prin-
ciples of organizational design (Pfeffer and Salan-
cik, 1978). However, more recent research is
beginning to question the generality of this prin-
ciple by showing that—when market uncertainty
increases—individual companies tend to interact
more, rather than less, with other organizations,
thereby increasing the overall volume of their
market transactions (Podolny, 1994). As a conse-
quence, the main effect of market uncertainty is
not the absorption of the source of uncertainty
within corporate boundaries, but increased
reliance on external partners who are known and
trusted as reliable (Baker, 1992).
The resource-based view (hereafter RBV)
examines strategic capabilities as a pool of inter-
nal resources which are strategically important
for the creation of competitive advantage
(Penrose, 1959; Rumelt, 1984; Wernerfelt, 1984;
Barney, 1991; Amit and Schoemaker, 1993). The
RBV also suggests that the combination of a
unique collection of resources within a single
ﬁrm will create synergies leading to sources of
sustained competitive advantage (Barney, 1991).
A growing body of literature, focusing on dif-
ferent industrial sectors and large and small ﬁrms,
sees collaborative practices as a viable method
of knowledge creation and transfer (Hamel, 1991;
Nonaka, 1994; Powell et al., 1996), even though
the risk of knowledge erosion is emphasized in
some quarters (Teece, 1987). Strategic alliances
may also create competitive advantage through
idiosyncratic complementary resource combi-
nations between partnering ﬁrms (Kogut, 1991),
while the idiosyncratic nature and embeddedness
of the central ﬁrm’s relational assets make imita-
bility difﬁcult (Hansen et al., 1997).
The dynamic capabilities perspective (Teece
and Pisano, 1994; Lado and Wilson, 1994; Teece,
Pisano, and Shuen, 1997) emphasizes that the
distinctive competencies of external actors, such
as buyers and suppliers, are among the driving
factors in vertical integration or deintegration
decisions. Along this vein, the knowledge-based
view of the ﬁrm (Grant and Baden-Fuller, 1995;
Conner and Prahalad, 1996) considers the ability
to integrate the efforts of different actors as
important as the capacity to innovate (Grant,
1996a).
Copyright Ó1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 317–338 (1999)The above perspectives informed and guided
our research on the evolution of interﬁrm net-
works and on ﬁrms’ capabilities to interact with
other ﬁrms. By seeing the ﬁrm as transactionally
intensive in nature (Hansen et al., 1997), and
based on an architecture of capabilities (Grant,
1996b), these approaches supply considerable
theoretical support for the assertion that a ﬁrms’
performance is directly linked to its efforts in
competence building and renewal. Despite the
different perspectives, all the approaches share
the assumption that interﬁrm relationships are of
the utmost importance for knowledge access and
transfer. The creation and development of tightly
integrated production networks similar to those
described in the study emerge as a source of
competitive advantage over competitors who
forego intense relational activity.
Our study is aimed at ﬁlling some gaps in the
above literature. The growing body of anecdotal
and empirical literature on interﬁrm relationships
has highlighted the importance of a ﬁrm’s
relational capability, but the attempt to link this
capability to the achievement of a sustainable
competitive position has often led to results of
limited value for researchers and practitioners.
With few exceptions (Madhavan, Koka, and
Prescott, 1998), theoretical development on stra-
tegic alliances and networks are mainly concerned
with cross-sectional analysis. Despite the interest
in the strategic implication of networks, there is
still a strong need for better theories on network
evolution and change (Nohria and Eccles, 1992;
Lipparini and Sobrero, 1997). Past work has
tended to consider networks as given contexts,
rather than a structure that can be deliberately
designed.
To ﬁll this gap, we approached longitudinally
three interﬁrm networks taken from a successful
business environment, namely the producers of
automatic packaging machines. The analysis,
based on the study of the structure of lead ﬁrm-
network relationships at two points in time, takes
into account the evolution of the network struc-
tures as well as the evolution of those capabilities
required to manage a progressive intensiﬁcation
of interﬁrm ties.
Another gap in the literature is that it is mainly
concerned with the study of diadyc ties (Gulati,
1998). We move beyond the impact of single
alliances by considering the entire set of relation-
ships that should be activated for the realization
 10970266, 1999, 4, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(199904)20:4<317::AID-SMJ28>3.0.CO;2-3 by University Of Oklahoma, Wiley Online Library on [05/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


Leveraging of Interﬁrm Relationships 319
of a speciﬁc product. We highlight how invest-
ments for the creation of an integrated network
of suppliers are a common strategy for ﬁrms
structurally geared to multiple and frequent inter-
actions. In this sense, we aim at providing a
fertile ground for theory building on the issue of
interﬁrm relationships and lead-ﬁrm networks. In
particular, interﬁrm networks can be shaped and
deliberately designed; over time, managers tend
to create a tightly related supplier network and
build a narrower and more competitive set of
core competencies.
The paper is organized as follows. The ﬁrst
section sets out the theoretical background which
informed our research. The second section
presents the study, highlighting the industrial set-
ting and the relational context in which the three
manufacturers operate. The third section focuses
on the structuring of functional activities inside
and outside the ﬁrm, and on the longitudinal
study of the production network. The ﬁnal sec-
tions contain discussion and conclusion, together
with implications for further research.
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
Our research questions originated from some
weakness of different theoretical perspectives, and
was guided by some of their theoretical assump-
tions. One weakness of transaction–costs eco-
nomics (TCE) is its static comparative analysis
and the normative assumptions underlying the
generalized boundary conditions that exist
between ﬁrm and market (Zajac and Olsen,
1993). These factors contrast with dynamic rent-
seeking behavior centered on the leveraging of
distinctive capabilities. Furthermore, TCE
research primarily has been concerned with trans-
actions involving tangible assets, whereas many
researchers relate organizational rents to the pos-
session of intangible assets such as learning, and
reputation (Barney and Hansen, 1994).
While TCE focuses on how to integrate various
activities in order to lower transaction costs, the
RBV emphasizes the untradability and immobility
of idiosyncratic resources as the basis of competi-
tive advantage (Dierickx and Cool, 1989; Peteraf,
1993). The RBV sees the ﬁrm’s enduring com-
petitive advantage as related to the possession of
unique, inimitable resources and capabilities, and
to processes of resource accumulation and deploy-
Copyright Ó1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 317–338 (1999)ment (Wernerfelt, 1984; Barney, 1986). Amit and
Schoemaker (1993) refer to capabilities as tan-
gible or intangible assets which are ﬁrm-speciﬁc,
created over time through complex interactions
among the ﬁrm’s resources, and based on
developing, carrying, and exchanging information
through the ﬁrm’s human capital.
In search of theoretical support for the
relational capability of a ﬁrm, we depart from the
assumption of asset immobility which currently
dominates the RBV (Barney, 1991) and which
has prompted critiques based on its being a poten-
tial source of rigidities and inertia (Hannan and
Freeman, 1989). In particular, Peteraf (1993)
argues that there are different kinds of imperfect
mobility that do not deprive or hurt the company
looking outside for sources of competitive advan-
tage. Hansen et al. (1997) claim that some of
the unique resources of a ﬁrm are selectively
tradable through a network of ﬁrms. The investi-
gation of capabilities implies a dynamic and pro-
cessual approach. One common weakness of TCE
and RBV perspectives is their focus on a single
ﬁrm and on single transactions, providing less
insight into the processes by which multiple ﬁrms,
working collaboratively, develop individual and
common capabilities.
The capabilities arising from resource-based
interaction among autonomous but interdependent
ﬁrms have only recently begun to receive some
attention. Interorganizational relationships are a
viable option for the creation of a sustained coop-
erative advantage (Ring, 1996b) through idiosyn-
cratic, yet complementary, resource combinations
(Kogut, 1991; Kogut and Zander, 1992). A
resource-based view of strategic alliances has
been advanced by Eisenhardt and Schoonhoven
(1996). Their basic assumption is that alliances
are formed when ﬁrms are in a vulnerable stra-
tegic position for which they need additional
resources, or when ﬁrms are in strong social
positions giving them the resources critical to
know, attract, and engage partners.
Along this vein, the dynamic capability
approach and the knowledge-based view of the
ﬁrm have been useful in informing and guiding
our study. The dynamic capability paradigm
(Lado and Wilson, 1994; Teece et al., 1997) is
an integrative approach to the RBV offering a
closer understanding of sources of competitive
advantage. The emphasis on process becomes
explicit when the authors afﬁrm that it is
 10970266, 1999, 4, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(199904)20:4<317::AID-SMJ28>3.0.CO;2-3 by University Of Oklahoma, Wiley Online Library on [05/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


320G. Lorenzoni and A. Lipparini
extremely important to investigate the mechanism
by which ﬁrms accumulate and disseminate new
skills and capabilities to reply promptly to
changes in the competitive environment despite
conditions of path dependencies and core rigid-
ities in technological and organizational proc-
esses. The possession of dynamic competencies
leads to several fundamental features of strategic
maneuvering: high response capability, reduced
time-to-market, innovative capability.
The recent conceptualization of a knowledge-
based theory (KBT) also represents considerable
support for our assertion that one of the strategic
capabilities of the ﬁrm is its ability to integrate
knowledge (Grant, 1996a) and to transform dis-
persed, tacit, and explicit competencies into a
wide body of organizational knowledge (Nonaka,
1994). Interﬁrm networks may provide an effec-
tive way to organize knowledge transfer or access
in dynamically competitive domains, and in con-
texts where complex knowledge is scattered or
specialized, as well as to use and build on knowl-
edge. Organizational learning capability is
especially critical since idiosyncratic advantages
naturally erode over time, and an intensive
exchange of knowledge, deliberately delivered,
may help reinforce strategic positioning. Grant
(1991, 1996b) embraces the idea of a ﬁrm’s
competencies being the ability to deploy
resources, usually in combination, using organi-
zational processes to achieve a desired end. In
this sense, suppliers are regarded as resources
enabling ﬁrms to consolidate in-house com-
petencies.
An increasing number of studies supplies valu-
able support to the theoretical perspective
presented above. In modern economies, ﬁrms
engage in a narrow set of activities which are
embedded in a complex chain of interﬁrm
relationships (Dyer, 1996). Consequently, the
investigation of the division of innovative and
manufacturing activities between a lead manufac-
turer and its suppliers might be useful in high-
lighting what competencies a ﬁrm should develop
to integrate and synchronize such a wide number
of actors.
Organizations are more and more involved in
multiple repeated alliances. Research on the auto-
motive industry (Womack, Jones, and Ross, 1990;
Clark and Fujimoto, 1991; Nishiguchi, 1994)
highlights the superior performance achieved by
ﬁrms which rely on tiers of external suppliers,
Copyright Ó1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 317–338 (1999)and mobilize them in order to reduce development
risks, time-to-market, quality defect rates, and
stocks, while at the same time enhancing their
capacity for innovation and ﬂexibility (Helper,
1991). Despite the intensiﬁcation of the relational
activity of the ﬁrms, a narrow body of research
has focused attention on the evolutionary process
of interﬁrm ties formation (Doz, 1996).
A useful area stemming from current research
is the analysis and measurement of a ﬁrm’s capa-
bility to develop, integrate, and transfer knowl-
edge across different actors in a network. Even
if empirical investigations on the relational capa-
bility of the ﬁrm are not yet diffused, several
conceptualizations of competence reveal their use-
fulness for a ﬁne-tuning of this concept. In order
to manage efﬁciently the complex relational sets
in which they are embedded, organizations must
develop: the ability to absorb competencies from
others (Cohen and Levinthal, 1990); the ability
to combine and coordinate the technical dimen-
sions of a large number of ﬁrms (Kogut and
Zander, 1992); the ability—described as
‘architectural’—to combine existing competencies
or generate new knowledge, if required
(Henderson and Cockburn, 1994).1
In summary, we advanced an argument that
the ability to interact and share knowledge with
other companies is a distinctive organizational
competence for ﬁrms transactionally intensive in
nature.
THE LONGITUDINAL STUDY
Research design and method
Most deﬁnitions and theories in the ﬁeld of stra-
tegic management are longitudinal (Mintzberg
and Waters, 1985; Porter, 1991), and strategic
moves or organizational structures can be better
understood if they are tracked over time (Miller
and Friesen, 1982; Schendel, 1996). In order to
examine whether or not there are differences
between ﬁrms from the same industry, as well as
between old and new boundaries at the ﬁrm’s
level, we have explored the relational sets of
1In addition, others also enrich the concept of relational
capability when talking of ‘integrative capabilities’ (Lawrence
and Lorsch, 1967), ‘architectural knowledge’ (Henderson and
Clark, 1990), ‘collective knowledge’ (Spender, 1994), ‘organi-
zational architecture’ (Nelson, 1991), and ‘architecture of
capabilities’ (Grant, 1996b).
 10970266, 1999, 4, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(199904)20:4<317::AID-SMJ28>3.0.CO;2-3 by University Of Oklahoma, Wiley Online Library on [05/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


Leveraging of Interﬁrm Relationships 321
three Italian ﬁrms recognized as major inter-
national players in the packaging machinery
industry (SIC 3565). This industry was deemed
as an appropriate research setting mainly for two
reasons. First, ﬁrms in the packaging machinery
industry are competing on the technological fore-
front at the international level. Second, this is an
industry setting in which interﬁrm relationships
are likely to be strategic due to increasing needs
to share R&D risks, and achieve time com-
pression in the development of new products.
The collection of data, initiated in 1995, is part
of a larger survey of the ‘Packaging Valley,’ an
industrial district located in the northern Italian
city of Bologna, which has the highest concen-
tration of ﬁrms operating in the design and manu-
facturing of automatic packaging machines. Of
these ﬁrms—identiﬁed using data bases, personal
contacts, and institutional sources of
information—three were studied longitudinally
(1988–95). Our longitudinal analysis required the
use of measures of identical subjects (one speci-
ﬁc product).
The analysis was conducted at product level.
Initially, we gathered information on each com-
pany’s history, products, and markets from open-
ended interviews. The next step, undertaken
jointly with the top management, was the iden-
tiﬁcation, for each of the three ﬁrms, of a product
in existence since 1988 and representative of the
company’s portfolio and technological position.
We then mapped the internal and external contri-
butions and competencies required for its design
and manufacturing, as well as the determinants
of the actual conﬁguration of activities. To do
this, we asked the CEOs to identify more speci-
ﬁcally the persons in their respective organi-
zations who could comment most knowledgeably
on ‘who’ does ‘what,’ at the product level, and
‘why’ the ﬁrm opted for the ‘in-house’ or the
external conﬁguration for a speciﬁc production
activity.
Another step was the identiﬁcation of structural
changes in lead ﬁrm-networks over time—
changes which have led to the current distribution
of product and component knowledge across
boundaries. To capture these aspects, we decided
to undertake a longitudinal study of the entire
process of manufacturing of a packaging machine,
at two points in time (1988 and 1995), analyzing:
(a) how ﬁrms distributed across their boundaries
the various activities and competencies, (b) why
Copyright Ó1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 317–338 (1999)network evolution occurred, and (c) what hap-
pened in between and how leveraging was occur-
ring.
Individual interviews with the CEOs, top man-
agers, and technicians were conducted within each
company. Efforts were made to interview the
individuals directly involved in new product
development and actively managing external
relationships. Follow-up questions were asked
during additional interviews. The interviews
ended in late 1996. In total, nearly 40 hours of
interviews were conducted with 19 individual
respondents.
The sample
The sample consists of three Italian manufacturers
of automatic packaging machinery. These
medium-sized ﬁrms are part of a larger industrial
context comprising companies specializing in the
production of special-purpose machines designed
for speciﬁc packaging tasks (i.e. blistering, wrap-
ping, or ﬁlling machines), which have contributed
to Italy’s position of technological leadership in
this industry at the international level. Competi-
tive positioning also arises from locational advan-
tages due to proximity with specialized sources
of knowledge, such as suppliers, technical col-
leges, and even competitors, thereby allowing
both small and large manufacturers to draw on
different competencies.
The distinctive competencies of these ﬁrms
which contribute to their positioning at the inter-
national level are to be found in an ability to
create value for customers with totally new brands
or simple improvements on past machines; to
enter new markets faster than their competitors;
to rely on external specialized sources of knowl-
edge; to act as ‘system integrators,’ able to offer
a wide range of packaging machines and complete
lines thanks to acquisitions and collaborative
agreements. These ﬁrms originated in the same
incubator (ACMA Spa), which led directly or
indirectly to the creation of ‘Packaging Valley’
through a spin-off process (Porter, 1990). As a
consequence of their distinctive competencies,
there is broad recognition in the organizational
community of their status and leading role in the
relationship sets in which they are embedded.
Ima Spa, founded in 1960, is the world leader
in teabag packaging machines (global market
share of 75%), and a major competitor in the
 10970266, 1999, 4, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(199904)20:4<317::AID-SMJ28>3.0.CO;2-3 by University Of Oklahoma, Wiley Online Library on [05/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


322G. Lorenzoni and A. Lipparini
pharmaceutical industry machinery market. In
1995 it exported about 90 percent of its products.
It employs 1000 personnel and its net sales to-
talled $290 million in 1995. Corazza Spa is the
world leader in packaging machines for bouillon
cubes and cheese (global market share of 80%).
Established in 1956, it has a workforce of 254
employees and in 1995 its net sales totaled $46
million. In 1996 the ﬁrm became part of a Chi-
nese group. Wrapmatic Spa is the world leader
in the packaging of tissue and paper for ofﬁce
use and exports 90 percent of its output. Recently,
it moved into the pharmaceutical industry with
the development of a blistering machine. Estab-
lished in 1960, it now employees 200 personnel
and its net sales in 1995 totaled approximately
$42 million. In 1991 Wrapmatic was sold to a
German group.
The products: mobilizing and integrating
internal and external competencies
Our analysis focused on three successful packag-
ing machines for the pharmaceutical, food, and
paper industries. These machines are systems of
interactive parts and groups, all highly inter-
dependent, emerging from a manufacturing proc-
ess involving sophisticated equipment and a large
number of operations. Each one of the major
groups of packing machine is itself a system,
comprising a set of interacting and interlocking
parts. Since each component is part of a larger
system, mutual adjustment and interﬁrm coordi-
nation are required. In recent years, customers
(i.e., large multinational pharmaceutical or food-
processing companies) have changed their pro-
curement strategies. Instead of buying the con-
stituent parts of a packaging line from different
suppliers, they prefer to deal with a single source.
This has forced small and medium-sized packag-
ing manufacturers to engage in collaborative prac-
tices in order to gain access to external special-
ized knowledge, and thus supply a complete line.
The leveraging of interﬁrm ties and the use of
external specialized knowledge is therefore funda-
mental to supplying a multinational with, for
instance, a ﬁlling line comprising an automatic
depacker, rotary ﬁlling and closing machines, a
labeling machine, a cartoning machine,
wrapping/binding machines, a vertical case
packer, and a palletizer.
The ﬁrst product we report on is the Ima
Copyright Ó1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 317–338 (1999)C90, a blistering machine for the pharmaceutical
industry whose main features are low operating
cost, reliability, and extreme ﬂexibility. It consists
of different units operating as a whole. The ﬁrst
version, introduced in 1988, was modiﬁed in 1993
in order to enter the Japanese and Far East
markets. We began our analysis by asking tech-
nicians to split the machine into functional
groups, and to specify, for each of them, whether
the product design and product manufacturing
were performed in-house, externally, or both, thus
assigning speciﬁc internal competencies in design
or manufacturing where the ﬁrm relies on internal
forms of organization. We then asked managers
to be explicit as to the form of organization they
adopted for the design or manufacturing of that
type of contribution. Among the options, our
respondents indicated that design activity was
carried out by an internal R&D department, at a
supplier site, or jointly via co-design practices
entailing—usually at the supplier site—the simul-
taneous presence of technicians from the lead
ﬁrm and the supplier. Similarly, we found that
manufacturing activity was either performed by
the ﬁrm’s assembly department, by the supplier in
its factory, or via co-makership practices, usually
performed at the supplier site.
Table 1 sets out the organization of Ima C90
design and manufacturing, as well as an appraisal
of the signiﬁcant determinants which guided the
ﬁrm in its choice of what was considered the
most appropriate form of organization for the
fabrication of a speciﬁc group. These ﬁndings
were obtained from interviews with technicians,
functional managers, and CEOs.
The ﬁrm relies largely on internal competencies
for its product design. Access to external
capabilities—via co-design practices—is limited
to the shearing group and the numbering–
sectioning unit. Other parts or groups such as the
printer, protection devices, and TV camera for
quality control are wholly designed and manufac-
tured outside, since they are standard products
available by catalogue or with minor adaptations
on the basis of the individual packaging ﬁrm’s
requirements. Even though suppliers are taking
on more and more design work, this activity is
still a prerogative of Ima. The situation is differ-
ent when it comes to the organization of manufac-
turing activity. With the exception of the compo-
nent group known as the ‘sealing roller,’ all the
other groups are purchased from outside suppliers
 10970266, 1999, 4, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(199904)20:4<317::AID-SMJ28>3.0.CO;2-3 by University Of Oklahoma, Wiley Online Library on [05/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


Leveraging of Interﬁrm Relationships 323Table 1. Organization of Ima ‘C90’ design and manufacturing
Main groups and parts Product design Product fabrication Make-or-buy
Signiﬁcant determinants
In-house Out-sourced Form of In-house Out-sourced Form of
organization organization
Shearing group OO Co-design OSupplier Distinctive ﬁrm capabilities
Dropping group O R&D dept OSupplier Distinctive ﬁrm capabilities
Electrical box O R&D dept OSupplier Distinctive capabilities and economies of scale
Motorization O R&D dept OO Co-makership Complementary capabilities
Cooling group O R&D dept OO Co-makership Complementary capabilities
Numbering–sectioning unit OO Co-design OSupplier Distinctive ﬁrm capabilities
Sealing roller O R&D dept O Assembly dept In-house distinctive capabilities and uncertainty
Feeding group O R&D dept OSupplier Management costs/distinctive ﬁrm capabilities
Microprocessor unit O R&D dept OSupplier Distinctive capabilities and economies of scale
Folding group for summaries OSupplier OSupplier Low asset speciﬁcity/distinctive ﬁrm capability
Printing group OSupplier OSupplier Low asset speciﬁcity/distinctive ﬁrm capability
Industrial accident protections OSupplier OSupplier Low asset speciﬁcity/distinctive ﬁrm capability
Quality control TV camera OSupplier OSupplier Low asset speciﬁcity/distinctive ﬁrm capability
Source: Ima Spa. Use of data authorized by the ﬁrm.
Copyright Ó1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 317–338 (1999)
 10970266, 1999, 4, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(199904)20:4<317::AID-SMJ28>3.0.CO;2-3 by University Of Oklahoma, Wiley Online Library on [05/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


324G. Lorenzoni and A. Lipparini
or co-manufactured, as is the case, for example,
with the motors and the cooling component
groups. This extensive mobilization of external
manufacturing capabilities is a common practice
in this industry, thanks to the suppliers’ special-
ized knowledge of mechanics and electronics.
In 1995, the sealing roller was the only compo-
nent group designed and manufactured by relying
exclusively on Ima’s distinctive internal com-
petencies. This item—strategic for the quality and
integrity of the pill within the blister—would still
be manufactured by Ima even if suppliers could
produce it more efﬁciently. The high environmen-
tal uncertainty surrounding this component group,
deriving from the fact that potential suppliers
cannot guarantee a stable long-term relationship
as far as product quality is concerned, combined
with the possession of unique internal com-
petencies developed over time, makes internal
production of the sealing roller the only viable
option currently available to Ima. Nevertheless,
the ﬁrm has started to cultivate a potential sup-
plier for future joint design practices.
The choice between internal resources and
competencies and the reliance on a supplier net-
work are motivated by different reasons. The
need to keep up with technological advancements
suggests reliance on external contributions when
a speciﬁc supplier is recognized as having a
distinctive capability. This is the case with the
‘sharing’ and ‘dropping’ groups, the ‘numbering’
and ‘sectioning’ machines, and the electrical box.
Suppliers’ possession of unique capabilities brings
advantages when producing a large number of
component groups for different customers. The
practice of co-makership is a viable option for the
lead ﬁrm when suppliers possess complementary
capabilities, allowing them to form part of a team
for the manufacturing of a speciﬁc product. Low
asset speciﬁcity and the possession of specialized
competencies in governing speciﬁc technologies
at the supplier level are the basic determinants
inﬂuencing the purchase of entire groups or
components from catalogues.
The Corazza FD12-AD12/N is a packing and
packaging line for bouillon cubes. Its main pro-
duction features are high speed and versatility.
Using the same interpretative logic adopted for
Ima, we ﬁnd that extensive use is made of inter-
nal competencies in design activity. Table 2
shows how all the main subassemblies and parts
are designed in-house, except for the ‘weight
Copyright Ó1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 317–338 (1999)control’ group and, less importantly, the ‘printer’
and ‘machine protection’ groups which are readily
available on the market. Corazza employs a team
of designers and engineers working on the entire
set of functions a machine should perform. This
does not involve co-design activity, but there is
large-scale recourse to collaborative practices in
manufacturing. With the exception of component
groups available on the market, only the ‘forming
boxes’ and the ‘dosing’ groups are fabricated
without the direct participation of Corazza tech-
nicians. The ‘buy’ option arises when comple-
mentary capabilities are needed and/or the sharing
of resources with suppliers leads to greater
efﬁciency. When external ﬁrms possess distinctive
capabilities, volume advantages, or operate in
situations characterized by low asset speciﬁcity,
the practice of co-makership tends to be replaced
by direct procurement from the supply market.
The strategic ‘weight control’ operating unit is
highly sophisticated and wholly developed by a
partner in whom the ﬁrm invested heavily at the
beginning of the relationship. In contrast with
Ima’s strategy for its ‘sealing roller,’ and even
though the ‘weight control’ component is critical
to the machine’s success, the ﬁrm has not
invested to develop the internal competencies
required to lower the risk of opportunistic
behavior or constraints in the procurement of
such a component. The external supplier is recog-
nized as trustworthy, and as having distinctive
capabilities in producing and supplying high-
quality products to many major customers inter-
nationally.
The Wrapmatic PW33 is a wrapping machine
for tissue products. Since its introduction in 1987,
it has been upgraded to include the latest technol-
ogies for the transportation and control of the
product. This machine, 95 percent of whose parts
are made by outside suppliers, can operate either
independently or within a line comprised of dif-
ferent units, all supplied by satellite ﬁrms. Like
the other ﬁrms, Wrapmatic has invested heavily
to develop internally the set of competencies
required to design the different groups comprising
a packaging line. Co-design activities are
performed for the ‘electrical box’ and the
‘microprocessor unit’ (Table 3). Similarities with
Corazza’s network organization are to be found
in manufacturing. Here, with few exceptions, joint
activity with external suppliers is the rule. Given
the critical importance of computerized control
 10970266, 1999, 4, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(199904)20:4<317::AID-SMJ28>3.0.CO;2-3 by University Of Oklahoma, Wiley Online Library on [05/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


Leveraging of Interﬁrm Relationships 325Table 2. Organization of Corazza ‘FD12 +AD12/N’ design and manufacturing
Main groups and parts Product design Product fabrication Make-or-buy
Signiﬁcant determinants
In-house Out-sourced Form of In-house Out-sourced Form of
organization organization
Paper feeding group O R&D Dept OO Co-makership Complementary capability
Forming boxes group O R&D Dept OSupplier Distinctive ﬁrm capabilities
Dosing group O R&D Dept OSupplier Distinctive ﬁrm capabilities
Folding group O R&D Dept OO Co-makership Complementary capabilities
Turning group for bouillon O R&D Dept OO Co-makership Complementary capabilities
Exit group O R&D Dept OO Co-makership Complementary capabilities
Weight control Supplier OSupplier Distinctive ﬁrm capabilities
Feeding group OO R&D Dept OO Co-makership Complementary capabilities
Feeding group II O R&D Dept OO Co-makership Complementary capabilities
Glue dispenser O R&D Dept OO Co-makership Complementary capabilities/asset speciﬁcity
Ink-jet printer OSupplier OSupplier Distinctive capabilities/economies of scale
Closing boxes equipment O R&D Dept OO Co-makership Complementary capabilities
Electrical box O R&D Dept OSupplier Distinctive capabilities/economies of scale
Industrial accident protections OSupplier OSupplier Low asset speciﬁcity/distinctive ﬁrm
capabilities/economies of scale
Source: Corazza Spa. Use of data authorized by the ﬁrm.
Copyright Ó1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 317–338 (1999)
 10970266, 1999, 4, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(199904)20:4<317::AID-SMJ28>3.0.CO;2-3 by University Of Oklahoma, Wiley Online Library on [05/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


326G. Lorenzoni and A. Lipparini
Table 3. Organization of Wrapmatic ‘PW33’ design and manufacturing
Main groups and parts Product design Product fabrication Make-or-buy
signiﬁcant determinants
In-house Out-sourced Form of In-house Out-sourced Form of
organization organization
Product throwers O R&D dept OO Co-makership Complementary capabilities
Feeding draft O R&D dept OO Co-makership Complementary capabilities
Motorization O R&D dept OO Co-makership Complementary capabilities/low asset
speciﬁcity
Unwrapping and cutting group O R&D dept OO Co-makership Complementary capabilities
Folders motorization group O R&D dept OO Co-makership Complementary capabilities
Wrapping and lateral folding O R&D dept OO Co-makership Complementary capabilities
Exit draft O R&D dept OO Co-makership Complementary capabilities
Electrical box OO Co-design O Supplier Distinctive capabilities and economies of scale
Microprocessor unit OO Co-design OO Co-makership Distinctive capabilities and economies of scale
Industrial accident protections O Supplier O Supplier Low asset speciﬁcity/distinctive ﬁrm
capability
Source: Wrapmatic Spa. Use of data authorized by the ﬁrm.
Copyright Ó1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 317–338 (1999)
 10970266, 1999, 4, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(199904)20:4<317::AID-SMJ28>3.0.CO;2-3 by University Of Oklahoma, Wiley Online Library on [05/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


Leveraging of Interﬁrm Relationships 327Table 4. The structure of interﬁrm relationships in the sample
Leading ﬁrm Ima Corazza Wrapmatic
Suppliers NDistance Duration NDistance Duration NDistance Duration
(avg. miles) (avg. years) (avg. miles) (avg. years) (avg. miles) (avg. years)
1st tier 13 32 17 14 36 15 10 41 14
2nd tier 104 44 9 116 61 6 94 36 9
3rd tier 512 – – 602 – – 391 – –
Source: Archival data. Data refer to those relationships needed for the realization of a speciﬁc product.
Values concerning proximity reﬂect the distance between 1st or 2nd tier suppliers and lead manufacturer’s main location.
Copyright Ó1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 317–338 (1999)
 10970266, 1999, 4, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(199904)20:4<317::AID-SMJ28>3.0.CO;2-3 by University Of Oklahoma, Wiley Online Library on [05/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


328G. Lorenzoni and A. Lipparini
to machine performance, the microprocessor unit
requires both internal and external competencies
in design and manufacturing. This reﬂects the
competition that has arisen between product lines
with different computerized control systems,
which are critical to the functional efﬁciency and
safety of the packaging machine. With respect
to signiﬁcant determinants of the make-or-buy
decisions, we note how frequently the technicians
and managers justify the use of external actors
by the need to access distinctive capabilities.
The process: How lead ﬁrm-networks evolve
and change over time
To approach the network evolution dynamically, we
decided to undertake a longitudinal study of the
entire process of fabrication of a packaging machine.
With the aid of technicians and engineers, we
identiﬁed the following logical ﬂow of activities:
(a) manufacturing of electronic, electromechanical
and mechanical components, safety devices, and
ﬁnished groups; (b) subassemblies of major
components which will be assembled by lead
suppliers, the focal ﬁrm, or both; (c) assembly,
to integrate the various components of the
machine; (d) format adjustment, to meet different
customer requirements in terms of package size,
speed, and machine operating conditions; (e) test-
ing, to guarantee that the machines meet technical
and functional efﬁciency requirements under
speciﬁed conditions.
Figures 1–3 show the functional competencies
Electronics
Mechanical
components
Electromechanics
ProtectionsFinished
groups
Pre-assembly AssemblyMechanical
components
Format
adjustmentTestingEXTERNAL
IN-HOUSE
Vertical dotted line shows old boundaries
Figure 1. The Ima C90: Changes in functional competencies and ﬁrm boundaries (1988–95)
Copyright Ó1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 317–338 (1999)which the three ﬁrms have developed in-house
and those they currently access on the outside.
A ﬁrst glance reveals common ground in a
behavioral path towards progressive deintegration
of the manufacturing process. The ﬁgures reﬂect
how the ﬁrms have expanded their reliance on
suppliers and have contracted their own ﬁrm
boundaries over time. The shaded area indicates
those activities and competencies which are cur-
rently performed entirely outside the ﬁrm’s
boundaries. Changes in ﬁrm boundaries are iden-
tiﬁed by the dotted line—representing the situ-
ation in 1988—drawn within each ﬁgure.
The longitudinal analysis reveals how the three
lead ﬁrms have focused on what they consider
to be their strategic competencies—format adjust-
ment, and testing—resorting to interﬁrm relation-
ships to meet their requirements with regard to
electronic and electromechanical devices, external
protection devices, and mechanical components.
A common behavioral trend in 1988 was to per-
form internally all the main activities required to
construct a machine. In the case of Ima, for
example, the groups that were built using special-
ist external expertise were preassembled (with the
exception of the guards) by the company, and
then assembled together with other, internally
fabricated mechanical components. At that time,
competencies extended to the production of ﬁn-
ished groups, as well as format adjustment and
testing (Figure 1). Seven years later, the ﬁrm
was focused on a narrow set of functional com-
petencies: the machine customization and ﬁnal
 10970266, 1999, 4, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(199904)20:4<317::AID-SMJ28>3.0.CO;2-3 by University Of Oklahoma, Wiley Online Library on [05/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


Leveraging of Interﬁrm Relationships 329
Electronics
Pre-assembly AssemblyFormat
adjustmentTestingMechanical*
components
Electromechanics
ProtectionsEXTERNAL
IN-HOUSE
Vertical dotted line shows old boundariesElectrical
Assembly
* Internal production of mechanical components gradually ceased in the period 1988-1993
Figure 2. The Corazza FD12 +AD12/N: Changes in functional competencies and ﬁrm boundaries (1988–95)
Electronics
Pre-assembly AssemblyFormat
adjustmentTestingMechanical
components
Electromechanics
ProtectionsMechanical
componentsEXTERNAL
IN-HOUSE
Vertical dotted line shows old boundaries
Figure 3. The Wrapmatic PW33: Changes in functional competencies and ﬁrm boundaries (1988–95)
testing, and the production of a small number
of mechanical components as a buffer for new,
unplanned orders.
Similarly, the Corazza manufacturing process
(Figure 2) has seen increasing recourse to exter-
nal competencies in the assembly of electrical
devices and the preassembly of groups, while the
internal production of mechanical components has
gradually been wound down in parallel with the
evolution of supplier capabilities. At Wrapmatic,
the current focus is on the ﬁnal stage of the
manufacturing process and testing, and the use
of suppliers in preassembly—already performed
externally—and assembly (Figure 3).
Copyright Ó1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 317–338 (1999)The similar paths towards a network-like
organization of manufacturing activities cannot be
explained simply by imitative behavior due to
spatial proximity. The drivers for change were
the need to respond to events at the industry
level. The investigation of speciﬁc events as
occasions for structuring (Barley, 1986) may be
helpful for the interpretation of structural modiﬁ-
cation in the lead ﬁrm-networks. As advanced by
Madhavan et al. (1998), key industry events pro-
vide occasions for network restructuring. These
could be, for instance, technological advance-
ments, the entry of a prominent competitor, or
radical shift in consumer preferences. Such events
 10970266, 1999, 4, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(199904)20:4<317::AID-SMJ28>3.0.CO;2-3 by University Of Oklahoma, Wiley Online Library on [05/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


330G. Lorenzoni and A. Lipparini
could either increase the value of the lead ﬁrm’s
current set of external resources or push the ﬁrm
to enter into new relationships to access the
competencies required.
The ﬁrst such event in this industry was the
huge output expansion in the 1970s and the 1980s
as a consequence of the diffusion of packaging
for many industrial products. At this initial stage,
ﬁrms manufactured most of their components
internally, and subcontracting was a short-term
strategy. The increasing pressure of new technol-
ogies and the need to reduce costs forced the
ﬁrms to improve the ﬂexibility of their structures.
The lead ﬁrms began to rely increasingly on
suppliers for ﬁnished product subassembly and
assembly operations. Over time, a large number
of small and medium-sized ﬁrms evolved from
suppliers of simple parts built to the ﬁrm’s speci-
ﬁcations into highly specialized manufacturers of
components and groups. Moreover, the suppliers
improved their capabilities in assembly and some-
times in product design. As a consequence, in
the 1990s, lead ﬁrms and their suppliers have
become closely linked. At this point, the lead
ﬁrms decided to manufacture only the systems
for which they possess special expertise. Most of
them were co-developed with experienced sup-
pliers, while relying on others for the procurement
of complete high-technology subassemblies.
Another event was the dramatic shift in buyer
priorities. The customers for these ﬁrms are
mainly the large multinationals operating in the
pharmaceutical, food, or paper industries. The
need to match their high standards, in terms of
quality and technology, forces the manufacturers
to concentrate on what they can do best. Testing
is one of those activities deﬁned as ‘strategic’ or
‘critical’ to success in the packaging industry,
since the lead ﬁrm is responsible for the ultimate
reliability of the product. This explains the
renewal of in-house competencies in this area.
Compared with our other cases, Corazza main-
tains its assembly capabilities in-house. Since the
founder of the company was originally an
assembler, the family directed much of its efforts
to upgrading the ﬁrm’s ability in combining
components. Accumulated production experience
still plays an important part in the interpretation
of network structuring. The format adjustment is
another task a lead ﬁrm could not delegate. A
source of competitive advantage in this industry
lies in the ability to adapt the machine at the
Copyright Ó1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 317–338 (1999)customer’s plant, modifying the machine con-
ﬁguration and transferring the basic knowledge
to manage the packaging process.
The networks’ evolution was vigorously sup-
ported. A key role in leveraging external ties is
that played by middle managers. Their willingness
to interact with suppliers as external sources of
knowledge and to access their complementary
capabilities emerged as driving forces toward the
ﬁne-tuning of the network structure.
Table 4 shows the structure of interﬁrm
relationships in the sample at 1995. The relational
structure resulting from farming or contracting
out strategies over the 10-year period reveals a
multilevel supply chain similar to those observed
in Japanese ﬁrms and their lean production sys-
tems. Two key features of such linkages are
proximity, seen as a facilitating coordinative
mechanism (Gerlach, 1992; Uzzi, 1996), and dur-
ation, a variable related to performance in com-
panies characterized by intensive transactional
activities (Larson, 1992; Gulati, 1995). Proximity
leads to lower search costs for a member of a
networked organization.
The observation of what happened between
1988 and 1995 reveals some trends: (i) the num-
ber of ﬁrst-tier suppliers decreased while the qual-
ity and content of the relationships increased; (ii)
the ﬁrst tiers focused their activities too, becom-
ing specialized componentry makers; (iii) ﬁrst-
tier suppliers apparently were able to lower their
production costs as a consequence of their cus-
tomer base increases; (iv) familiarity among
parties—the average duration of ongoing relation-
ships with ﬁrst tier ﬁrms is 14 years—has helped
to shape relationships based on trust, thereby
reducing transaction and coordination costs.
The leveraging of interﬁrm relationships
occurred with deliberate initiatives undertaken by
the lead ﬁrms. Among them, the upgrading of
the suppliers’ evaluation system was an important
move to get access to the competencies that best
ﬁt with the internal ones. Again, frequent sem-
inars with key suppliers were organized on critical
issues such as: Total Quality Management tech-
niques, stock reduction, strategic cost analysis,
and techniques aimed at improving responsive-
ness. Frequent intercompany meetings, similar to
those generated in the Japanese reality (Dore,
1983; Sako, 1991), also created a ‘network
environment’ with the aim of fostering trust and
cooperation. Before involving the suppliers in
 10970266, 1999, 4, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(199904)20:4<317::AID-SMJ28>3.0.CO;2-3 by University Of Oklahoma, Wiley Online Library on [05/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


Leveraging of Interﬁrm Relationships 331
closer collaborative practices, the lead ﬁrms also
provided engineering and manufacturing assis-
tance, and management consulting.
In addition to the large number of long-lasting
relationships with proximate suppliers, another
similarity among the three networks lies in the
progressive abandonment of a conventional arm’s
length mode of transactional governance, and the
progressive investment on the relational side of
the exchange. Since the beginning of their delib-
erate process of network redesign, all the lead
ﬁrms regarded partnering strategies as the best
way to access knowledge and to simultaneously
pursue product quality and ﬂexibility.
By adhering to a ‘learning by cooperating’
logic, ﬁrms may profit from the early sharing of
critical information as well as from a continuous
ﬂow of technical and managerial suggestions. In
creating the conditions for their boundary shifting
strategies, ﬁrms are likely to exchange goods and
knowledge on a day-to-day basis. This is seen as
the best way to develop the suppliers’ capabilities
while ensuring high adaptability to the environ-
ment. These aspects are best expressed in the
words of two managers from the engineering
departments of Wrapmatic and Corazza respec-
tively:
. . . we compete in an environment where infor-
mation has to circulate faster and faster. Suppliers
cannot adapt quickly to our changing require-
ments if they are not kept abreast of new
advances . . .
. . . we try to engage in collaborative practices
as soon as we can. We are aware of the beneﬁts
deriving from partnering and networking activi-
ties with external ﬁrms . . .
When the ‘learning by interacting’ mechanisms
started to show their usefulness, the lead ﬁrms
abandoned the ‘hierarchy’ option of manufact-
uring, adding the relational dimension to the
efﬁciency-based consideration traditionally
driven by make-or-buy alternatives. This is
summed up in the words of a purchasing man-
ager from Ima:
. . . we have long-standing relationships with
external suppliers with unique capabilities in the
production of strategic groups for our most suc-
cessful blistering machine. In the last ﬁve years,
we have focused our efforts on keeping in-house
only those activities whose cost would be higher
if performed outside, as well as those activities
for which we possess unique capabilities. Never-
Copyright Ó1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 317–338 (1999)theless, we must not forget the relational dimen-
sion of this process which has required—and
still requires—commitment at different levels.
Thus, the efﬁciency criterion comes with exten-
sive partnering strategies and networking. The
re-deﬁnition of our boundaries requires a prelimi-
nary stage during which we get to know our
potential partners . . .
Leveraging of interﬁrm ties during the phase
of network transition also occurred with the
awareness that ﬁrms do not need to protect their
core activities by means of internalization. Dis-
turbances can be avoided by cooperating exten-
sively with suppliers at an early stage of new
product development process. Accumulated
knowledge allows them to coordinate and control
external sources of knowledge more effectively.
Buyer experience lowers the costs of governing
market contracting, and leads to the decision to
access external knowledge and complementary
assets. A fundamental step has been the one of
considering suppliers as ‘knowledge generators’
and as trainers of the lead ﬁrm’s capabilities. The
leveraging occurred when lead ﬁrms upgraded the
status of key suppliers, involving them in a sort
of ‘interﬁrm council’. Here suppliers are asked
to play a fundamental role in helping the lead
ﬁrms to identify methods and opportunities in the
application of new technologies, making access to
ideas and innovations possible. Company-network
embeddedness (Granovetter, 1985), and overall
network interdependence (Provan, 1992), create
incentives for cooperation and long-term commit-
ment (Uzzi, 1996). The leveraging requires an
ability to rely on trust playing a prominent role
in the relationships, serving as a substitute for
more formalized control systems (Ring, 1996b).
DISCUSSION
The organizations in the study pioneered a
collaborative strategy with many selected sup-
pliers to access complementary competencies. On
the whole, the ﬁndings from this research indicate
that lead ﬁrms are homogeneous in their efforts
to structure the interﬁrm network of which they
are a part. Large-scale reliance on collaborative
activity has the potential to reshape the nature of
competition, and a ﬁrm’s network portfolio
becomes a key organizational attribute. Our longi-
tudinal analysis demonstrates a co-evolution
 10970266, 1999, 4, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(199904)20:4<317::AID-SMJ28>3.0.CO;2-3 by University Of Oklahoma, Wiley Online Library on [05/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


332G. Lorenzoni and A. Lipparini
between the distinctive competencies of the ﬁrms
and their relationship sets. Consistent with the
theoretical approaches presented early on, organi-
zations have learned how to gain access to, and
transfer knowledge across, alliances and locate
themselves in network positions which enable
them to keep pace with technological develop-
ments within the industry.
The ﬁndings also suggest that networks can be
potentially subject to managerial design (Nohria
and Eccles, 1992; Madhavan et al., 1998). The
lead ﬁrms deliberately act to create an architecture
of capabilities, where expertise is located both
internally and externally, and partnered organi-
zations are seen as intelligence units. An
important issue here is that, within a learning
network, the internal knowledge should help the
lead ﬁrm to appreciate, select, and mobilize exter-
nal capabilities. Simultaneously, lead ﬁrms should
develop the ability to interact with others to better
manage their internal competencies reﬁnements.
The explanatory power of TCE is of limited
value for an interpretation of changes in organi-
zational boundaries and the choice of the most
efﬁcient organizational form. The static assump-
tions of TCE, and research which is based on
short-term dyadic linkages, are not appropriate
for the study of what transforms a combination
of ﬁrms into a durable network (Uzzi, 1997), or
the large-scale reliance on interﬁrm collaboration.
TCE appears inadequate to describe changes in
the structure of lead ﬁrm-networks also because
the focus on cost overlooks the opportunities that
can be deployed through intensive relationships.
To provide a broader framework to understand
sources of competitive advantage, the TCE per-
spective should be coupled with the RBV and
KBT assumptions that the integration of com-
petencies and combination of knowledge across
a ﬁrm’s boundaries is an important goal of mana-
gerial action.
Our empirical investigation suggests that lead
ﬁrms are making serious efforts to create an
interacting platform with selected partners in
which knowledge and information are generated
and transferred. This may foster the learning proc-
ess in the network, while making it difﬁcult
for unconnected competitors to pursue imitative
practices, especially when interﬁrm relationships
become idiosyncratic.
When these conditions arise, the partnered
organizations become strategic assets inﬂuencing
Copyright Ó1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 317–338 (1999)the sustainability of the lead ﬁrm’s competitive
advantage. The quality of the partners and their
distinctive competencies provide greater ﬂexibility
in the innovative process when compared with
vertically integrated ﬁrms. In organizations simi-
lar to the companies studied, the cost structure
changes with the progressive deintegration of the
production process and the incremental involve-
ment of external sources of knowledge. The
transformation of ﬁxed costs to variables costs as
a consequence of large-scale reliance on inter-
organizational collaboration is a hidden facet of
the debate on transaction cost management, as
the focus is shifted from the nature of cost to
the magnitude of costs, where direct comparison
is less feasible and relevant.
Two propositions can be advanced on the basis
of the research results we have presented. The
ﬁrst proposition originates from the observation
that the large-scale networks arising from tight,
repeated, trust-based relationships among actors
are likely to bring sustainable advantages in terms
of innovation and cost economics. Network sta-
bility and the combination of the social and eco-
nomic dimensions of the exchange may have a
profound effect on innovation and transaction
cost reduction.
Interﬁrm ties are enhanced over time by the
creation of a sense of community and trust, daily
activity in knowledge access, and co-design prac-
tices. Familiarity between organizations through
prior alliances convinces ﬁrms to progressively
use less hierarchical structures in organizing new
alliances. This suggests moving beyond the price
mechanism as a means of governing interﬁrm
ties, and embracing the idea of an architecture
of governance mechanisms (Bradach and Eccles,
1989). The presence of interﬁrm trust is a strong
lubricant for alliances involving interdependence
and task coordination between parties (Gulati,
1998). In particular, trust seems to be a basic
ingredient even when the risk of knowledge dis-
persion is scarce, as is the case for many of the
components of a packaging machine. External
actors are skilled, but their competencies are lim-
ited to the parts, and do not extend to the whole.
Over time, repeated transactions potentially
lead to lower transaction costs, thus permitting
economic actors to gain advantages in subcon-
tracting to suppliers who are developing their
own competencies more effectively, thereby low-
ering the overall production costs of the network.
 10970266, 1999, 4, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(199904)20:4<317::AID-SMJ28>3.0.CO;2-3 by University Of Oklahoma, Wiley Online Library on [05/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


Leveraging of Interﬁrm Relationships 333
TCE tends to neglect important processual aspects
of networks entailing continuing exchange and
ﬁne-tuning. As demonstrated (Gulati and Singh,
1998), appropriation concerns are relevant to
ﬁrms entering into alliances, but there is another
set of concerns resulting from coordination costs.
Lead ﬁrm-networks are often formed on the basis
of consideration associated with managing costs
resulting from the anticipated ongoing coordi-
nation of tasks across organizational boundaries,
and the complexity of coordinating activities to
be completed jointly or individually. For these
reasons, trust-based relationships are distinctive
in addressing both coordination costs and appro-
priation concerns, as reﬂected by the nature of
contracts between parties. Reliance on trust may
eliminate the need for formalized contracts, and
serve as a substitute for many of the kinds of
endogenous safeguard prescribed by Williamson
as a means of reducing opportunistic behavior,
thus reducing coordination costs.
On the basis of these assumptions, and the
observations derived from our sample, the follow-
ing proposition is advanced, to be tested by
further research:
Proposition 1: Lead ﬁrms potentially can
lower the overall coordination and production
costs of a network through multiple, repeated,
trust-based relationships with key suppliers.
Our analysis of lead-ﬁrm networks suggests a
number of prominent issues which must be ﬁne-
tuned in future research. The interactive process
among actors creates a greater quantity of planned
and spontaneous information, while accelerating
the learning process. The failures of the market
system and the rigidities of internal control are
overcome by interaction among partners, bringing
new knowledge either through the crystallized
network of ﬁrms or the selected contamination
of new actors (Imai, 1987).
One key issue in interﬁrm cooperation is the
leakage of knowledge or the loss of idiosyncratic
capabilities. This is a critical concern in both the
transaction cost and resource-based approaches,
while research into strategic alliances highlighted
how in vertically disintegrated organizations
multiple and dense interﬁrm linkages offer access
to specialized knowledge distributed among many
ﬁrms, with signiﬁcant effects on knowledge cre-
ation and transfer (Mowery, Oxley, and Sil-
Copyright Ó1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 317–338 (1999)verman, 1996; Grant, 1996b). In large-scale net-
works like the ones described in the study—i.e.,
in biotechnology—knowledge resides in smaller
organizations, and larger companies can concen-
trate on a narrow set of resources and core capa-
bilities (Powell et al., 1996). The ‘strategic cen-
ters,’ those ﬁrms with relational capabilities in
regulating and controlling trade between part-
nering ﬁrms (Lorenzoni and Baden-Fuller, 1995),
are focused on core internal idiosyncratic techni-
cal and coordinative capabilities, and have access
to specialized third-party knowledge.
A dense network of ﬁrms with multiple,
repeated relationships determines an organi-
zational form in which the intensity of strong ties
is coupled to and consistent with weak ties, in
order to create variance and to introduce scattered
capabilities into the system. At the same time,
networks of ﬁrms built on intensive relational
bases are open to the contamination of new
actors, thereby avoiding organizational inertia.
Potential information is denser and the burden of
entropy and inertia is lower. The extent of the
competence and knowledge of external partners
creates a redundancy effect of different potential
inputs, and this condition generates innovation
and change (Nonaka, 1994) without being
exposed to the cost of slack (Nohria and Gulati,
1995), since this is absorbed by third parties.
Membership in a network also facilitates learn-
ing through multiple knowledge ﬂows, and may
reduce the cost of the capability-building process.
The distinctive governance pattern of interﬁrm
relationships in a large-scale network of ﬁrms
has particular effects with regard to the nature of
knowledge ﬂows between partners. The learning
that is generated by recurrent contracting (Ring
and Van de Ven, 1992) within networks may be
less costly than the learning that would come
from a variety of unrelated partners, as observed
in the Japanese automotive industry, where sup-
pliers dealing with different manufacturers tend
to be more profitable than those dealing with
just one.
Research into strategic alliances has sparked a
debate regarding the alternative nature of trans-
ferred knowledge vs. access knowledge (Mowery
et al., 1996; Grant, 1996b). In vertically disinte-
grated organizations, multiple and repeated inter-
ﬁrm linkages offer access to specialized knowl-
edge distributed among many ﬁrms, with
signiﬁcant effects on knowledge creation and
 10970266, 1999, 4, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(199904)20:4<317::AID-SMJ28>3.0.CO;2-3 by University Of Oklahoma, Wiley Online Library on [05/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


334G. Lorenzoni and A. Lipparini
ﬂow. Leveraging provides access to capabilities
that the focal ﬁrm does not retain.
The networks tend to evolve to respond to
some environmental changes, as advanced early
on. The changing requirements of multinational
companies—among the most important customers
for the packaging ﬁrms—leads to boundaries
redeﬁnition and new divisions of labor. The
ability to respond to speciﬁc events is a source
of competitive advantage engendering new capa-
bilities and increased ﬂexibility. The search for
new internally developed capability comes
together with managerial actions aimed at helping
partnering suppliers to became componentry
specialists (Kogut and Bowman, 1995). The
deliberate nature of these moves does not rule
out mimicry completely, but it certainly gives
mimicry a secondary role in shaping organi-
zational structure. These efforts are not restricted
to manufacturing, but inﬂuence the whole activity,
the full learning pace, creating an improved con-
vergence among the partners.
The new propositive role of suppliers, as well
as support from the assemblers aimed at giving
them new tasks, show a deliberate reorganization
of the lead ﬁrm boundaries and a refocusing
around internal core competencies. The dissemi-
nation of knowledge among many actors
improves the absorptive capabilities of the whole
network as well as mutual adaptation of network
participants. Upgrading of capabilities and net-
work ﬂexibility are reached in spite of the relative
stability of the relationships.
On the basis of these assumptions, we advance
the following proposition:
Proposition 2: Multiple, repeated, trust-based
relationships with key suppliers favor lead
ﬁrm’s access to complementary capabilities
and specialized knowledge with positive effects
on the networks as a whole.
CONCLUSION
The ﬁndings of this study generally support the
expectations regarding the outcomes of interﬁrm
relationships and the potential of the network
form of organization (Ring, 1996b). One of the
intended goals of the study is to contribute to
the discussion of the dynamic aspects of interﬁrm
networks. Coherently with research that uses the
Copyright Ó1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 317–338 (1999)network perspective to investigate strategic proc-
esses (Nohria and Eccles, 1992; Shan, Walker,
and Kogut, 1994), interﬁrm relationships play a
signiﬁcant role in the development of new prod-
ucts and in the ﬁne-tuning of competencies of
partnered organizations.
This paper highlights an important set of con-
ditions deriving from changes in lead ﬁrm-
networks. Given the limited understanding of the
dynamics of networks, interﬁrm relationships pro-
vide a unique laboratory in which strategy and
structure are intertwined and the dynamic evolu-
tion of ﬁrms’ competencies can be examined.
Probably our most interesting result lies in the
attempt to understand why and how lead ﬁrm-
networks evolve over time, certainly a main ques-
tion in the understanding of how networks can
become valuable resources subjected to mana-
gerial action and design.
Our investigation of three networks in the
packaging industry has suggested that lead ﬁrms
can achieve remarkable positions using multiple
formal and informal ties as a vehicle for organiz-
ing knowledge access and transfer. Rather than
using external ties as a substitute for capabilities
which a ﬁrm has not yet developed, ﬁrms use
collaborations to expand and improve their core
competencies. These results could be extended to
similar networks of learning which emerge when
the sources of knowledge are disparate, as in
the biotechnology industry, where organizations
simultaneously learn which collaborations to pur-
sue and how to function within a set of multiple
cooperative ventures, and where the locus of
innovation is found within a network of inter-
organizational relationships (Powell et al., 1996).
The ﬁeld analysis reveals several distinctive
behavioral patterns in medium-sized company
technology access and transfer which have pre-
viously been documented in other industries, thus
furnishing further insight into asset mobility and
knowledge protection. The cases reported here
conﬁrm the deployment and combination of inter-
nal and external knowledge, embedded in product
components and widely dispersed among a large
number of actors who are expected to actively
reinforce the network structure. Firms like those
presented learn new skills by recombining their
capabilities, and growth occurs by building on
current social relationships (Kogut and Zander,
1992). The ﬁndings add weight to the architec-
tural innovation model (Henderson and Clark,
 10970266, 1999, 4, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(199904)20:4<317::AID-SMJ28>3.0.CO;2-3 by University Of Oklahoma, Wiley Online Library on [05/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


Leveraging of Interﬁrm Relationships 335
1990), since they show how value is created by
the reconﬁguration of competencies belonging to
a selected set of partners.
When the ‘periphery’ of the network contrib-
utes as much as the center to the generation of
value, and when any single unit acts entrepre-
neurially and helps to keep the system alert, the
potential of the network-like organization
increases. The ability to interact with outside
ﬁrms helps competence renewal and reduces
resistance to change. In keeping with other theo-
retical propositions, ﬁrms tend to invest in assets
corresponding to a combination of current capa-
bilities and relational expectations as to future
opportunities (Kogut and Zander, 1992). We have
argued further that the lead ﬁrm’s relational capa-
bility can shape interﬁrm networks representing
a structure-reinforcing competence.
The ability to orchestrate multiple sources of
learning is seen here as occurring with ‘strategic
intent,’ and not as a result of relatively unplanned
strategies (Burgelman, 1983). Partnering at an
early stage, with a vision into the future, appears
to be an essential precondition for the rapid devel-
opment of the relational capability necessary to
efﬁciently steer the process of boundary redeﬁ-
nition. Once a ﬁrm begins collaborating, it
develops experience at interacting, and this pro-
vides fertile ground for further innovative inter-
actions. Over time, the development of relational
capability allows managers to lower the cost of
exchange, to optimize the choice of governance
structures, and to internalize specialized knowl-
edge across the interorganizational network.
Our ﬁndings also offer a relational perspective
for the study of industrial districts and, more
generally, for the analysis of systems of co-
located ﬁrms, such as industrial and technology
parks, research centers, and high-tech ‘valleys.’
In these cases, the locational effects save time
since the partners share updated knowledge and
work on signals rather than complex contracts.
Another theoretical implication centers on the
design and leveraging of relationship sets where
intelligence and knowledge are not the preroga-
tive of a single ﬁrm. From this point of view,
our ﬁndings are of more general interest since
they show how lead ﬁrms can simultaneously
operate on the content side and the implemen-
tation side of their relational sets in order to
secure signiﬁcant results. This suggests
developing guidelines for the strategic design of
Copyright Ó1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 317–338 (1999)networks so as to facilitate their evolution and
the achievement of a sustainable advantage.
The limitations of a research study based on a
small set of cases are obvious, and attempts to
generalize the results to a diverse population are
oversimplistic. Nevertheless, the decision to focus
on interﬁrm ties increases the number of ﬁrms
involved, thus allowing the researchers to gener-
ate predictive content even from a limited number
of case studies (Eisenhardt, 1989). As we have
focused primarily on the initial conditions and
ﬁnal outcomes of the boundary-shifting process,
our appreciation of interpersonal interactions,
governance mechanisms, and learning processes
can be underestimated. Despite these basic limi-
tations, the research study may be useful in gener-
ating further theoretical and empirical research
into organizational networks and interﬁrm stra-
tegic alliances.
If it is a common purpose of networks to
experiment with new ways by which interﬁrm
relationships are structured, then relational capa-
bility emerges as a strategic asset both for large
and small ﬁrms, bringing ﬂexibility in resource
combination and coordination.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We received many helpful comments from Peter
Smith Ring, Robert Grant, and Walter Powell.
We would also like to thank Ed Zajac and two
anonymous reviewers for their insightful com-
ments on earlier drafts of this manuscript. We
are very grateful to the engineers and managers
whose cooperation made this study possible. We
alone are responsible for errors and omissions.
The research was generously funded by the CNR
(National Research Council).
REFERENCES
Amit, R. and P. J.H. Schoemaker (1993). ‘Strategic
assets and organizational rent’, Strategic Manage-
ment Journal ,14(1), pp. 33–46.
Badaracco, J. L. (1991). The Knowledge Link: How
Firms Compete through Strategic Alliances . Harvard
Business School Press, Boston, MA.
Baker, W. E. (1992). ‘The network organization in
theory and practice’. In N. Nohria and R. Eccles
(eds.),Networks and Organization: Structure, Form,
and Action . Harvard Business School Press, Boston,
MA, pp. 397–429.
 10970266, 1999, 4, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(199904)20:4<317::AID-SMJ28>3.0.CO;2-3 by University Of Oklahoma, Wiley Online Library on [05/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


336G. Lorenzoni and A. Lipparini
Barley, S. R. (1986). ‘Technology as an occasion for
structuring: Evidence from observation of CT scan-
ners and the social order of radiology departments’,
Administrative Science Quarterly ,21, pp. 78–108.
Barney, J.B. (1986). ‘Strategy factor market: Expec-
tation, luck, and business strategy’, Management
Science,32(10), pp. 1231–1241.
Barney, J. B. (1991). ‘Firm resources and sustained
competitive advantage’, Journal of Management ,17,
pp. 99–120.
Barney, J.B. and M. H. Hansen (1994). ‘Trustworthi-
ness as a source of competitive advantage’, Strategic
Management Journal , Winter Special Issue, 15,
pp. 175–190.
Beamish, P.W. and P.J. Killing (eds.) (1997). Cooper-
ative Strategies. European Perspectives . New Lex-
ington Press, San Francisco, CA.
Bradach, J. L. and R. G. Eccles (1989). ‘Price, auth-
ority, and trust: From ideal types to plural form’,
Annual Review of Sociology ,15, pp. 97–118.
Burgelman, R. A. (1983). ‘A model of the interaction
of strategic behavior, corporate context, and the
concept of strategy’, Academy of Management
Review,8, pp. 61–70.
Clark, K.B. and T. Fujimoto (1991). Product Develop-
ment Performance . Harvard Business School Press,
Boston, MA.
Cohen, W. M. and D.A. Levinthal (1990). ‘Absorptive
capacity: A new perspective on learning and inno-
vation’, Administrative Science Quarterly ,35,
pp. 128–152.
Conner, K. and C. K. Prahalad (1996). ‘A resource-
based theory of the ﬁrm: Knowledge versus oppor-
tunism’,Organization Science ,7(5), pp. 477–501.
Dierickx, I. and K. Cool (1989). ‘Asset stock accumu-
lation and sustainability of competitive advantage’,
Management Science ,35, pp. 1504–1511.
Dore, R. (1983). ‘Goodwill, and the spirit of market
capitalism’, British Journal of Sociology ,34(4),
pp. 459–482.
Doz, Y. L. (1996). ‘The evolution of cooperation in
strategic alliances: Initial conditions or learning
processes?’, Strategic Management Journal , Summer
Special Issue, 17, pp. 55–83.
Dyer, J.H. (1996). ‘Specialized supplier networks as a
source of competitive advantage: Evidence from the
auto industry’, Strategic Management Journal ,
17(4), pp. 271–292.
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989). ‘Building theories from case
study research’, Academy of Management Review ,
Special Forum on Theory Building, 14(4),
pp. 532–550.
Eisenhardt K. M. and C. B. Schoonhoven (1996). ‘Stra-
tegic alliance formation in entrepreneurial ﬁrms: Stra-
tegic needs and social opportunity for cooperation’,
Organization Science ,7(2), pp. 136–150.
Gerlach, M.L. (1992). Alliance Capitalism: The Social
Organization of Japanese Business . University of
California Press, Berkeley, CA.
Granovetter, M. (1985). ‘Economic action and social
structure: The problem of embeddedness’, American
Journal of Sociology ,91(3), pp. 481–510.
Grant, R. B. (1991). ‘A resource based theory of com-
Copyright Ó1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 317–338 (1999)petitive advantage: Implications for strategy formu-
lation’, California Management Review ,33(3),
pp. 114–135.
Grant, R. M. (1996a). ‘Prospering in dynamically-
competitive environments: Organizational capability
as knowledge integration’, Organization Science ,
7(4), pp. 375–387.
Grant, R. B. (1996b). ‘Towards a knowledge-based
theory of the ﬁrm’, Strategic Management Journal ,
Winter Special Issue, 17, pp. 109–122.
Grant, R.B. and C. Baden-Fuller (1995). ‘A knowledge-
based theory of inter-ﬁrm collaboration’, Academy
of Management Best Paper Proceedings , pp. 17–21.
Gulati, R. (1995). ‘Does familiarity breed trust? The
implications of repeated ties for contractual choice
in alliances’, Academy of Management Journal ,38,
pp. 85–112.
Gulati, R. (1998). ‘Alliances and networks’, Strategic
Management Journal , Special Issue, 19(4),
pp. 293–317.
Gulati, R. and H. Singh (1998). ‘The architecture of
cooperation: Managing coordination costs and appro-
priation concerns in strategic alliances’, Administra-
tive Science Quarterly , forthcoming.
Hagedoorn, J. (1993). ‘Understanding the rationale of
strategic technology partnering: Interorganizational
modes of cooperation and sectoral differences’, Stra-
tegic Management Journal ,14(5), pp. 371–385.
Hamel, G. (1991). ‘Competition for competence and
inter-partner learning within international strategic
alliances’, Strategic Management Journal , Summer
Special Issue, 12, pp. 83–103.
Hannan, M. and J. Freeman (1989). Organizational
Ecology. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Hansen, M. H., R. Hoskisson, G. Lorenzoni and P. S.
Ring (1997). ‘Strategic capabilities of the trans-
actionally-intense ﬁrm: Leveraging inter-ﬁrm
relationships’, working paper, Texas A&M Univer-
sity.
Helper, S. (1991). ‘How much has really changed
between U.S. automakers and their suppliers?’, Sloan
Management Review ,15, pp. 15–28.
Henderson, R. M. and K. B. Clark (1990). ‘Architec-
tural innovation: The reconﬁguration of existing
product technologies and the failure of established
ﬁrms’, Administrative Science Quarterly ,35,
pp. 9–30.
Henderson, R. and I. Cockburn (1994). ‘Measuring
competence? Exploring ﬁrm effects in pharmaceu-
tical research’, Strategic Management Journal , Win-
ter Special Issue, 15, pp. 63–84.
Hennart, J.-F. (1991). ‘The transaction costs theory
of joint ventures: An empirical study of Japanese
subsidiaries in the United States’, Management
Science,37(4), pp. 483–497.
Imai, K. (1987). ‘A network view of the ﬁrm’, working
paper, Hitotsubashi University.
Kogut, B. (1988). ‘Joint ventures: Theoretical and
empirical perspectives’, Strategic Management Jour-
nal,9(4), pp. 319–332.
Kogut, B. (1991). ‘Joint ventures and the option to
expand and acquire’, Management Science ,37,
pp. 19–33.
 10970266, 1999, 4, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(199904)20:4<317::AID-SMJ28>3.0.CO;2-3 by University Of Oklahoma, Wiley Online Library on [05/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


Leveraging of Interﬁrm Relationships 337
Kogut, B. M. and E. H. Bowman (1995). ‘Modularity
and permeability as principles of design’. In E. H.
Bowman and B. M. Kogut (eds). Redesigning the
Firm. Oxford University Press, New York,
pp. 243–260.
Kogut, B. and U. Zander (1992). ‘Knowledge of the
ﬁrm, combinative capabilities, and the replication of
technology’, Organization Science ,3(3), pp. 383–
397.
Lado, A. and M. Wilson (1994). ‘Human resource
systems and sustained competitive advantage: A
competency-based perspective’, Academy of Man-
agement Review ,19, pp. 699–727.
Larson, A. (1992). ‘Network dyads in entrepreneurial
settings: A study of the governance of exchange
relationships’, Administrative Science Quarterly ,37,
pp. 76–104.
Lawrence, P.R. and J.W. Lorsch (1967). Organization
and Environment . Harvard University Press, Bos-
ton, MA.
Lipparini, A. and M. Sobrero (1997). ‘Coordinating
multi-ﬁrms innovative processes: Entrepreneurs as
catalysts in small-ﬁrm networks’. In M. Ebers
(ed.),The Formation of Inter-organizational Net-
works. Oxford University Press, New York,
pp. 199–219.
Lorenzoni, G. and C. Baden-Fuller (1995). ‘Creating a
strategic center to manage a web of partners’, Cali-
fornia Management Review ,37(3), pp. 146–163.
Madhavan, R., B. R. Koka and J. E. Prescott (1998).
‘Networks in transition: How industry events
(re)shape interﬁrm relationships’, Strategic Manage-
ment Journal ,19(5), pp. 439–459.
Miller, D. and P. H. Friesen (1982). ‘The longitudinal
analysis of organization: A methodological perspec-
tive’,Management Science ,28, pp. 1013–1034.
Mintzberg, H. and J. Waters (1985). ‘Of strategies,
deliberate and emergent’, Strategic Management
Journal,6(3), pp. 257–272.
Mowery, D. C. (ed.) (1988). International Collabo-
rative Ventures in U.S. Manufacturing . Ballinger,
Cambridge, MA.
Mowery, D. C., J.E. Oxley and B. S. Silverman (1996).
‘Strategic alliances and interﬁrm knowledge trans-
fer’,Strategic Management Journal , Winter Special
Issue,17, pp. 77–91.
Nelson, R. (1991). ‘Why do ﬁrms differ and how does
it matter?’, Strategic Management Journal , Winter
Special Issue, 12, pp. 61–74.
Nishiguchi, T. (1994). Strategic Industrial Sourcing:
The Japanese Advantage . Oxford University Press,
New York.
Nohria, N. and R. G. Eccles (eds.) (1992). Networks
and Organizations: Structure, Form, and Action .
Harvard Business School Press, Boston, MA.
Nohria, H. and R. Gulati (1995). ‘What is the optimum
amount of organizational slack? A study of the
relationship between slack and innovation in a multi-
national ﬁrm’, Academy of Management Best Paper
Proceedings , pp. 32–36.
Nonaka, I. (1994). ‘A dynamic theory of organizational
knowledge creation’, Organization Science ,5(1),
pp. 14–37.
Copyright Ó1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 317–338 (1999)Ouchi, W. G. (1980). ‘Markets, bureaucracies, and
clans’, Administrative Science Quarterly ,25,
pp. 124–141.
Penrose, E. (1959). The Theory of the Growth of the
Firm. Wiley, New York.
Peteraf, M. A. (1993). ‘The cornerstone of competitive
advantage: A resource-based view’, Strategic Man-
agement Journal ,14(3), pp. 179–191.
Pfeffer, J. and G. R. Salancik (1978). The External
Control of Organization . Harper & Row, New York.
Podolny, J. (1994). ‘Market uncertainty and the social
character of economic exchange’, Administrative
Science Quarterly ,39, pp. 458–483.
Porter, M. E. (1990). The Competitive Advantage of
Nations. Free Press, New York.
Porter, M.E. (1991). ‘Towards a dynamic theory of
strategy’, Strategic Management Journal , Winter
Special Issue, 12, pp. 75–94.
Powell, W. W., K.W. Koput and L. Smith-Doerr
(1996). ‘Interorganizational collaboration and the
locus of innovation: Networks of learning in biotech-
nology’, Administrative Science Quarterly ,41,
pp. 116–145.
Provan, K.G. (1992). ‘Embeddedness, inter-
dependence, and opportunism in organizational
supplier-buyer networks’, working paper, Univer-
sity of Kentucky.
Ring, P. S. (1996a). ‘The costs of networked organi-
zation’, paper presented at the Fourth EMOT Con-
ference on Networks, Modena, Italy.
Ring, P. S. (1996b). ‘Networked organization: A
resource based perspective’, working paper, Acta
Universitatis Upsaliensie: Studia Oeronomiae Nego-
tiorum, 39. Almquist & Wiskell International,
Uppsala.
Ring, P. S. and A. H. Van de Ven (1992). ‘Structuring
cooperative relationships between organizations’,
Strategic Management Journal ,13(7), pp. 483–498.
Rumelt, R. P. (1984). ‘Towards a strategic theory of
the ﬁrm’. In R. B. Lamb (ed.), Competitive Strategic
Management . Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ,
pp. 556–570.
Sako, M. (1991). ‘The role of trust in Japanese buyer-
supplier relationships’, Ricerche Economiche ,45,
April-September, pp. 449–474.
Schendel, D. (1996). ‘Editor’s introduction to the 1996
Summer Special Issue: Evolutionary perspectives on
strategy’, Strategic Management Journal , Summer
Special Issue, 17, pp. 1–4.
Shan, W., G. Walker and B. Kogut (1994). ‘Interﬁrm
cooperation and startup innovation in the biotechnol-
ogy industry’, Strategic Management Journal ,15(5),
pp. 387–394.
Spender, J.-C. (1994). ‘The geographics of strategic
competence’, mimeo, Rutgers University.
Teece, D. J. (1987). ‘Proﬁting from technological inno-
vation: Implications for integration, collaboration,
licensing, and public policy.’ In D.E. Teece (ed.),
The Competitive Challenge . Ballinger, Cambridge,
MA, pp. 185–220.
Teece, D. J. and G. Pisano (1994). ‘The dynamic capa-
bilities of ﬁrms: An introduction’, Industrial and
Corporate Change ,3(3), pp. 537–556.
 10970266, 1999, 4, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(199904)20:4<317::AID-SMJ28>3.0.CO;2-3 by University Of Oklahoma, Wiley Online Library on [05/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License


338G. Lorenzoni and A. Lipparini
Teece, D.J., G. Pisano and A. Shuen (1997). ‘Dynamic
capabilities and strategic management’, Strategic
Management Journal ,18(7), pp. 509–533.
Uzzi, B. (1996). ‘The sources and consequences of
embeddedness for the economic performance of
organizations’, American Sociological Review ,61,
pp. 674–698.
Uzzi, B. (1997). ‘Social structure and competition in
interﬁrm networks: The paradox of embeddedness’,
Administrative Science Quarterly ,42(1), pp. 35–67.
Wernerfelt, B. (1984). ‘A resource-based view of the
ﬁrm’,Strategic Management Journal ,5(2),
pp. 171–180.
Copyright Ó1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Strat. Mgmt. J., 20: 317–338 (1999)Williamson, O. (1975). Markets and Hierarchies . Free
Press, New York.
Williamson, O. (1991). ‘Comparative economic organi-
zation: The analysis of discrete structural alterna-
tives’,Administrative Science Quarterly ,36,
pp. 269–296.
Womack, J.P., D. T. Jones and D. Ross (1990). The
Machine that Changed the World . Rawson Associ-
ates, New York.
Zajac, E. J. and C. P. Olsen (1993). ‘From transaction
cost to transaction value analysis: Implications for
the study of interorganizational strategies’, Journal
of Management Studies ,30, pp. 131–145.
 10970266, 1999, 4, Downloaded from https://sms.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0266(199904)20:4<317::AID-SMJ28>3.0.CO;2-3 by University Of Oklahoma, Wiley Online Library on [05/06/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
