Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management
ISSN: 0885-3134 (Print) 1557-7813 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/rpss20
Salesperson directive modiﬁcation intention: a
conceptualization and empirical validation
Gregory McAmis, Kenneth R. Evans & Todd J. Arnold
To cite this article: Gregory McAmis, Kenneth R. Evans & Todd J. Arnold (2015) Salesperson
directive modiﬁcation intention: a conceptualization and empirical validation, Journal of
Personal Selling & Sales Management, 35:3, 203-220, DOI: 10.1080/08853134.2015.1037308
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/08853134.2015.1037308
Published online: 05 May 2015.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 279
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rpss20
Salesperson directive modification intention: a conceptualization and empirical validation
Gregory McAmisa, Kenneth R. Evansband Todd J. Arnoldc*
aDepartment of Marketing, Western Kentucky University, 1906 College Heights Blvd. #21059, Bowling Green, KY 42101-1059, USA;
bLamar University, P.O. Box 10001, Beaumont, TX 77710, USA;cDepartment of Marketing, Oklahoma State University, 312A Business
Building, Stillwater, OK 74078, USA
(Received 3 July 2014; accepted 25 March 2015 )
Salespersons represent an important and challenging set of employees for organizational management. Given frequently
high autonomy levels and varied job roles, boundary spanning agents have ample opportunity and motivation to modify/
ignore organizational directives. Based on a multi-theoretical perspective, this research sets forth a three-dimensional
conceptualization of directive modification intentions and develops and empirically tests a scale designed to better explain
this phenomenon while empirically validating its occurrence. Results indicate that boundary spanners have three distinct
and relatively stable motivations for modifying/ignoring organizational directives, including customer-, organization-, and
self-focused motivations, and that each motivation may potentially relate differently to important antecedent and outcome
variables. Managerial and theoretical implications are discussed.
Keywords: directive modification; salesperson; boundary spanner; scale validation; agency theory; cognitive dissonance
One of the most important functions of upper-level man-
agement in any organization is the formulation of corporate
strategy. Strategies that are formulated at the top levels of
the organization translate into functional directives focu ‐
sed on guiding and/or controlling the behavior of employ-
ees of the organization, particularly boundary spanning
employees such as salespeople. Boundary spanners are a
critical element for most corporate strategies because these
employees have such a high level of interaction with imp ‐
ortant external partners (e.g., customers). The boundary
spanner is frequently the face and voice of the organiz ‐
ation to the outside world, managing several functions such
as sales, post-sales service, and relationship manage ‐
ment (Weitz and Bradford 1999 ). External partners with
whom the boundary spanners work are vital co-producers
of value with the organization (Vargo and Lusch 2004 ).
The directives and controls of the organization are inten ‐
ded to guide boundary spanners in creating the right type
and amount of value with the external partner. However,
different controls have been shown to elicit varied reac-
tions, both positive and negative, from sales employees
(Miao and Evans 2014 ). Deviation from the directives of
the parent organization by boundary spanners may result in
a different value output from the interaction between
boundary spanning employee and external partner, which
may effectively point the organization in a new strategic
direction that upper level management had not intended.
The very nature of the sales role compounds the
difficulties associated with assuring directive complia ‐
nce among salespeople. First, the boundary spanning fun ‐ction typically necessitates a great deal of autonomy and
flexibility, in spite of the potential for exploitation of such
freedoms. For each goal that is laid out for employees eit ‐
her by the organization or individual, every employee
may have a seemingly unique way of accomplishing it.
Although management would likely prefer to monitor and
control the boundary spanner in each of these tasks, this,
for a number of reasons, is virtually impossible in most
circumstances. The level of monitoring of such a subjective
set of tasks would be extremely costly, to the point of being
counterproductive from a profit standpoint. Also, control-
ling boundary spanners ’actions would negate benefits to
the organization derived from their intimate knowledge of
the customer and industry, as well as potentially elevate the
likelihood that employees engage in behaviors that do not
optimally suit their unique skill sets. This is in addition to
the negative motivational consequences that would stem
from such a work condition. With this in mind, boundary
spanners, particularly in business-to-business (B2B) orga-
nizations, are bestowed an unusually large degree of
freedom in their job function, which creates the opportunity
for information asymmetry between the boundary spanners
and their parent organization.
In relation to either implied or specific organizational
directives, there are situations where sales employees may
deviate from an organizationally desired behavioral path. For
example, Palmatier, Scheer, and Steenkamp ( 2007)r e c o g -
nize that salespeople may deliberately attempt to develop
customer loyalty directed only to themselves instead of
toward the company. Research also has considered the
*Corresponding author. Email: todd.arnold@okstate.edu
© 2015 Taylor & FrancisJournal of Personal Selling & Sales Management , 2015
Vol. 35, No. 3, 203 –220, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/08853134.2015.1037308
possibility that manufacturer ’s reps might identify more
readily with a brand rather than their employer, which would
influence their extra-role behaviors (Hughes and Ahearne
2010). In an example of behaviors inconsistent with specific
directives, there is a stream of literature devoted to the
organizational challenge of convincing salespeople to devote
effort and commitment to the sale of new products or the
adoption of new technologies (e.g. Atuahene-Gima 1997;
Hultink and Atuahene-Gima 2000). Research also has
examined cautiously granting autonomy and trust to bound-
ary spanners by the organization, acknowledging that
individuals afforded more latitude might exploit such
opportunities (Perrone, Zaheer, and McEvily 2003).
Given all of this, it is critical for organizations to
understand the machinations behind salesperson treatment
of the directives issued by upper level management. With
such contrasting information bases between upper level
management and frontline boundary spanners, the appro-
priate expression of strategy as perceived by each will
likely differ greatly. If boundary spanners perceive corpor-
ate directives to be misaligned with appropriate goals as
perceived by the employee, then the individual will poten ‐
tially engage in some form of modification of the directive
to find a compromise between the two contrasting direc-
tions. This modification of directives from upper level
management may therefore result in an unintended strategic
malfunction by the organization as a whole.
The purpose of this research is to explore situations
where salespeople may modify an organization ’s directives,
creating both a conceptualization and empirical validation
of the phenomenon. Previous research has highlighted the
need for a better understanding of all parts of salesperson
controls as part of an overall control system, including
employee response to attempts to control behaviors (Flah-
erty, Pappas, and Lee 2014 ). Consistent with this, we seek
to describe the phenomenon of directive modification and
offer measures to empirically capture the intentions of bou ‐
ndary spanners to engage in directive modification, or the
intent to alter/ignore the implementation of an organiza-
tional directive. We conjecture that, due to the complex
nature of the sales role, boundary spanners are directly
motivated to follow, modify or ignore organizational dire ‐
ctives by more than just self-interests. Utilizing extant sales
and organizational behavior literatures and informed by
applicable theoretical perspectives, including dissonance
and agency theories, we lay a foundation for understanding
this intricate set of motivations in the context of the
influence of the boundary spanner within the organization.
Our exploration identifies various influences on boundary
spanners to engage in the modification of organizational
directives. Specifically, we posit that the individual bound-
ary spanner is motivated by the interests of self, the external
partner(s), and the employer. We complement this con-
ceptualization with the development of scales to effectively
measure the various motivations for salesperson directivemodification intention. Tests of such measures are provided
and discussed, especially in relation to the role such mea ‐
sures may play within a sales-focused nomological net-
work. Potential consequences and contributions of these
findings are then discussed.
Directive modification
The term ‘directive ’has not been well-researched in
marketing literature and has not been formally defined. In
general, we propose that a directive is any guidance from
organizational management directly communicated to the
boundary spanning employee that is focused on altering
some input of the boundary spanner ’s job function (i.e.,
altering a means to an end). A number of aspects of this
definition are important to note. For the purposes of this
research, we limit our consideration to only those directives
that are explicit in nature. While we believe that directives
can be implicit as well as explicit, the purview of this
research is limited to only those that explicitly communic-
ate the input of the boundary spanner that is to be altered.
Further, it is in the context of explicit directives where
research is more likely to have substantive impact on sales
supervision and its consequences.
Additionally, as a specific order focused on an input
of the job function of the boundary spanner, a directive
is distinct from outcome controls, such as quotas for
sales agents. Because outcome controls are objectively
measured, they are rarely subject to the autonomy of the
boundary spanner. As a basic example, consider an organi ‐
zation following a strategy to sell more of a given product in
the coming period. The organization could set a quota for
that product and instruct the sales force that all conversations
with existing and potential customers must include mention
of that product. The quota is not a directive under our
definition. However, the instruction to mention the product
to all customers is a directive because it addresses (and
attempts to control) the inputs of the sales agent. Further, it
should be noted that failure to comply with a directive can
affect outcome performance, thereby influencing the firm ’s
desired objectives and its capacity to measure the same.
In addition, a directive is directly communicated by
organizational management to the boundary spanner. This
precludes situations in which a boundary spanning emp ‐
loyee learns of a directive by some means other than comm ‐
unication with the organization. Examples could include
learning of a directive from an external partner or unofficial
communication with other individuals inside the parent
organization. Although these cases are rare, we explicitly
exclude them from the current research because such
circumstances would likely influence some of the relation-
ships we will propose.
Following from this discussion, directive modification
is defined as any behavior or behavioral intention by a
boundary spanner that partially or wholly deviates from204 G. McAmis et al.
the actions prescribed by his/her parent organization in its
original directive. As such, modification behaviors or inten ‐
tions can run the spectrum from full rejection of a directive
(i.e., ignoring) to a slight alteration. Referring to our
previous example, a sales agent engaging in directive
modification could refuse to mention the product to any
of his customers (full rejection) or ‘forget ’to mention it to
just one of several customers (slight alteration).
One assumption is essential to establish for the current
research and developing an effective means of measuring a
salesperson ’s intention to engage in directive modific ‐
ation; we assume that there is at least some dissension by
the boundary spanning agent with respect to the directive
introduced by organizational management (i.e., a level of
dissonance within the salesperson must be created, which
would not be the case for an aligned or agreed upon dire ‐
ctive –Bacharach, Bamberger, and Sonnenstuhl 1996 ).
Hence, directive modification is inherently a modified path
taken by a salesperson relative to an initial directive.
Directive modification versus similar concepts
In the marketing and sales literature, there are some fields of
investigation that help to inform the current research, but
they do not capture a salesperson ’s motivation for direc ‐
tive modification. Thus, marketing and sales organization ’s
ability to implement specific directives, gauge boundary
spanner responses to the directive and ultimately measure
directive effectiveness to date has not received much
needed attention in the literature
An emerging topic in boundary spanner research is that
of deviant behavior. This topic has been examined in the
management literature for some time, but has only recently
been investigated in the unique context of the sales force.
The broad topic of deviance in the workplace has been
identified under various labels, such as organizational
resistance (Lawrence and Robinson 2007 ) and anti-citizen-
ship behaviors (Ball, Trevino, and Sims 1994 ), among
others. The generally accepted definition of workplace
deviance is, ‘Voluntary behavior that violates significant
organizational norms and in so doing threatens the well-
being of an organization, its members, or both ’(Robinson
and Bennett 1995 , 556).
One important point that is made throughout the
literature on workplace deviance is that the definition
directly identifies that the employee is engaging in beha ‐
viors in violation of organizational norms. This focus on
violating behaviors is a critical distinction from the more
overarching notion of unethical behavior (as well as from
the current discussion of directive modification intentions,
to be discussed subsequently). Unethical behavior is a
violation of universally held right and wrong, but work-
place deviance, directive modification, and similar con-
structs delineate a specific focus of the behavior (or
behavioral intention), which may or may not be relatedto right and wrong. So, a boundary spanner can engage in
workplace deviance but not unethical behavior if the
violated organizational norm is deemed unethical. In a
similar fashion, directive modification research is distinct
from the ethics paradigm in that directive modification
focuses on a specific organizational instruction instead of
universal right and wrong. If an organization issues a
directive that is unethical, the more ethical choice for a
boundary spanner may be to modify/ignore the directive.
Clearly, directive modification could have ethical implica-
tions and outcomes. However, it must be treated as a
separate research stream from ethics, and the ethical
repercussions fall outside the scope of this research.
In addition, while there are some similarities and
overlap between directive modification and workplace dev ‐
iance, the differences are acute and require a new concep-
tual formulation to properly explore the phenomenon
proposed in the current research. Jelinek and Ahearne
(2006 ) discuss four salient points regarding the definition
of workplace deviance: (1) the behavior is committed by
members of the organization, (2) this behavior is voluntary,
(3) organizational norms are the focus of the violation, and
(4) the violations have a significant and negative impact
because the behavior threatens the organization and/or its
members in some way. In contrast to workplace deviance,
directive modification violates specific directives of the
selling organization, regardless of their compliance with
organizational norms . So, as with the distinction with
unethical behavior, this difference in the target of directive
modification behavior creates a distinctly different research
situation and questions. Also, directive modification does
not necessarily threaten the well-being of the organization
or its members. In fact, a boundary spanner engaging in
directive modification may benefit the organization and its
members (especially from his/her perspective, which
suggests intent would possibly be different in directive
modification versus deviant or unethical behavior). So,
despite some overlap in relevant behaviors, directive
modification and workplace deviance are conceptually
distinct, requiring a separate measurement.
Finally, Malshe and Sohi ( 2009 ) directly address the
notion of ‘buy-in ’from the sales department. ‘Buy-in ’is
the closest concept in the literature to directive modifica-
tion because it is applied to a specific marketing initiative.
Although the concept of buy-in is similar to directive
modification and reinforces the need for research in this
general domain, there are significant differences between
the concept of buy-in, as it currently exists, and directive
modification. Malshe and Sohi ( 2009 ) define ‘buy-in ’as,
‘The sales function ’s belief that a proposed marketing
strategy or initiative is appropriate and has merit ’(208).
From the definition, buy-in refers to an effective response
from sales employees that is not linked to specific action
or intention. The current research goes beyond just the
belief of the sales force (or any other boundary spanner) toJournal of Personal Selling & Sales Management 205
consider measurable intentions that individuals form.
So, whereas buy-in is more affective in nature, directive
modification focuses on a cognitive response by boundary
spanners necessarily formed by a dissonant reaction
(which could not be a needed avenue for buy-in), which
is linked to a behavioral intention.
Theory
Two key theories guide our investigation of salesperson
directive modification: agency theory and cognitive dis-
sonance theory. Cases where employees resist managerial
guidance (and attempts to control behaviors) fit the text ‐
book definition of an agency theory problem. Agency
theory is concerned with situations in which a principal
(employer) and agent (employee) have conflicting interests
(Eisenhardt 1989 ; Fama 1980 ), in a manner similarly repre ‐
sented by the dissonance created through misaligned logic
for organizational action (Bacharach, Bamberger, and
Sonnenstuhl 1996 ). One critical assumption in agency
theory is that there exists information asymmetry between
the principal and agent (Eisenhardt 1989 ). Not only do the
two parties have differing information, they have disparate
filters through which new information is interpreted based
on their information contexts. These interpretive mechan-
isms can create the motivation for modification of direc-
tives from upper-level management by the frontline
employee as s/he seeks to rectify new information into the
existing work perspective as a means of retaining job
satisfaction.
Another important assumption of agency theory is
that the behavior of the agent is guided by self-interests
(Eisenhardt 1989 ). The tendency within much of the extant
literature has been to adopt this notion when considering
employee deviation from managerial direction. However,
an emerging stream of research has begun to question this
implicit assumption of self-interest motivation. For
example, some authors have explored ‘organizational expe ‐
dience ’in employees (Parks, Ma, and Gallagher 2010 ).
Also, pro-social rule breaking explores occasions where
employees supersede organizational rules in an attempt to
help, not harm, their organization (Dahling et al. 2012 ;
Morrison 2006 ). Even in this emerging research, though,
the unique job function of the boundary spanner has yet to
be considered through this new lens.
The current research challenges the blanket application
of the agency theory assumption that divergent behavior by
boundary spanning employees is driven exclusively by
self-interest. Our challenge to this assumption in the current
research context is not that it is invalid. Rather, we posit that
the self-interests must be pursued indirectly by boundary
spanners in many instances through the interests of other
essential parties, with the notion of integrating the interests
of both the self and others also being consistent withdissonance theory (Bacharach, Bamberger, and Sonnen-
stuhl 1996 ).
Cognitive dissonance forms the core of directive
modification intention. Cognitive dissonance is a psycho-
logical state that refers to the discomfort felt between what
individuals already know or believe and new information
that is presented to them (Festinger 1957 ). As has been
investigated in organizational theory, employees search for
consistencies in the logic of action across organizational
levels (i.e., institutional (corporate), managerial, technical
(employee)), with changes recommended (or demanded)
from the corporate and/or managerial level often being at
odds with perceptions and motivations of employees
(Bacharach, Bamberger, and Sonnenstuhl 1996 ). Such
inconsistent views may be triggered by employee expos-
ure to new information from managers, disagreement with
such information, or because of forced compliance with
organizational directives with intent to control behaviors
(Bacharach, Bamberger, and Sonnenstuhl 1996 ). The end
result of an inconsistent view is an employee ’s experience
of dissonance in reaction to the organizational information
and/or directive, and intentions to resist the change
(Bacharach, Bamberger, and Sonnenstuhl 1996 ; Burnes
and James 1995 ). Further, the experience of dissonance
occurs after the exposure to new information has taken
place, but before attempts at dissonance reduction have
taken place, helping to form intentions to reduce such
feelings (Bawa and Kansal 2008 ).
Motivations for directive modification
Considering the role of boundary spanners within an
organization and the extant literature, three major poten ‐
tial dimensions of the motivations for directive modifica-
tion would be the triangulation of the salespeople ’s pers ‐
pective of the possible impact of a directive on their firm,
themselves and their customer. Any one of these may be a
possible source of directive modification. Hence, three
sources of directive modification that are likely to be most
prevalent include: customer-focused directive modifica ‐
tion (CFDM), organization-focused directive modification
(OFDM), and self-focused directive modification (SFDM).
Customers are often researched as a source of role stress
(e.g. Schmitz and Ganesan 2014 ), and the individual
interests of salespeople have been considered a potential
source of conflict (e.g. Darrat, Amyx, and Bennett 2010 ).
While not as heavily researched, the organization itself also
has the potential to create role conflict (e.g. Fournier et al.
2013 ). We posit that at least one of these areas may create
dissonance for a boundary spanner when s/he disagrees
with a directive aimed at controlling behavior received
from her/his organization, motivating directive modifica-
tion intentions. Such motivations are not mutually exclus-
ive, so more than one motivation may be present, creating
the motivation set for the boundary spanner. In the206 G. McAmis et al.
following sections, we discuss and argue for the inclusion
of each of these dimensions among intentions for directive
modification.
Customer-focused directive modification
When considering the interests of an external partner,
boundary spanners may be motivated to modify organiza-
tional directives as a means of fulfilling a desire (perceived
or genuine) of the external partner to persist with the current
business arrangement. Agency theory assumes agents to
be risk averse (Eisenhardt 1989 ; Fama 1980 ). This risk
aversion often can be connected with reluctance by boun ‐
dary spanning employees to embrace change (Ahearne
et al. 2010 ; Davis, Bagozzi, and Warshaw 1989 ). Addi-
tionally, bounded rationality is assumed for all parties. In
the absence of information to the contrary, individual boun ‐
dary spanners are likely to assume that external partners
share in their risk aversion and would therefore be opposed
to voluntarily engaging in actions that alter the existing
status quo. In the interest of assisting the external partner in
achieving this assumed common goal, boundary spanners
will be inclined to consider engaging in directive modi ‐
fication.
In addition, some directives by the parent organization
may be ill-timed for an external partner. Even if the boun ‐
dary spanner is willing to embrace a directive, full accep ‐
tance of that directive may have to be shelved in the short
term because doing otherwise would imply a disregard
for the partner ’s situation, injuring the relationship. For
example, an external partner currently engaged in a major
software overhaul would be unlikely to agree to simulta-
neously transition additional software applications tied to
the partnership with the boundary spanner ’s organization.
With trust from the partner being so valuable, boundary
spanning employees may be understandably averse to
taking actions that could violate and/or decrease the
partner ’s trust in the future. Thus, they may seek to modify
directives that threaten to damage the relationship between
the boundary spanner and the partner.
Additionally, the current job function of boundary
spanners can lead to a consultative role for the employee
with respect to the partner that can be quite critical to the
success of the relationship (Spiro, Rich, and Stanton 2008 ).
Sales consultants, for example, create value for customers
by focusing on the discovery of latent needs and the optimal
fulfillment of those needs (Pelham 2009 ). In this role of
consultant, therefore, the boundary spanner advises the
external partner on how to more efficiently and effectively
conduct its business. In the pursuit of fulfilling the needs of
the external partner, boundary spanners will necessarily
filter out those ideas and actions that will not meet that end
goal. As a result, a boundary spanning employee may be
willing to modify/ignore a directive if it is inequitable for
the customer in order to maintain or even strengthen theperceived trust in the relationship. What the employer
perceives as beneficial for external partners may not be
perceived that way by frontline employees because of their
different knowledge and familiarity with the situation (and
the potential uniqueness of a given context), creating the
previously noted feelings of cognitive dissonance. Also, the
parent organization may deem it a reasonable exchange to
experience a negative impact on the relationship with the
partner in order to fulfill some other goal that will hopefully
garner greater positive results for the parent organization or
the entire relationship (a view that may not be shared or
even appreciated by the sales employee).
Organization-focused directive modification
At times, the parent organization may introduce a directive
that boundary spanners believe is not feasible and will
cast both them and their organization in a negative light in
the eyes of other participants in the industry. Such an
inconsistent view will likely generate dissonance and the
boundary spanner will be motivated to prevent such an
occurrence. Even though the organization may be willing to
accept less-than-optimal performance in the short-term in
the interest of long-term growth, the boundary spanning
agent may view the approach as a threat to immediate
customer satisfaction/transaction quality. For example, a
supplier may introduce a new product offering with the
understanding that they are not fully prepared for every
question or concern of their customers. In this case,
organization ’s management considers this to be part of the
reasonable costs of a new product introduction. Sales-
people, on the other hand, may be reluctant to allow their
company to fall short of what they hold to be acceptable
performance standards with their customers. Salespeople
may, in turn avoid discussion of the new product if they
realize their customers will have concerns the organization
is not prepared to address, opting to wait until a later time
when the supplier is better able to fully meet its standards of
performance.
We propose that this motivation to modify organiza-
tional directives represents a counterintuitive form of orga ‐
nizational citizenship behavior. Because of the unique
aspects of their role in the organization, boundary spanning
employees are posed with ‘exception-to-the-rule ’situations
where their own discretion must be applied. Organizational
citizenship behavior (OCB) is voluntary behavior by indi ‐
viduals that is outside the normal role of the employee and
supports the organization (Organ 1988 ). Two dimensions of
OCB relevant to the current research are organizational
loyalty (commitment) and individual initiative (Podsakoff
et al. 2000 ). Organizational loyalty includes behaviors
aimed at defending the organization ’s reputation and pro ‐
moting the organization as effectively as possible to exter ‐
nal entities (Graham 1991 ; Moorman and Blakely 1995 ).
Individual initiative entails performing functions aboveJournal of Personal Selling & Sales Management 207
and beyond the requirements of the prescribed job role
(Moorman and Blakely 1995 ).
When a directive seems to contradict boundary span-
ning employees ’desire to express organizational loyalty,
their individual initiative, along with the accompanying
feelings of dissonance, may motivate them to modify the
directive. In such an instance, employees must choose
between complying with the directive and effectively
representing the parent organization to external parties.
Since many boundary spanning job functions, such as sales,
focus on short-term results (Homburg and Jensen 2007 ),
these employees can confront situations where they may
need to choose between what may appear to be disparate
options. In these circumstances, salespeople may be moti ‐
vated to modify directives which in their opinion are
disruptive to their and their organization ’s customer rela ‐
tionships.
Further, the internal departments within the parent
organization represent an often unconsidered set of vital
partnerships for boundary spanners. As suggested by orga ‐
nizational theory, successful employees not only build
relationships with external partners, but they also cultivate
interactions with individuals and groups within their own
organization (Plouffe and Barclay 2007 ; Steward et al.
2010 ). We propose that these internal relationships also
provide motivation for boundary spanners to engage in
OFDM.
When an organization develops a new strategy, the
resulting directives rarely apply only to boundary spanners.
Either through direct communication with other depart-
ments or conjecture on the boundary spanner ’s part, boun ‐
dary spanners likely project how the directive issued to
them may also affect other groups within the parent
organization. How the directive affects these other groups
can influence the boundary spanner ’s directive modifica-
tion behavior. A boundary spanner may be motivated to
preserve and foster relationships with internal members of
the parent organization in other departments. If accepting a
directive will create unwelcome challenges for their inte ‐
rnal partners, boundary spanners more likely will be motiv ‐
ated to seek out modified versions of the directive.
Additionally, boundary spanners may seek to create
indebtedness from internal partners by deviating from the
directives. The norm of reciprocity suggests that when one
partner in a relationship acts in the interest of the other
partner, that other partner will feel an obligation to recip ‐
rocate such deeds (Rhoades and Eisenberger 2002 ). By
‘bending the rules ’for an internal partner, boundary span ‐
ners can create an atmosphere where the partner feels
obligated to respond in kind in the future. Therefore,
boundary spanning employees may be motivated to engage
in directive modification behavior in order to prevent
inequities for their partners within the parent organization.Self-focused directive modification
Often a pervasive motivation for boundary spanners in a
sales role is the financial. This motivation is frequently tied
to a desire to expend the least amount of effort for a given
compensation level, which can be referred to as job task
minimization. For some boundary spanners (not necess ‐
arily limited to salespeople), this motivation is manifested
as a basic desire to expend no more effort than is required
to minimally meet the requirements of the directive. For
others, though, this can become a complicated calculation
because many boundary spanner rewards are based on their
performance (i.e. commissions and bonuses) instead of
effort alone. Here the implications of directives that may
endanger existing business or redeploy customer purchase
behaviors may have less than desirable salesperson com-
pensation outcomes resulting in directive modification
becoming potentially highly relevant.
Vroom ’s(1964 ) expectancy theory poses workforce
motivation as a three-part equation. Employees will be
motivated if three elements are present: expectancy, instru-
mentality, and valence. Expectancy is the belief that effort
leads to performance. Instrumentality is the belief that
performance leads to reward. Valence is the belief that the
reward leads to satisfaction or that the reward is desirable.
If these connections are not inherent when deploying a new
directive, modification, in many cases, most likely will
occur.
With few exceptions, the introduction of a directive by
the employing organization disrupts at least some part of
this set of equations for boundary spanners, likely prompt-
ing the feelings of dissonance that accompany change,
especially when an employee has a strong belief that current
methods of doing things are working well (Dechawata ‐
napaisal and Siengthai 2006 ). Embracing a new directive
from the parent organization requires effort from the
boundary spanner. So, assuming some steady state amount
of overall effort from the agent, a new directive will most
likely lead to less performance directed toward other tasks
(e.g., selling other non-directive related products/services
or customer follow up). These modifications in task dep ‐
loyment ultimately could decrease existing rewards and
possibly job satisfaction for the boundary spanning agent.
If, however, boundary spanners can modify the directive,
thereby making it more aligned with accommodating their
core activities, their present rewards are maintained poten-
tially with complete or, at best, partial compliance with the
initial directive.
Some directives (e.g. software adoption or a refined job
process) are designed to improve boundary spanner effici-
ency in the long-term. However, research indicates that
boundary spanning agents tend to have a rather short-term
orientation with some aspects of their job function (Hom-
burg and Jensen 2007 ; Rouzies et al. 2005 ). Agency theory
assumes bounded rationality for individuals suggesting208 G. McAmis et al.
that the benefits associated with directives that fall outside
that individual ’s typical cognitive framework are unlikely
to be embraced. Unfortunately, from an organizational
perspective, this short-term focus creates challenges for
longer-term strategies directed at improving firm, salesper-
son, and client well-being.
Agency theory also asserts that the agent is risk-averse
and the organization is risk-neutral (Eisenhardt 1989 ). So,
even in the face of prospective future gains tied to the
directive, boundary spanners could still be strongly moti-
vated to engage in directive modification because there is
a risk that the promised long-term gains may never
materialize (and typically not during the period the sales-
person is likely to experience material losses). This result
could potentially leave the employee incurring a short-term
loss in order to comply with a directive. Alternatively,
boundary spanners might seek a modified version of the
directive, thereby permitting them to protect their current
outcome state and/or minimize the risk of loss. In contrast,
the organization as a risk-neutral entity, selects actions
that may pose some level of risk placing the boundary
spanner in a vulnerable position. It is this conundrum, of
firm risk propensity and agent desire for status quo, where
the potential for salesperson directive modification is
cultivated.
Methods
Given the strength of conceptual evidence regarding the
existence and form of directive modification intentions
among sales personnel, the next step in investigating this
phenomenon is to develop a means of capturing its occur ‐
rence. In this light, a series of studies were conducted to
develop measures for directive modification intentions in
relation to each of the three dimensions previously detailed.
Study 1 attempts to validate the identified dimensions of
directive modification intentions through qualitative inter-
views. Study 2 describes item generation and scale puri-
fication. Study 3 was conducted in three stages, all using the
same data-set: (1) initial item testing; (2) confirmatory
analysis and validity testing; and (3) a nomological testing
of the developed scales based upon construct relationships
suggested by dissonance theory.
Study 1: proof of concept
This research generally follows the guidelines set forth by
DeVellis ( 2003 ) in the development of a valid measure ‐
ment scale. Once the definition and dimensions of direc ‐
tive modification intention were developed (as developed
in the previous sections), the next step is to verify the
conceptualization through qualitative interviews.
Eight personal in-depth interviews were conducted with
sales professionals in different industries (see Appendix 1
for interview script). The panel of interviewees consistedof personal contacts of one of the authors, supplemented
by candidates for the advisory council of a large university
in the Central USA. The panel included one female and
seven male respondents. All respondents had at least five
years of B2B selling experience with titles ranging from
salesperson to vice president of global sales to CEO.
Multiple industries were included to get a survey of various
sales situations in our sample. Industries included pharma-
ceuticals, insurance, and home improvement products,
among others.
Using a deductive approach, a semi-structured inter-
view format was employed allowing for the detailed exp ‐
loration of particular responses. Individuals were asked to
share personal examples (i.e., themselves or other employ-
ees they observed) of instances when salespeople did not
comply with employer directives, including their (the
salesperson ’s) perceived motivations. Respondents were
not provided direction with their responses, and were not
‘led’toward any of the motivations for directive modifica-
tion suggested by the literature. All of the interviews were
audio recorded and lasted approximately 30 minutes.
A transcript of each interview was content analyzed by a
single coder. In particular, the coder investigated each
interview for presence of the concept of directive modi-
fication as well as the potential cause(s) of the behavior.
Table 1 summarizes the notable findings from these
interviews.
Striking about the interviews was that the sales
professionals could readily offer multiple stories of this phe ‐
nomenon, with ‘protection of the customer ’being a
consistent theme of examples. In addition, there was no
trepidation or indication of social desirability bias prevent-
ing respondents from being forthcoming about this beha-
vior. This phenomenon and its distinct dimensions seem to
be very prevalent and considered to be normal behavior by
all of the interviewees. Two of the respondents failed to
indicate they altered the directives of their organization.
Both individuals, however, later shared stories of modifica-
tion behaviors during the interview.
Study 1 strongly indicates the existence of this phe-
nomenon, along with the 3 distinct dimensions we have
proposed (with no consistent theme of alternative motiva-
tions being exhibited). Further, Study 1 results are indicat-
ive of the applicability of dissonance theory, as more than
one respondent noted that if s/he was involved with the
development of the directive, s/he was much more likely to
‘go along ’with the directed change in actions, where such
employee involvement has been demonstrated to reduce
feelings of dissonance and subsequent resistance to organ-
izational change (Burnes and James 1995 ).
In relation to CFDM, respondents were particularly
motivated to protect their customers. ‘It doesn ’t matter who
I work for, (Company X) will always be my customer. ’
Hence, directive modification in the interest of protect ‐
ing customers was both evident in our interviews andJournal of Personal Selling & Sales Management 209
consistent with what was suggested by the extant literature.
These comments were often framed in the context of new
product introductions where the necessary support was
perceived to be lacking, forcing salespeople to modify
directives in order to protect their customers, their firm and
themselves.
Similarly, in relation to OFDM, examples were pro-
vided by respondents indicating the existence of this dim ‐
ension of directive modification. The overarching theme
here tended to be a perception that a company was being
short-sighted in its suggested actions, which was jeopard-
izing sales. As suggested by the literature, the salesperson
was taking actions to modify directives that, from the
organization ’s perspective, may have beneficial long-term
implications, but from the salesperson perspective could be
injurious to short-term performance. It could be that
respondents were framing this from the perspective of
‘protecting the company ’from itself deflecting attention
from their desire to protect their personal interests. This
may suggest a possible relationship between OFDM and
SFDM; however, for the purposes of a robust articulation of
the directive modification phenomenon, the dimension of
OFDM was retained in our item generation and scale
development.
In relation to SFDM, there are clear indications, as
would be expected, that salespeople modify directives to
protect their own interests. Further, there were a number of
comments suggesting that means of minimizing effort inrelation to return were top-of-mind for salespeople when
considering organizational directives. As noted by one of
the respondents, ‘Salespeople are like water; they will find
the path of least resistance. ’Further, it was clear that a focus
upon sales/commissions was paramount in evaluating
the influence of a directive. Modification of a directive
appeared to be very likely to occur if commissions are
threatened. Finally, salespeople also seemed likely to eng ‐
age in modification if a directive threatened their even ‐
tual value to the organization. If the directive made the
salesperson, ‘easier to be replaced, ’there was a clear self-
interest motivation to modify the directive. (For instance,
installation of sales force automation systems.)
In total, the salesperson interviews offered valuable
reinforcement of the results of the previously reported
literature review. This prompted the progression to the next
stage of scale development, which was item generation.
Study 2: item generation
Based upon the results of Study 1 and the review of the
literature, a pool of 21 semantic differential scale items was
generated by the research team to assess the three types
of directive modification previously discussed. Appendix 2
includes a list of the 21 scale items. These 21 items con ‐
sisted of three sets of seven similar items. A common
opening phrase was used for each set to distinguish the
intended dimension to be measured. So, the first set ofTable 1. Qualitative study findings.
General findings .Each interviewee was readily able to provide stories of times that either they or other coworkers had engaged in
directive modification.
.Two of the participants claimed that they did not believe they had the right to engage in directive modification.
However, one of those respondents did have a story of an occasion when he modified an organization ’s directive
because ‘it wasn ’t right. ’
.Salespeople will often actively and openly try to find ways around a directive if it seems to have a negative impact on
efficiency with respect to the situation before the directive.
.Salespeople are often resistant to a directive if they do not see the benefit/purpose for it.
.Salesperson involvement in the directive decreases the likelihood of modification.
CFDM-related findings .Modification occurs if the directive threatens some kind of injury to the customer.
.‘It doesn ’t matter who I work for, [company X] will always be my customer. ’
.Salespeople don ’t always embrace new products because it jeopardizes the customer and, in turn, the salesperson ’s
credibility with the customer.
.Even if management is committed to selling new products, it is not clear if management is committed to supporting
those new products for the customer.
OFDM-related findings .Salespeople will at times get the impression that the organization has become too focused on directives to please a
very few and lose sight of the true goal of making sales.
.‘I realized my company wasn ’t ready to answer the questions that customer would ask, so I didn ’t mention the new
product. ’
SFDM-related findings .Modification occurs if the directive threatens commissions.
.‘Salespeople are like water; they find the path of least resistance. ’
.Salespeople will sometimes engage in self-destructive behavior to communicate to management how objectionable a
directive is.
.Salespeople sell to the compensation plan, making all other guidance subordinate.
.Salespeople are aware of directives that make them less valuable to the organization.
.Directives that increase monitoring and supervision often encounter resistance210 G. McAmis et al.
seven items began with the phrase, ‘Compared to my
individual goals, including those assigned by my employer
(e.g. quotas) and those I have personally set for myself,
I would treat the directive as …’in order to capture SFDM
behavior. This opening phrase was then followed by each
semantic differential scale item with different endpoints
such as ‘very important …not important at all ’and
‘something to be circumvented …something to be acc ‐
epted. ’After the respondent completed those seven items, a
new opening phrase was applied to designate the next
dimension and the same seven ending phrases from the
previous set were repeated. This was done in the third set of
items as well.
The semantic differential scale was chosen for two
reasons. First, this scale type was selected as a means to
prevent respondent fatigue on the survey. Second, a sem ‐
antic differential scale is appropriate because of the some ‐
what affective nature of the phenomenon we are studying
and the subjective nature of responses. Likert scales lend
themselves to measuring the likelihood of a behavior with
the behavior being an either-or proposition. We are att ‐
empting to measure how a boundary spanner might engage
in the gray area between complete rejection and complete
acceptance. A semantic differential scale more accurately
portrays the personal prioritization of the directive among
many options that a boundary spanner would experience in
the given scenario.
The list of items was subjected to a review by a panel of
five academic experts (two advanced stage doctoral stu-
dents, two associate professors of marketing, one full pro ‐
fessor of marketing, all working within the sales domain),
as well as pre-tested on a group of sales students. Some of
the specific wording was altered, but otherwise all items
were retained to measure each type of directive modi ‐
fication.
Study 3A –initial item testing
Data were collected through an online survey of B2B
sales agents. The sample consisted of a prescreened panel
of volunteers from across the USA. An electronic survey
company –US Sample, Inc. –facilitated contact with the
respondents and helped to enlist their participation. Data
collected through online panels has begun to appear reg ‐
ularly in many high-quality business journals (e.g. Darrat,
Amyx, and Bennett 2010 ;P u n j 2006 ). Although there are
still opponents to its use, there are a number of advantages,
such as access to a nationwide sample as well as impro ‐
ved data accuracy since the data are input electronically,
thus removing some possibilities of coding errors by the
researcher (Birnbaum 2004 ). Additionally, comparison of
online and paper-and-pencil data collections indicate simi-
lar covariance structures for both methods (Stanton 1998 ).
Respondents were offered a cash equivalent worth
$6.00 for their participation in this survey. Of the 4120invitations sent, a total of 1036 panel members responded
to the survey resulting in a response rate of 25.15%.
Because the panel was not exclusively B2B salespeople,
a qualifying question was asked to eliminate B2C sales-
people, which left 406 responses. To assist in screening
low involvement respondents, an item was inserted asking
the respondent to leave the answer blank. Responses were
also eliminated if the participant did not take a minimum
amount of time to complete the survey. After these steps,
a total of 304 usable responses remained for analysis with
an effective response rate of 7.37%.
A scenario-based questionnaire was employed for this
study. The application of scenario-based scales is an acc ‐
epted practice when the goal of the scale is to capture a
reaction or related values, goals, or intended actions of the
individual respondent in relation to a situation (see Konig
et al. 2007 ). The scenarios are provided in Appendix 3 .
Respondents were instructed to randomly choose the
customer with whom they had most recently completed a
sale. Then, a scenario was introduced, and the respondent
was asked a number of questions to gauge how they would
respond in such a situation. After the first scenario was
introduced, a second, different scenario was introduced,
and participants were asked the same set of questions based
on this new scenario.
The scenarios utilized in this study describe a situation
in which the parent organization has introduced a new
product to the market and has directed its sales agents to
prioritize promoting this product to all existing customers.
In each scenario, one or more of the relevant parties (self,
customer, or parent organization) is depicted as suffering
some injurious effect from the new product. This was
done to elicit different motivations for directive modifica-
tion among participants.
A new product introduction was selected for a number
of reasons. First, for most salespeople new product intro ‐
ductions are a commonly experienced directive. By utiliz-
ing a scenario that draws from salesperson past experiences,
responses will be more representative of the reality of the
salesperson function rather than being based on hypothet-
ical intentions of respondents that may or may not be
realistic. Second, a new product introduction scenario most
accurately depicts a situation where directives can have
mixed consequences for the boundary spanner irrespective
of the long-term strategic potential for the firm. It is often
in these contexts where supervisors are limited in their
ability to assess how the salesperson is enacting the dir ‐
ective. New product introductions require some level of
reliance by the selling organization on its sales force to
receive and deliver on the directive. Third, a new product
introduction directive presents the opportunity for a wide
range of reactions by the salesperson. A salesperson can
neglect the new product altogether, mention it in passing
and advise the customer against it along with a host of other
possible modifications. By using this scenario, we believeJournal of Personal Selling & Sales Management 211
we can more readily measure the continuum of modifica-
tion intention possibilities, whereas many other scenarios
would only allow for full acceptance or full rejection of the
directive. Additionally, these scenarios can be readily
combined or separated to achieve the necessary treatments
for the current research.
Because respondents were asked to answer questions
based on two scenarios independent of each other, a number
of steps were taken to prevent cross-contamination eff ‐
ects. First, the order of the two scenarios introduced was
randomized in order to prevent any order effects. Addition-
ally, each scenario was exposed equally in combination
with all other possible scenarios. So, scenario 1 appeared an
equal number of times in conjunction with treatments 2, 3,
4, and 5.
Exploratory factor analysis
The 21 items were factor analyzed using the principal factor
analysis method in the SAS software package. The prin-
cipal factor analysis method was chosen over the maximum
likelihood method because the data are not expected to be
normally distributed. Two factor extraction methods were
utilized to determine the number of factors to retain: the
scree plot test and the percentage of variance method. These
methods were chosen over the more commonly used Kaiser
rule (eigenvalues > 1) because the Kaiser rule has shown to
yield unreliable results and is more appropriate for principal
components analysis (DeVellis 2003 ; Rizzo, House, and
Lirtzman 1970 ). The scree plot test examines a graphical
display of the eigenvalues of the factor analysis to search
for the point at which the eigenvalues level off (Mallin and
Pullins 2009 ). The percentage of variance method analyzesthe shared variance (communality) amongst the items to
determine the common factors (Darmon 1987 ).
Utilizing the above extraction methods, an exploratory
factor analysis with an oblique rotation was performed
on the 21 items from the survey. These extraction methods
and rotation were chosen because they allow the factors to
be related to each other and result in some correlation bet ‐
ween them (Hatcher 1994 ; Walsh and Beatty 2007 ). This
initial test resulted in a five-factor solution. However, two
of these factors indicated a low amount of variance exp ‐
lained, and the entire solution held a good deal of cross-
loading of factors. The cross-loading variables were rem ‐
oved from the analysis. Once these items were removed, a
clear three-factor solution emerged utilizing a total of nine
items from the survey. Recall that the 21 items are a series
of combinations of three opening phrases and seven ending
phrases. The nine items that emerged from the factor anal ‐
ysis were the same three end phrases combined with the
three opening phrases. Table 2 shows the items included in
the final factor solution along with their factor loadings.
The results of the study strongly support the three
dimensions of directive modification intention that we have
set forth. Because the same three ending phrases emerged
in each factor, we have substantial evidence that each
dimension indicated by the opening phrases create a sign ‐
ificant difference in the mind of the respondents. Further
testing was conducted through a confirmatory analysis and
an examination of scale validity.
Study 3B: confirmatory factor analysis and validity tests
In Study 3B, we seek to further confirm and validate a scale
for empirically capturing the three distinct dimensions of
Table 2. Exploratory factor analysis results.
Factor
loading
Factor 1: Self-focused directive modification intentions Compared to my individual goals , including those assigned by
my employer (e.g. quotas) and those I have personally set for myself, I would treat the directive to promote this
product as …
A rule to be broken …… .A rule to be followed 0.60578
Something to be circumvented …… .Something to be accepted 0.58006
A loose guideline …… .A rule set in stone 0.64018
Factor 2: Customer-focused directive modification intentions Compared to my role as an advocate for this customer ,I
would treat the directive to promote this product as …
A rule to be broken …… .A rule to be followed 0.78768
Something to be circumvented …… .Something to be accepted 0.80083
A loose guideline …… .A rule set in stone 0.73971
Factor 3: Organization-focused directive modification intentions Compared to my role as an employee that looks out for
the best interests of my organization, I would treat the directive to promote this product as …
A rule to be broken …… .A rule to be followed 0.81175
Something to be circumvented …… .Something to be accepted 0.83019
A loose guideline …… .A rule set in stone 0.79365212 G. McAmis et al.
directive modification intentions (from within the same
sample as Study 2). The 9-item, 3-factor structure that
emerged in the exploratory factor analysis was submitted to
a confirmatory factor analysis. An inspection of model fit
revealed reasonable, if mixed, results. GFI is 0.8929,
RMSEA is 0.1391, CFI is 0.9523, NNI is 0.9285, and χ2
is 304.8931. Although the RMSEA is noticeably higher
than the generally accepted cut-off of 0.08 (Hatcher 1994 ),
other indices such as CFI and NNI indicate a good fit for the
model. Additionally, each item loaded significantly on its
designated factor.
To further test the legitimacy of our findings, a number
of other validity tests were run on the factor analysis resu ‐
lts. The composite reliability of each factor, factor load ‐
ings of each item in the model, and Cronbach ’s alpha are
displayed in Table 3 . The numbers indicate that the three
dimensions are reliable and that each item significantly
loads onto its dimension. The composite reliability for each
factor exceeds 0.918, well above the generally accepted
minimum of 0.7 (Fornell and Larcker 1981 ; Hatcher 1994 ).
Content validity and construct validity were used as the
criteria for determining the validity of the scale aimed at
capturing directive modification (Ping 2004 ). Construct
validity is composed of two parts: discriminant validity and
convergent validity. Based on the high inter-item correla-
tions, the proposed measures for directive modification
appear to be content valid.
Discriminant validity was tested in two ways. First, a
chi-square difference test was conducted (Anderson and
Gerbing 1988 ). The chi-square of the standard measure ‐ment model in which all factors are allowed to co-vary was
compared to the chi-square of measurement models in
which the correlation between two of the factors was fixed.
This test was run for each possible pair of factors. In each
instance, the difference between chi-square values for the
standard model and modified model were significant at the
p< 0.001 level, indicating discriminant validity. Second,
the factors were subjected to a variance extracted test in
which the average variance extracted for two factors is
compared to the square of the correlation between them
(Fornell and Larcker 1981 ). For each possible pairing, the
variance extracted of both variables exceeded the squared
correlation between them, also suggesting discriminant
validity.
Convergent validity was subjected to multiple analyt-
ical tests as well. First, the average variance extracted of
each dimension was calculated. Each of these values
exceeded the recommended 0.50 threshold, signifying that
the measure explains significantly more variance than
does measurement error (Fornell and Larcker 1981 ). This
indicates convergent validity. Additionally, the t-tests for
each factor loading were assessed. In all cases, the
calculated t-values were 26.5929 or higher also suggesting
convergent validity.
Study 3 provides strong evidence confirming the stre ‐
ngth of the directive modification measurement items.
Although the confirmatory factor analysis yielded some
inconsistent findings, the rest of the tests provide robust
results supporting the validity of the three proposed dim ‐
ensions.
Table 3. Composite reliability (CR), Average variance extracted (AVE), and factor loadings.
CR AVECronbach ’s
AlphaFactor
loading
Factor 1: Self-focused directive modification intentions Compared to my individual goals ,
including those assigned by my employer (e.g. quotas) and those I have personally set for
myself, I would treat the directive to promote this product as …0.918 0.898 0.922
A rule to be broken …… .A rule to be followed 0.8928
Something to be circumvented …… .Something to be accepted 0.8981
A loose guideline …… .A rule set in stone 0.8708
Factor 2: Customer-focused directive modification intentions Compared to my role as an
advocate for this customer , I would treat the directive to promote this product as …0.936 0.923 0.939
A rule to be broken …… .A rule to be followed 0.9225
Something to be circumvented …… .Something to be accepted 0.9041
A loose guideline …… .A rule set in stone 0.9025
Factor 3: Organization-focused directive modification intentions Compared to my role as an
employee that looks out for the best interests of my organization, I would treat the directive
to promote this product as …0.935 0.923 0.939
A rule to be broken …… .A rule to be followed 0.9075
Something to be circumvented …… .Something to be accepted 0.9065
A loose guideline …… .A rule set in stone 0.9167Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management 213
Study 3C: nomological test
The validation of the directive modification phenomenon
and the contribution of these three dimensions of directive
modification to marketing research is further established
by investigating its relationship to constructs within the
bounds of core theory. In association with cognitive diss ‐
onance predictions, we have selected relationship import-
ance and organizational commitment as key antecedent
variables, and job satisfaction as a key dependent variable
for testing the nomological validity of directive modifica-
tion intentions. As noted by Burnes and James ( 1995 ), dis‐
sonance related to organizational initiatives for behavioral
change is much more likely to occur when employees view
affected behaviors as being highly important. In associa ‐
tion with this, we have selected a salesperson ’s view of
customer relationship importance as one focal antecedent.
Similarly, an employee ’s level of commitment to his/her
organization is indicative of the importance placed upon
such a relationship. The more committed a sales employee
is to his/her organization, the more likely is dissonance/resi ‐
stance to result from suggested changes that an employee
may see as potentially problematic (cf., Burnes and James
1995 ). Job satisfaction was selected as a relevant dependent
variable not only because of its potential to relate to actions
taken to ease feelings of dissonance (Lii 2001 ), but also
because of its prevalence in salesperson research (e.g.,
Johnson and Sohi 2014 ).
CFDM stems from a desire to sustain and nurture the
relationship with a customer because of the value of that
relationship. It stands to reason that an important customer
relationship to a boundary spanner would create an incr ‐
eased willingness to engage in CFDM, especially when
such a directive is dissonance-creating (Burnes and James
1995 ). Additionally, we can assume that a relationship that
is important to the boundary spanner will by extension also
be important to the organization employing the boundary
spanner. This would create a motivation to engage in
OFDM by the boundary spanner. Formally:
H1: Customer relationship importance will positively
affect (a) customer-focused directive modification inten-
tions and (b) organization-focused directive modification
intentions.
On the other hand, the importance of the relationship with
the customer would not logically have any direct bearing
on the motivation of the boundary spanner to engage in
SFDM. Again, we anticipate that the self-interests of the
boundary spanner will be expressed indirectly through the
interests of the customer rather than directly (i.e., the focus
is upon the well-being of the customer). Therefore, we
would expect the importance of the relationship with a
customer to have no influence on SFDM behaviors.
In relation to organizational commitment, extant liter-
ature indicates that commitment to the parent organiza ‐
tion is a positive and significant predictor of an employeeengaging in ‘extra-role ’behaviors that go beyond expected
behaviors to benefit his/her organization (O ’Reilly and
Chatman 1986 ; Schappe 1998 ). Such behaviors would
become especially relevant to an employee if s/he perceives
an action to be potentially harmful to the organization
(via dissonance –Bacharach, Bamberger, and Sonnenstuhl
1996 ). A boundary spanner engaging in OFDM is moti-
vated to either save face for the parent organization or assist
other constituents within the parent organization. In this
case, the boundary spanning employee is using his/her own
discretion, is not being directly rewarded for the behavior,
and is attempting to improve organizational function of the
employer. Given this, we expect a positive relationship
between commitment to the parent organization and
OFDM. No prediction is made relative to either SFDM
or CFDM.
H2: Organizational commitment will positively affect
organization-focused directive modification intentions.
In relation to a job satisfaction outcome, dissonance theory
would predict when employees take actions that are cons ‐
istent with their beliefs and values (i.e., that reduce feelings
of dissonance), the outcome is a positive effect upon job
satisfaction (Lii 2001 ). Additionally, modification can be a
form of compromise between conflicting demands. If, for
example, the interests of the customer are not best served by
strict adherence to a directive, the salesperson may seek
some compromise (modification of the directive) to resolv-
ing the conflict. So, directive modification can serve to
lessen role conflict. Consistent with this, we predict that
sales employees who express directive modification inten-
tions will feel more positive about their job, enhancing
feelings of job satisfaction.
H3: All forms of directive modification intentions will
positively affect employee job satisfaction.
To test the nomological validity of the three proposed
dimensions of directive modification, we used the same
data collection discussed in Study 3A and B. As a part of
the questionnaire, each participant was asked items regard-
ing their job satisfaction (Nygaard and Dahlstrom 2002 ;
Rizzo, House, and Lirtzman 1970 ) as well as the import-
ance of the relationship (Morgan and Hunt 1994 ; Mowday,
Steers, and Porter 1979 ) with the focal customer that was
randomly chosen during the survey and the salesperson ’s
commitment to his/her organization (Mowday, Steers, and
Porter 1979 ). Each respondent was asked to answer ques ‐
tions regarding two scenarios that he/she were to treat as
unrelated. This creates a repeated measures data collection
with a within-subjects and a between-subjects factor. Given
this design, a mixed model was chosen to test the nomo ‐
logical validity of the three dimensions of directive modi ‐
fication because there is the potential for both fixed and
random effects.
Mixed models are more flexible and robust than trad ‐
itional regression or structural equation models because214 G. McAmis et al.
they incorporate the influence of both fixed and random
effects that may emerge due to the repeated measures
design of the survey. By accounting for a portion of the
error variance in a fixed-effects model, a mixed model can
be expected to produce ‘more efficient estimates and more
powerful tests. ’(Mowday, Steers, and Porter 1979 , 13)
Additionally, mixed effects models are more effective at
handling unbalanced designs and lead to more detailed
coefficient estimates by utilizing the maximum likelihood
method. The SAS programming language was used to test
the mixed model. The procedure PROC MIXED was
utilized to account for the random effects that could be
caused by the different pairings of scenarios.
Figures 1 and2depict the tested relationships as well as
the results of mixed model analyses. Relationship import-
ance is a significant predictor of the level of CFDM as well
as OFDM (supporting H1 a and b). However, relation ‐
ship importance is not a significant predictor of SFDM. In
relation to organizational commitment, all three forms of
directive modification are positively affected by an employ-
ee’s commitment to his/her organization (supporting H2,
but finding additional significant relationships that were not
predicted). While the relationships with CFDM and SFDM
were not hypothesized, they are not unreasonable. The
commitment of the individual to the organization is within
the information context of that salesperson, which includes
personal goals set by the organization (e.g. quotas). There ‐
fore, higher commitment would indicate a greater will-
ingness on the part of the salesperson to do what s/he
interprets as best for the organization including breaking
the rules (even if the organization itself issued those rules).
Additionally, all three forms of directive modification have
a positive effect upon job satisfaction (supporting H3).
Discussion
Managerial contribution
This research has a number of managerial implications.
First, conceptualization of directive modification intenti ‐
ons demonstrates the importance of understanding a sales-
person ’s customer-focused motivation for directive
modification. When management is contemplating beha-
vior-focused and behavior controlling changes among the
salesforce, understanding that one of the primary drivers of
salesperson acceptance will likely be the effect upon his/her
customer allows for management to possess a better under ‐
standing of how effective ‘positioning ’must be developed
to encourage salesperson adoption. Such findings are
consistent with the work in organizational behavior where
organizational change initiatives are much more likely to be
successful when employees are highly involved in the
change process and are, as a result, less likely to experience
cognitive dissonance and resist the change initiatives
(Bacharach, Bamberger, and Sonnenstuhl 1996 ). Further,
such understanding will put management in a betterposition to actually predict which salespeople will be
most likely to accept versus reject the directive, given the
anticipated influence upon the specific salesperson ’s cus-
tomer(s). A possible implication of new directives or
attempts to control salesperson behaviors is the extent to
which mandated behaviors place salespeople in awkward,
conflicted or dissonant situations with their customers. This
may be particularly salient in instances where salespeople
have long-standing relationships with customers. It is in
these customer contexts where new directives may be
viewed as potentially jeopardizing salesperson-customer
trust (particularly in cases of new, untried products/
services) thereby placing salespeople in precarious posi-
tions of conflicting motives. Management might seek to
provide the sales staff with the opportunity to phase in new
directives permitting salespeople the ability to test new
applications in select (controlled) contexts where clients are
better prepared to adapt the new application. Similarly, by
introducing the new directives among a smaller percentage
of a salesperson ’s total business, management permits them
the opportunity to more closely monitor any implications of
the change thereby diminishing potential conflict imposed
by new directives. (These challenges may be less prevalent
among salespeople with shorter tenure and/or fewer
established clients in their sales portfolio.)
Second, findings from the current study of directive
modification behavior suggest that managers may,NS
0.1636***0.1175***0.1339*
0.1607**0.1363***
Relationship 
importanceCustomer-focused 
DMI
Self-focused DMI
Organization-focused 
DMIJob 
satisfaction
Figure 1. Nomological testing of directive modi ﬁcation inten-
tions. *Signi ﬁcant at p-value < 0.1; **Signi ﬁcant at p-value <
0.05; ***Signi ﬁcant at p-value < 0.01.
Organizational 
commitmentCustomer-focused 
DMI
Self-focused DMI
Organization-focused 
DMI0.1505***0.1782****
0.1735***
Figure 2. Organizational commitment and directive modi ﬁca-
tion intentions. *Signi ﬁcant at p-value < 0.1; **Signi ﬁcant at p-
value < 0.05; ***Signi ﬁcant at p-value < 0.01.Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management 215
surprisingly, wish to permit or even encourage some forms
of this behavior in particular circumstances and conditions.
Until now, deviation from organizationally prescribed act ‐
ions has generally been discouraged. However, we have
empirically verified that different motivations for directive
modification exist based on the interests of the boundary
spanner him-/herself, the external partner(s), or the organi ‐
zation. In instances where boundary spanners are engaging
in directive modification on behalf of the organization or
customer (and in some instances the salesperson him/
herself), then it may be in the best interests of the organ ‐
ization to introduce strategies that can tolerate modification
behavior within the bounds of professional, policy, legal
and ethical boundaries. Given the positive linkage from
organizational commitment to each form of directive modi ‐
fication, it seems it would be important to understand the
perspective of the salesperson to gain deeper insights into
why the modification may be perceived as a ‘helping ’
behavior.
Similarly, directive modification could be considered
by managers as a form of double-loop learning. Individuals
engaged in double-loop learning adapt and potentially que ‐
stion the efficacy of goals that are set before them (Argyris
and Schon 1978 ). This type of learning is probably the more
difficult for organizations to achieve (Argyris 1991 ), even
though it has been linked to a stronger relationship orien ‐
tation in organizations (Chaston, Badger, and Sadler-Smith
2000 ). With many organizations seeking a relationship
orientation from their boundary spanning employees, dir ‐
ective modification may be a positive signal to manage-
ment. In short, directive modification in the instance of
salesperson self-interest can have positive benefits for a
firm and should be carefully assessed and managed to ass ‐
ure that the firm ’s best interests are being served.
On a related note, this research may also influence the
level of specificity of organizational directives in various
situations. If an organization feels it would benefit from
its boundary spanners engaging in directive modification
as a result of that employee ’s tacit knowledge, it may seek
to set forth directives that create more of a framework for
boundary spanner behavior rather than a highly specific
directive. By doing so, the boundary spanner is allowed
some flexibility to find the best alternative for the cus ‐
tomer (and possibly organization) while still pursuing the
employer ’s desired general strategic outcome.
The downside implications of tolerating, if not system-
atically anticipating, directive modification is the impact
of these practices on the ability of the firm to effectively
measure the performance of strategic initiatives. Given the
potential propensity of salespeople to have higher incidence
of directive modification with their larger accounts, the
magnitude of the performance-impact of these modific ‐
ation behaviors on the firm ’s newly initiated strategies is
possibly even greater. Platforms for initiating changes
that permit multiple options can be configured in a mannerthat permits performance measurement and ultimately the
establishment of dashboards. One possibility would be to
vet proposed changes among the sales force in advance to
identify application, service, financing and other imple-
mentation strategy challenges inclusive of possible altern-
ative core product offerings (again, adding dissonance
reducing steps to the implementation process). Careful
preparation by firms in advance of new initiatives, when
they are prone to be vulnerable to directive modification,
can result in more effectively ascertaining the likely success
of strategic deployments (Bacharach, Bamberger, and
Sonnenstuhl 1996 ).
Future research implications
This study also contains a number of significant re ‐
search implications. The current research expands our
understanding of boundary spanner behavior. In the extant
literature, employee deviation from organizationally pre-
scribed actions is primarily treated as self-interested
behavior that is detrimental to the organization (e.g. Ball,
Trevino, and Sims 1994 ; Lawrence and Robinson 2007 ;
Perrone, Zaheer, and McEvily 2003 ). However, a stream of
literature has recently emerged that explores the notion of
deviation from organizational directives by employees as a
possible benefit to the organization (Parks, Ma, and
Gallagher 2010 ). Directive modification extends this new
stream of literature to explore the unique situations faced by
boundary spanners. By overlapping agency theory and
cognitive dissonance, we consider a number of motivations
that contribute to boundary spanner directive modification
intentions, especially in relation to attempted control of
employee behaviors. Not only is the distinction of cus-
tomer-, organization-, and SFDM argued as important from
a multi-theoretic perspective, it is also empirically sup-
ported in our data collection.
Capturing the nature of directive modification beha-
viors is valuable to firms as it enables them to identify
salesperson systematic and idiosyncratic behaviors. Future
supervision and strategic formulation should seek to
accommodate these behaviors (presuming they are ulti-
mately in the best interest of the firm). Modification
behaviors can prove to be a valuable source of information.
Sales cultures that encourage information about client
management behavior (compliant or not) have a much
greater likelihood of gathering data that may expose
directive modification behavior which could be particularly
valuable in instances of systematic deviance.
Limitations
As a first step in conceptualizing and measuring the
phenomenon of directive modification, this study is not
without its limitations. First, the scenarios utilized in the
current research are negatively framed. While this is in216 G. McAmis et al.
keeping with the base assumption of directive modification
that the boundary spanner disagrees with the directive in
some way, it does constrain the generalizability of our
findings. It must be considered that the level of disagree-
ment (potentially influenced by the wording of the provided
scenario) could have some influence on the intentions to
modify directives. Also, our scenarios are related to a new
product introduction. There may be some aspects of that
specific context that influence our findings as well.
While this study sought to identify and validate an
observed phenomenon in sales management, other vari-
ables of interest could be investigated in relation to a
theoretically valid nomological net. For example, disson-
ance theory would predict such things as employee trust of
his/her organization or employee ethical views of the
directed behaviors could certainly influence intentions to
engage in directive modification. Further, effects upon such
behaviors as employee performance from engaging in
directive modification need to be investigated. Identifica-
tion of the distinctive nature of these constructs within the
complex motivation and performance systems that charac-
terize the sales organization is beyond the scope of this
study but merits further attention. This enhancement to the
sales literature may be particularly important because the
evidence in this study suggests that customer directive
modification may be motivated from a positive outcome
focused intention where the non-compliant motivations
previously studied have failed to capture firm and customer
empathetic motivations of salesperson deviance.
Lastly, while our focus was on salespeople, there is
certainly reason to believe that field sales managers most
directly responsible for overseeing the sales force (repre-
sented by the sample in this study) may be enablers of
directive modification. When the reality of a firm strategy
hits the challenges of field deployment, evidence may be
quickly accumulated regarding the viability of the new
initiative and, if so, how best to modify it for optimal effe ‐
ctiveness. To presume that management at the field sales
level is not aware and potentially enabling these modifica-
tions would be naive. How best to capture this phenomenon
and whether the field salesperson construct developed in
this study is a suitable measure of field sales management
directive modification (and/or enablement) could prove to
be a promising future investigation.
References
Ahearne, Michael, Son K. Lam, John E. Mathieu, and Willy
Bolander. 2010. “Why Are Some Salespeople Better at
Adapting to Organizational Change? ”Journal of Marketing
74 (3): 65 –79. doi: 10.1509/jmkg.74.3.65 .
Anderson, James C., and David W. Gerbing. 1988. “Structural
Equation Modeling in Practice: A Review and Recom-
mended Two-step Approach. ”Psychological Bulletin 103
(3): 411 –423.
Argyris, Chris. 1991. “Teaching Smart People How to Learn. ”
Harvard Business Review 69 (3): 99 –109.Argyris, Chris, and Donald A. Schon. 1978. Organizational
Learning: A Theory of Action Perspective . Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley.
Atuahene-Gima, Kwaku. 1997. “Adoption of New Products by the
Sales Force: The Construct, Research Propositions and Mana-
gerial Implications. ”Journal of Product Innovation Manage-
ment 14 (6): 498 –514. doi: 10.1111/1540-5885.1460498 .
Bacharach, Samuel B., Peter Bamberger, and William J.
Sonnenstuhl. 1996. “The Organizational Transformation
Process: The Micropolitics of Dissonance Reduction and
the Alignment of Logics of Action. ”Administrative Science
Quarterly 41 (3): 477 –506. doi: 10.2307/2393939 .
Ball, Gail A., Linda Klebe Trevino, and Jr Henry P. Sims. 1994.
“Just and Unjust Punishment: Influences on Subordinate
Performance and Citizenship. ”Academy of Management
Journal 37 (2): 299 –322. doi: 10.2307/256831 .
Bawa, Anupam, and Purva Kansal. 2008. “Cognitive Dissonance
and the Marketing of Services: Some Issues. ”Journal of
Service Research 8 (2): 31 –51.
Birnbaum, Michael H. 2004. “Human Research and Data
Collection via the Internet. ”Annual Review of Psychology
55 (1): 803 –832.
Burnes, Bernard, and Hakeem James. 1995. “Culture, Cognitive
Dissonance, and the Management of Change. ”International
Journal of Operations and Production Management 15 (8):
14–33. doi: 10.1108/01443579510094062 .
Chaston, I., B. Badger, and E. Sadler-Smith. 2000. “Organiza-
tional Learning Style and Competences. ”European Journal
of Marketing 34 (5/6): 625 –642. doi: 10.1108/03090560010
321965 .
Dahling, Jason J., Samantha L. Chau, David M. Mayer, and Jane
B. Gregory. 2012. “Breaking Rules for the Right Reasons?
An Investigation of Pro-social Rule Breaking. ”Journal of
Organizational Behavior 33 (1): 21 –42.
Darmon, René Y. 1987. “The Impact of Incentive Compensation
on the Salesperson ’s Work Habits: An Economic Model. ”
Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management 7 (1): 21.
Darrat, Mahmoud, Douglas Amyx, and Rebecca Bennett. 2010.
“An Investigation into the Effect of Work-family Conflict
and Job Satisfaction on Salesperson Deviance. ”Journal of
Personal Selling & Sales Management 30 (3): 239 –251.
Davis, Fred D., Richard P. Bagozzi, and Paul R. Warshaw. 1989.
“User Acceptance of Computer Technology: A Comparison
of Two Theoretical Models. ”Management Science 35 (8):
982–1003. doi: 10.1287/mnsc.35.8.982 .
Dechawatanapaisal, Decha, and Sununta Siengthai. 2006. “The
Impact of Cognitive Dissonance on Learning Work Beha-
vior.”Journal of Workplace Learning 18 (1): 42 –54. doi: 10.
1108/13665620610641300 .
DeVellis, Robert F. 2003. Scale Development: Theory and
Applications . 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Eisenhardt, Kathleen M. 1989. “Agency Theory: An Assessment
and Review. ”Academy of Management Review 14 (1): 57 –74.
Fama, Eugene F. 1980. “Agency Problems and the Theory of the
Firm. ”Journal of Political Economy 88 (2): 288 –307.
doi:10.1086/260866 .
Festinger, Leon. 1957. The Theory of Cognitive Dissonance.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Flaherty, Karen E., James M. Pappas, and Allison Lee. 2014.
“The Influence of an Optimal Control System on Salesperson
Performance and Championing. ”Industrial Marketing Man-
agement 43 (2): 304 –311.
Fornell, Claes, and David F. Larcker. 1981. “Evaluating Struc-
tural Equation Models with Unobservable Variables and
Measurement Error. ”Journal of Marketing Research 18 (1):
39–50. doi: 10.2307/3151312 .Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management 217
Fournier, Christophe, William A. Weeks, Christopher P. Blocker,
and Lawrence B. Chonko. 2013. “Polychronicity and
Scheduling ’s Role in Reducing Role Stress and Enhancing
Sales Performance. ”Journal of Personal Selling & Sales
Management 33 (2): 197 –210.
Graham, Jill W. 1991. “An Essay on Organizational Citizenship
Behavior. ”Employee Responsibilities and Rights Journal 4
(4): 249 –270.
Hatcher, Larry. 1994. A Step-by-step Approach to Using SAS for
Factor Analysis and Structural Equation Modeling . Cary,
NC: SAS Institute.
Homburg, Christian, and Ove Jensen. 2007. “The Thought
Worlds of Marketing and Sales: Which Differences Make a
Difference? ”Journal of Marketing 71 (3): 124 –142.
Hughes, Douglas E., and Michael Ahearne. 2010. “Energizing
the Reseller ’s Sales Force: The Power of Brand Identifica-
tion.”Journal of Marketing 74 (1): 81 –96.
Hultink, Erik Jan, and Kwaku Atuahene-Gima. 2000. “The
Effect of Sales Force Adoption on New Product Selling
Performance. ”Journal of Product Innovation Management
17 (6): 435 –450.
Jelinek, Ronald, and Michael Ahearne. 2006. “The Enemy
Within: Examining Salesperson Deviance and Its Determi-
nants. ”Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management 26
(4): 327 –344.
Johnson, Jeff S., and Ravi Sohi. 2014. “The Curvilinear and
Conditional Effects of Product Line Breadth on Salesperson
Performance, Role Stress, and Job Satisfaction. ”Journal of
the Academy of Marketing Science 42 (1): 71 –89. doi: 10.
1007/s11747-013-0339-4 .
Konig, Christine, Holger Steinmetz, Michael Frese, Andreas
Rauch, and Zhong-Ming Wang. 2007. “Scenario-based
Scales Measuring Cultural Orientations of Business Own-
ers.”Journal of Evolutionary Economics 17 (2): 211 –239.
doi:10.1007/s00191-006-0047-z .
Lawrence, Thomas B., and Sandra L. Robinson. 2007. “Ain’t
Misbehavin: Workplace Deviance as Organizational Resist-
ance. ”Journal of Management 33 (3): 378 –394.
Lii, Peirchyi. 2001. “The Impact of Personal Gains on Cognitive
Dissonance for Business Ethics Judgments. ”Teaching Busi-
ness Ethics 5 (1): 21 –33. doi: 10.1023/A:1026598701095 .
Mallin, Michael L., and Ellen Bolman Pullins. 2009. “The
Moderating Effect of Control Systems on the Relationship
between Commission and Salesperson Intrinsic Motivation
in a Customer Oriented Environment. ”Industrial Marketing
Management 38 (7): 769 –777.
Malshe, Avinash, and Ravipreet S. Sohi. 2009. “Sales Buy-in of
Marketing Strategies: Exploration of Its Nuances, Antece-
dents, and Contextual Conditions. ”Journal of Personal
Selling & Sales Management 29 (3): 207 –225.
Miao, C. Fred, and Kenneth R. Evans. 2014. “Motivating Industrial
Salesforce with Sales Control Systems: An Interactive Per-
spective. ”Journal of Business Research 67 (6): 1233 –1242.
Moorman, Robert H., and Gerald L. Blakely. 1995. “Individu-
alism –Collectivism as an Individual Difference Predictor of
Organizational Citizenship Behavior. ”Journal of Organiza-
tional Behavior 16 (2): 127 –142.
Morgan, Robert M., and Shelby D. Hunt. 1994. “The Commit-
ment-trust Theory of Relationship Marketing. ”Journal of
Marketing 58 (3): 20 –38. doi: 10.2307/1252308 .
Morrison, Elizabeth W. 2006. “Doing the Job Well: An Invest-
igation of Pro-social Rule Breaking. ”Journal of Management
32 (1): 5 –28.
Mowday, Richard T., Richard M. Steers, and Lyman W. Porter.
1979. “The Measurement of Organizational Commitment. ”
Journal of Vocational Behavior 14 (2): 224 –247.Nygaard, Arne, and Robert Dahlstrom. 2002. “Role Stress and
Effectiveness in Horizontal Alliances. ”Journal of Marketing
66 (2): 61 –82. doi: 10.1509/jmkg.66.2.61.18474 .
O’Reilly, Charles, and Jennifer Chatman. 1986. “Organizational
Commitment and Psychological Attachment: The Effects of
Compliance, Identification, and Internalization on Prosocial
Behavior. ”Journal of Applied Psychology 71 (3): 492 –499.
Organ, Dennis W. 1988. Organizational Citizenship Behavior:
The Good Soldier Syndrome . Lexington, MA: Lexington
Books.
Palmatier, Robert W., Lisa K. Scheer, and Jan-Benedict E. M.
Steenkamp. 2007. “Customer Loyalty to Whom? Managing
the Benefits and Risks of Salesperson-owned Loyalty. ”
Journal of Marketing Research (JMR) 44 (2): 185 –199.
Parks, Judi McLean, Li Ma, and Daniel G. Gallagher. 2010.
“Elasticity in the ‘Rules ’of the Game: Exploring Organiza-
tional Expedience. ”Human Relations 63 (5): 701 –730.
Pelham, Alfred M. 2009. “An Exploratory Study of the Influence
of Firm Market Orientation on Salesperson Adaptive Selling,
Customer Orientation, Interpersonal Listening in Personal
Selling and Salesperson Consulting Behaviors. ”Journal of
Strategic Marketing 17 (1): 21 –39.
Perrone, Vincenzo, Akbar Zaheer, and Bill McEvily. 2003. “Free
to Be Trusted? Organizational Constraints on Trust in
Boundary Spanners. ”Organization Science 14 (4): 422 –439.
Ping, Robert A. 2004. “On Assuring Valid Measures for Theor-
etical Models Using Survey Data. ”Journal of Business
Research 57 (2): 125 –141. doi: 10.1016/S0148-2963(01)
00297-1 .
Plouffe, Christopher R., and Donald W. Barclay. 2007. “Salesper-
son Navigation: The Intraorganizational Dimension of the Sales
Role. ”Industrial Marketing Management 36 (4): 528 –539.
Podsakoff, Philip M., Scott B. MacKenzie, Julie Beth Paine, and
Daniel G. Bachrach. 2000. “Organizational Citizenship
Behaviors: A Critical Review of the Theoretical and Empir-
ical Literature and Suggestions for Future Research. ”
Journal of Management 26 (3): 513 –563.
Punj, Girish. 2006. “Structural Modeling in Marketing: Some
Future Possibilities. ”Marketing Science 25 (6): 622 –624.
Rhoades, Linda, and Robert Eisenberger. 2002. “Perceived
Organizational Support: A Review of the Literature. ”Journal
of Applied Psychology 87 (4): 698 –714. doi: 10.1037/0021-
9010.87.4.698 .
Rizzo, John R., Robert J. House, and Sidney I. Lirtzman. 1970.
“Role Conflict and Ambiguity in Complex Organizations. ”
Administrative Science Quarterly 15 (2): 150 –163.
Robinson, Sandra L., and Rebecca J. Bennett. 1995. “A
Typology of Deviance Workplace Behaviors: A Multidimen-
sional Scaling Study. ”Academy of Management Journal 38
(2): 555 –572.
Rouzies, Dominique, Erin Anderson, Ajay K. Kohli, Ronald E.
Michaels, Barton A. Weitz, and Andris A. Zoltners. 2005. “Sales
and Marketing Integration: A Proposed Framework. ”Journal of
Personal Selling & Sales Management 25 (2): 113 –122.
Schappe, Stephen P. 1998. “The Influence of Job Satisfaction,
Organizational Commitment. ”Journal of Psychology 132
(3): 277 –290.
Schmitz, Christian, and Shankar Ganesan. 2014. “Managing
Customer and Organizational Complexity in Sales Organiza-
tions. ”Journal of Marketing 78 (6): 59 –77.
Spiro, Rosann L., Gregory A. Rich, and William J. Stanton.
2008. Management of a Sales Force . 12th ed. New York:
McGraw-Hill/Irwin.
Stanton, Jeffrey M. 1998. “An Empirical Assessment of Data
Collection Using the Internet. ”Personnel Psychology 51 (3):
709–725.218 G. McAmis et al.
Steward, Michelle, Beth Walker, Michael Hutt, and Ajith Kumar.
2010. “The Coordination Strategies of High-performing
Salespeople: Internal Working Relationships that Drive
Success. ”Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science 38
(5): 55 –66.
Vargo, Stephen L., and Robert F. Lusch. 2004. “Evolving to a
New Dominant Logic for Marketing. ”Journal of Marketing
68 (1): 1 –17.
Vroom, Victor H. 1964. Work and Motivation . New York: Wiley.
Walsh, Gianfranco, and Sharen E. Beatty. 2007. “Customer-
based Corporate Reputation of a Service Firm: ScaleDevelopment and Validation. ”Journal of the Academy of
Marketing Science 35 (1): 127 –143.
Weitz, Barton A., and Kevin D. Bradford. 1999. “Personal
Selling and Sales Management: A Relationship Marketing
Perspective. ”Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science
27 (2): 241 –254. doi: 10.1177/0092070399272008 .
Appendix 1: Qualitative interviews basic script:
I am interested in discussing policies and directives from management toward the sales force that you as a salesperson don ’t necessarily agree with. Kind
of asking ‘Do you do everything you ’re told to do, and why do you not do all that you are told to do? ’These can be new ones or ones that you have dealt
with for years.
.Do you have any stories when you or others have done this?
.How did the sales force in general respond to the directive?
.What were the primary motivations behind the salesperson behavior?
.What do you think is management ’s stance on this reaction?
.Does it help if you know how the directive or policy will help the organization or is self-interest the only real concern?
.Does it matter if the directive is reactive or proactive in nature?
.Are you ever concerned that your company may start contacting your customer without you?
.Do you ever try to protect customers from these directives?
.Do you ever try to protect your company from itself?
.With respect to customers, what level of ownership did you have with the customers you sold to?
.Were they ‘your’customer or ‘your employer ’s’customers? Does that answer change depending on the customer?
.Did that ownership ever influence what kind of things you did for the customer?
.If you company gives you a lot of autonomy, does that make you want to do better for the company or does it make it tempting to take advantage
of that?
.Are salespeople concerned with being recognized by their firm?
.Do salespeople ever go against company policy just to do it their own way and be unique?
.Any further thoughts on this topic that my questions did not address?Journal of Personal Selling & Sales Management 219
Appendix 2: Directive modification intentions
Appendix 3: Individual scenarios
Background Information and Instructions (Included with all scenarios)
Please read the following paragraph and base your answers to the remaining questions on how you would react in each given scenario.
Suppose your employer has decided to add a new product to the portfolio of products the sales force sells. This new product is related to your
organization ’s current industry, but it is not a direct extension of an existing product line. There is uncertainty as to whether this new product represents a
permanent shift in the industry or if it is a trend that will be replaced in about five years. Management has repeatedly emphasized that all salespeople must
heavily promote this product to all existing customers as well as any new customer contacts. A quota has been set with respect to this new product, but yo u
do not feel it will be challenging to achieve. This new product has a commission potential similar to the other products that you currently sell, so ther ei s
not significant financial motivation for selling this new product over other products. The training on this product is done individually, therefore you have
not had a chance to discuss this new product with any other salespeople in your company.
Customer Inequity Scenario
After your training on the product, you start to believe that the product is probably not going to be beneficial for your customer (the one you identifie d
earlier in this survey). The problem is that the product would be difficult and potentially costly for your customer to adopt, and it would only deliver
marginal results for them. You feel that you could convince them to purchase this product, but you are fairly certain it will cause them headaches inter nally
in the future.
Organization Inequity Scenario
After your training on the product, you start to believe that your organization may not have thoroughly refined this product. In your opinion, then
product has some basic flaws that will possibly cause unintended consequences when put into ‘real-life ’use. Additionally, your company has instituted a
generous return policy for this new product, and items returned due to defect do not negatively impact your commission from the original sale. So,
promoting this new product will likely cost your organization money because of the potentially high number of returns. You are confident that your
customer would not be upset with you if the product had to be returned.
Self-inequity Scenario
You believe that this product will be difficult for you to effectively sell. The amount of information that you need to be able to provide to each of your
clients is going to be time-consuming for you to generate. You estimate that selling this new product will create an additional —four to five hours of work
for you each week beyond your normal work week.Compared to my individual goals , including those assigned by my employer (e.g. quotas) and those I have personally set for myself, I
would treat the directive as …
A high priority ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ A low priority
Very Important ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ Not important at all
A rule to be broken ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ A rule to be followed
Something to be circumvented ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ Something to be accepted
A loose guideline ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ A rule set in stone
A rule that should be adapted to my current behavior ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ A rule that will change my current behavior
A rule to be followed after everything else is done ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ A rule that comes before everything else
Compared to my role as an advocate for this customer , I would treat the directive as …
A high priority ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ A low priority
Very Important ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ Not important at all
A rule to be broken ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ A rule to be followed
Something to be circumvented ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ Something to be accepted
A loose guideline ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ A rule set in stone
A rule that should be adapted to my current behavior ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ A rule that will change my current behavior
A rule to be followed after everything else is done ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ A rule that comes before everything else
Compared to my role as an employee that looks out for the best interests of my organization, I would treat the directive as …
A high priority ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ A low priority
Very Important ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ Not important at all
A rule to be broken ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ A rule to be followed
Something to be circumvented ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ Something to be accepted
A loose guideline ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ A rule set in stone
A rule that should be adapted to my current behavior ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ A rule that will change my current behavior
A rule to be followed after everything else is done ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ ___ A rule that comes before everything else220 G. McAmis et al.