3.2. Measures and variables
Unless otherwise stated, we measured all constructs using a five- 
point Likert scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly 
agree).
We assessed the digital platform integration capability by adapting a 
four-item scale (α = 0.84) adapted from Cenamor et al. (2019). Sample 
item: “Our digital platform easily accesses data from our partners’ IT sys­
tems.” We assessed the digital platform reconfiguration capability by 
adapting a four-item scale (α = 0.85) developed by Cenamor et al. 
(2019). Sample item: “Our digital platform can be easily extended to 
accommodate new IT applications or functions.”
We assessed organizational knowledge depth by using a four-item 
scale (α = 0.86) developed by Yang et al. (2017). Sample item: “The 
knowledge of our firm in this industry is thorough.” We assessed organi­
zational knowledge breadth by using a four-item scale (α = 0.84) 
adapted from Yang et al. (2017). Sample item: “We effectively acquire 
market information from a diversified customer portfolio.”
We assessed organizational agility by adapting a four-item scale (α =
0.87) developed by Meli´an-Alzola, Domínguez-Falc´on, and Martín- 
Santana (2020). Sample item: “Our organization has the capacity to 
respond quickly to changes.”
We measured sustainable positioning (buyer-rated) by adapting nine 
items (α = 0.93) from Kapitan et al. (2019). Sample item: “Our supplier is 
actively trying to produce less waste.”
We assessed leader boundary-spanning behavior by adapting six 
items (α = 0.96) from Ancona and Caldwell (1992). Sample item: “I 
reach out to individuals outside of our organization who can offer expertise or 
ideas.”
3.3. Control variables
We controlled for firm size, firm age, and industry because these 
factors can influence organizational knowledge and organizational 
agility, thus potentially confounding our results (Elsayed, 2006). Indeed, 
larger firms may have more resources to invest in digital platform 
integration and reconfiguration, leading to varying levels of knowledge 
and agility. Likewise, older firms may have more established routines 
and knowledge management systems, affecting their ability to adapt to 
digital transformation. Further, different industry sectors may exhibit 
varying levels of adoption of digital platforms. Together, we understand 
that firm age, size, and industry sector can confound the results.
4. Results
4.1. Correlations and descriptive statistics
The descriptive statistics and correlations among the variables are 
presented in Table 1. All the correlations between the main variables of 
the study were found to be in the expected direction.
4.2. Measurement model
To assess the measurement model—consisting of the digital platform 
integration capability, the digital platform reconfiguration capability, 
knowledge depth, knowledge breadth, organizational agility, sustain­
able positioning, and leader boundary-spanning behavior, we performed 
a confirmatory factor analysis in Mplus (8.8). All the items we found to 
be loaded significantly (p < 0.01). The fit indices, χ2 (539) = 1484.45, 
χ2/df = 2.75, TLI = 0.90, CFI = 0.90, SRMR = 0.07, and RMSEA = 0.07, 
were found to show a good fit of the measurement model with the data.
We also calculated the maximum shared variance (MSV), average 
shared variance (ASV), and average variance extracted (AVE) for all 
variables (Table 2). The AVE values were found to exceed 0.50, indi­
cating that more than half of the variance in each construct was 
explained by its indicators. The square roots of the AVE were found to be 
greater than the inter-construct correlations, confirming discriminant 
validity. Furthermore, both the ASV and MSV were found to be lower 
than the AVE for all main variables, suggesting satisfactory levels of 
convergent and discriminant validity for the scales used in our study.
4.3. Hypotheses testing
We tested our model with and without controls and found no sig­
nificant differences betw