Journal of Applied Psychology
1982, Vol. 67, No. 1, 124-127
Copyright 1982 by the American Psychological Association, Inc.
0021-9010/82/6701-0124S00.75
Boundary Spanning and Individual Performance:
The Impact of Self-Monitoring
David F. Caldwell
School of Business, University of Santa Clara
Charles A. O'Reilly III
School of Business, University of California, Berkeley
Boundary-spanning positions require occupants to interact with groups whose
norms may differ from one another. It was hypothesized that individuals holding
these positions would perform better if they were sensitive to social cues and able
to adapt their behavior to fit the circumstances. Using a sample of 93 field
representatives who acted as boundary spanners, it was shown that significant
relationships exist between job performance and an individual difference variable
(self-monitoring) that assesses the ability of respondents to adjust their self-
presentation to fit the situation. It was also shown that self-monitoring was most
important during the period of early tenure.
The search for individual difference variables
that are related to job performance has had a long
and at times unsuccessful history (e.g., Alker,
1972; Bern & Allen, 1974; Guion & Gottier, 1965;
Mischel, 1968; Snyder & Monson, 1975). In re-
cent years, criticisms have been made that the
measures of so-called "personality constructs" are
inappropriate (e.g., Mischel, 1968) and that the
amount of variance explained by such variables
is small compared with contextual effects (e.g.,
O'Reilly & Caldwell, 1979; Salancik & Pfeffer,
1978; Saranson, Smith, & Diener, 1975).
Some of the difficulty in using individual dif-
ference variables to predict job performance stems
from failure to consider contextual effects such
as pressures for conformity and informational in-
fluence. Two other difficulties originate from at-
tempts to use personality measures without a clear
understanding of the nature of the job and a lack
of sensitivity to the individual's development in
the job. That is, individual differences are assessed
without a clear appreciation for why these should
directly affect job performance or how these
might affect an individual's performance in light
of increased job knowledge obtained through ex-
perience.
One case in organizations in which success may
be related to individual predispositions is that of
individuals holding boundary-spanning positions.
Boundary spanners serve to filter and transfer in-
formation across organizational boundaries (Aid-
rich & Herker, 1977; Tushman, 1977). Individ-
uals responsible for this information transfer may
occupy a difficult organizational position. Keller
and Holland (1975) argued that much of the rea-
son for this is that boundary spanners have role
Requests for reprints should be sent to David F. Cald-
well, School of Business, University of Santa Clara,
Santa Clara, California 95953.
senders both inside and outside the organization.
These individuals must therefore be able to re-
spond to a variety of informational and social
stimuli, both inside and outside the organization.
The success of a boundary spanner is, therefore,
likely to be influenced by the degree to which in-
dividuals can accurately perceive and adapt to a
variety of social situations. In short, if an indi-
vidual is sensitive to and can respond to a variety
of possibly divergent social cues, that individual
should be more successful in conveying informa-
tion across organizational boundaries and thus be
a more effective performer.
Sensitivity to social cues and the ability to adapt
one's behavior to the requirements of the situation
have been shown to vary across individuals. Sny-
der and his colleagues titled this predisposition
self-monitoring and developed the Self-Monitor-
ing Scale as a reliable and valid measure of it
(Snyder, 1974, 1980). Individuals who are high
self-monitors have been shown to be more effec-
tive than low self-monitors in (a) concern for the
social appropriateness of one's self-presentation;
(b) attention to social comparison information as
cues to appropriate self-presentation; (c) ability
to control and modify self-presentational and ex-
pressive behavior; (d) the use of this ability in
particular situations; and (e) cross-situational
variability in behavior (e.g., Snyder, 1974, 1980).
Snyder and Swann (1976), for example, found
that whereas strong, positive correlations existed
between attitudes and behavior for low-self-mon-
itoring subjects, no significant attitude-behavior
correlations existed for high-self-monitoring sub-
jects. High self-monitors, out of concern for the
appropriateness -of their behavior, modify their
behavior to fit the situation, whereas low self-mon-
itors attend less to social cues and rely more on
internal beliefs as guides for appropriate behavior.
The Self-Monitoring Scale uses items such as,
124
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
SHORT NOTES
125
"Even if I'm not enjoying myself, I often pretend
to be having a good time," and "I laugh more
when I watch a comedy with others than when
alone," to identify this difference in sensitivity to
social cues (Briggs, Cheek, & Buss, 1980; Snyder,
1974).
This individual difference variable appears to
be directly relevant to the successful performance
of boundary-spanning individuals. First, high-self-
monitoring respondents (i.e., those who are able
to adapt their behavior to a variety of situations)
should be higher performers in their boundary-
spanning positions than low-self-monitoring sub-
jects. Second, the impact of self-monitoring should
be most evident during the early stages of an in-
dividual's job tenure. Comparatively new job oc-
cupants who are sensitive to situational cues
should perform better than those who are not ad-
ept at diagnosing situations. Over time, however,
this comparative advantage should be less impor-
tant as job knowledge increases and/or as low-
self-monitoring subjects who are less successful
leave the boundary spanning role. The purpose of
this study is to explore the relationships among
self-monitoring, job tenure, and performance for
a sample of job incumbents who occupy a bound-
ary-spanning position.
Method
Subjects
Respondents were field representatives for a
large franchise organization. Job duties involved
servicing franchised outlets. For example, repre-
sentatives spent at least 3 days per week con-
tacting franchisees and presenting corporate po-
sitions, mediating franchisee-corporate differences
of opinion, and referring franchisees to informa-
tion sources and suppliers. To verify the bound-
ary-spanning and social information processing
requirements of the job, a brief job analysis was
conducted. Five supervisors were asked to com-
plete a 15-item task checklist for each of three
field representative positions they supervised. The
15 items were developed in conjunction with the
regional personnel manager. Supervisors were in-
structed to rate both the importance of and time
spent in each task. Evaluation of the similarity of
the position analyses is provided by Lawlis and
Lu's (1972) nonparametric chi-square. Results of
the task analysis indicated high comparability of
positions: for time spent, x2( 14) = 159.8, p<,.001;
for importance, x2(14) = 277.6, p £ .001. Results
of the analysis also indicated the relative impor-
tance of those items relating to boundary spanning
duties. For example, supervisors saw the most im-
portant and time-consuming job duty to be that
of sharing information with .the franchisee.
The 129 field representatives of one geographic
region of the company were surveyed. Usable re-
sponses were received from 93 representatives
(a response rate of 68%). Average age and tenure
with the firm were 30.5 years and 20.2 months,
respectively. All but one of the representatives had
at least some college education, and 77% had a
college degree. Seventy-eight percent of the re-
spondents were male, and 47% were single.
Measures
To test the hypotheses, two constructs were
assessed: job performance and attention to social
cues. Performance level was obtained from com-
pany performance evaluation forms, which pro-
vide, in part, a single, overall performance rating.
Each field representative was rated on a 4-point
scale as excellent, above average, average, or be-
low average. Attention to social cues was mea-
sured using the Self-Monitoring Scale. A factor-
scoring format was suggested by Briggs et al.
(1980), and analyses were conducted using both
the overall and factor-scoring protocols. Since the
results were nearly identical, only those using the
overall scoring format are reported.
Results
Table 1 presents means, standard deviations,
and zero-order and partial correlations for all
variables. The partial correlations show the as-
sociation between two of the three variables in-
vestigated, with the effects of the third removed
(e.g., the correlation between self-monitoring and
performance controlling for the effects of tenure).
As shown, significant zero-order correlations were
found among all variables. Subjects who were
more responsive to social cues (high self-monitors)
were rated as better performers than low self-
monitors. Self-monitoring was also positively re-
lated to job tenure.
To examine the independent relationships be-
tween self-monitoring, performance, and tenure,
partial correlations were computed between self-
monitoring and performance controlling for ten-
ure, and between tenure and performance con-
trolling for self-monitoring, Results of these par-
tial correlations show that the association between
self-monitoring and boundary-spanning perfor-
mance is independent of job tenure; that is, bound-
ary spanners who are more sensitive to social cues
perform better independent of any job knowledge
gained through experience on the job. Interest-
ingly, the significant zero-order correlation be-
tween tenure and performance also remains sig-
nificant after controlling for self-monitoring,
suggesting that job experience is independently
correlated with improved task performance. Both
self-monitoring and job tenure appear to be fac-
tors associated with higher performance.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
126
SHORT NOTES
Table 1
Means, Standard Deviations, and Correlations
Correlations
Zero-order 
Partial"
1.
2.
3.
Variable
Performance
Tenure (months)
Self-monitoring
M
2.07
20.22
36.16
SD
.69
19.36
3.91
1
.27**
.29**
2
3
1
2
— 
.23** 
—
.19* 
— 
.26** 
.12
3
—
" Partial correlations are between two variables, controlling for the third.
* p £ .05. ** p < .01.
To test the second hypothesis (i.e., that the re-
lationship between self-monitoring and perfor-
mance would be stronger for employees with
shorter tenure), moderated multiple regression
was used. A hierarchical regression was computed
for performance, entering self-monitoring and
tenure in the first step and the product of these
two variables in the second step. The overall
regression was significant, F(3, 89) = 5.19, p <
.01. The main effects of self monitoring, F(l,
91) = 5.88, p<. 01, and tenure, F ( l , 9 l ) = 4.57,
p < .05, were significant. The interaction term,
although in the hypothesized direction, was not
significant (F = 2.46). The nature of this inter-
action was further tested by splitting the sample
at the median into high-tenure (M = 32.5 months)
and low-tenure (M = 8.2 months) groups. The
correlation between self-monitoring and perfor-
mance was .31 (p ^ .01) for the low-tenure group
and .02 (ns) for the high tenure group. The dif-
ference between these correlations approached
significance (Z = 1.40, p < .10). Thus the second
hypothesis received slight support and therefore
can only suggest that for subjects with shorter
tenure, self-monitoring and performance may be
related; this was not the case for subjects with
longer tenure.
The results of this study are potentially inter-
esting for several reasons. First, the boundary-
spanning role places individuals in situations
where they must be sensitive to the social cues of
different groups if they are to perform the bound-
ary-spanning function effectively. In this study an
individual difference variable that precisely cap-
tures this required sensitivity (i.e., self-monitor-
ing) was shown to be related to performance. Low
self-monitors, those field representatives who were
less likely to perceive and adapt their behavior to
the situation, performed less well than high self-
monitors. The ability of high self-monitors to ad-
just their behavior was associated with high per-
formance ratings and was independent of job ex-
perience. These results suggest that individual
differences may be associated with actual job per-
formance if the individual difference variable is
directly relevant to the task (in this case field rep-
resentatives who are required to mediate between
a corporate office and licensed franchisees).
Clearly, under other circumstances one might ex-
pect an inverse relationship between high self-
monitoring and job performance as, for instance,
in positions requiring consistency of behavior re-
gardless of social pressure, such as in the military.
A second interesting finding is the stronger as-
sociation between self-monitoring and perfor-
mance that exists for low-tenure, as opposed to
high-tenure, job holders. This suggests that prior
to obtaining job knowledge through experience,
it is in the job holder's interest to be able to per-
ceive and adjust to social cues. Failure to make
this adjustment appears to be associated with
lower performance for new employees. Once an
individual has held the job for a period of time,
the impact of self-monitoring is attenuated. This
may reflect either the increased skill obtained
through experience or a selection bias that results
in the retention of employees who are high self-
monitors. Some evidence of the latter interpre-
tation is available through an examination of the
mean scores for self-monitoring between the low-
and high-tenure groups. The low-tenure subsam-
ple has a self-monitoring mean of 35.2, whereas
the high-tenure group mean is 37.1, /(91) = 2.36,
p < .01. The statistically significant partial cor-
relations suggest that both self-monitoring and job
tenure make independent contributions to im-
proved performance.
As indicated, the attempt to link personality
variables with job performance has had a long,
albeit not overly successful, history. Some of this
lack of success may result from a failure to link
individual difference variables to specific job and
situational characteristics that are clearly relevant
to job performance. For successful development,
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
SHORT NOTES
127
research must focus on those jobs and specific in-
dividual difference variables that appear to me-
diate performance. The present study has demon-
strated that performance in a job requiring
incumbents to be sensitive to a variety of social
cues is associated with individual differences in
the ability to perceive and adjust to different
settings.
References
Aldrich, H., & Herker, D. Boundary spanning roles and
organizational structure. Academy of Management
Review, 1977, 3, 217-230.
Alker, H. Is personality situationally specific or intra-
psychically consistent? Journal of Personality, 1972,
20, 1-16.
Bern, D., & Allen, A. On predicting some of the people
some of the time: The search for cross-situational
consistencies in behavior. Psychological Review, 1974,
81, 506-520.
Briggs, S. R., Cheek, J. M., & Buss, A. H. An analysis
of the Self-Monitoring Scale. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 1980, 38, 679-686.
Guion, R., & Cottier, R. Validity of personality mea-
sures in personnel selection. Personnel Psychology,
1965, 18, 135-164.
Keller, R., & Holland, W. Boundary-spanning roles in
a research and development organization: An empir-
ical investigation. Academy of Management Journal,
1975, 18, 388-393.
Lawlis, G., & Lu, G. Judgment of counseling process:
Reliability, agreement, and error. Psychological Bul-
letin, 1972, 78, 17-20.
Mischel, W. Personality and assessment. New York:
Wiley, 1968.
O'Reilly, C., & Caldwell, D. Informational influence
as a determinant of task characteristics and job sat-
isfaction. Journal of Applied Psychology, 1979, 64,
157-165.
Salancik, G., & Pfeffer, J. A social information pro-
cessing approach to job attitudes and task design.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 1978, 23, 224-
253.
Saranson, I. G., Smith, R. E., & Diener, E. Personality
research: Components of variance attributable to the
person and the situation. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 1975, 32, 199-204.
Snyder, M. The self-monitoring of expressive behavior.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1974,
30, 526-537.
Snyder, M. Self-monitoring processes. In L. Berkowitz
(Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology
(Vol. 12). New York: Academic Press, 1980.
Snyder, M., & Monson, T. C. Persons, situations, and
the control of social behavior. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 1975, 32, 637-644.
Snyder, M., & Swann, W. B. When actions reflect at-
titudes: The politics of impression management. Jour-
nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1976, 34,
1034-1042.
Tushman, M. L. Special boundary roles in the inno-
vation process. Administrative Science Quarterly,
1977, 22, 587-605.
Received February 6, 1981 •
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
All rights, including for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies, are reserved.
