Steven Lysonski
ABoundary Theory Investigation
oftheProduct Manager's Role
Boundary spanning theory and role theory are used to examine the product manager's role in consumer
industries. A research model depicting associations between environmental uncertainty, boundary span­
ning, role conflict andambiguity, jobsatisfaction, tension and performance, and moderating variables is
developed and tested with bivariate correlations, path analysis, and ANOVA. Implications of the results
are given.
SINCE its introduction by Procter and Gamble over
50 years ago, the product management system now
operates in about 85% of all consumer package goods
industries (Buell 1975). Despite its popularity, re­
searchers have not probed the behavioral and com­
municational aspects of this dynamic activity. For ex­
ample, the system's tendency to produce managerial
burnout fosters rapid turnover. Obviously, behavioral
issues deserve the attention of researchers. This study
applies role theory in a boundary spanning context to
gain an understanding of the product manager's role.
Boundary spanning refers to interdepartmental and
external communication.
Several aspects of a product manager's role make
it important and unique. First, it is a "boundary role"
at the interface between the firm and its market en­
vironment, as well as between departments within a
firm. While much of a product manager's communi­
cation is informal, others are formal and routine. As
one product manager remarked, "I feel like a real pol-
Steven Lysonski isAssistant Professor, Marketing Department, Univer­
sityofRhode Island atKingston. Theauthor wishes tothank Richard
Bagozzi, Conrad Hill,andDavid Wilemon fortheir advice intherevision
ofthisarticle, andBodil Frey, Marketing Institute, Copenhagen School
ofEconomics andBusiness Administration, foradministrative assis­
tance.
26 / Journal ofMarketing, Winter 1985itician at times-I'm always lobbying for support from
other departments." Hence, a product manager must
deal with diverse role expectations, not only from per­
sons in other departments, such as finance, engineer­
ing, and production, but also from outsiders such as
customers, the trade, consultants, and advertising
agencies.
Second, the product manager contributes to suc­
cessful profit making activities. With high environ­
mentaluncertainty, he/she must adapt the product line's
marketing mix to this uncertainty. Forexample, the
unpredictable inflation of the early 1980s impinged
upon decision making. Since a product manager needs
the cooperation of production, sales, and research and
development, he/she engages in boundary spanning
activities to establish many different role relation­
ships. Consequently, theproduct's success or failure
affects a number of related positions whose occupants
have a vested interest in attempting to influence the
product manager's behavior.
Third, a product manager faces countless conflict­
ing or ambiguous pressures as internal-external and
formal-informal interfaces make their demands. As
these pressures heighten, the manager's performance,
satisfaction, and feeling of control are inevitably af­
fected. Several persons interviewed expressed tense
feelings of being "caught in the middle." Although
Journal ofMarketing
Vol. 49 (Winter 1985), 26-40.researchers have studied the social organizational be­
havioral dimensions of the product manager's role
(Clewett and Stasch 1975, Gemmill and Wilemon 1972,
Venkatesh and Wilemon 1976), they have not yet ex­
amined its boundary spanning implications.
Boundary Spanning Concept
Because communication and integration are essential
for effective performance, the product manager's
boundary activities are crucial. Leifer and Delbecq
(1978) note that "persons who operate at the periphery
or boundary of an organization with elements outside
it are called boundary spanners" (p. 41). Figure 1 de­
picts the product manager's communication linkages
between the external environment and the internal op­
erating environment and between departments within
the firm. The product manager is a central transmitter
of information about the product from the environ­
ment into the fIrm and vice versa.
Role theory is a promising tool for an analysis of
boundary spanning activities (Adams 1976, Aiken and
Rage 1972, Kahn et al. 1964, Leifer 1975, Leifer andDelbecq 1978, Miles 1975a,b, Thompson 1967). Kahn
et al. (1964) were among the first to recognize the
importance of managers occupying boundary posi­
tions. Thompson (1967) refined the concept of bound­
aries to organizational performance, while Adams
(1976) applied boundary role theory to a study of la­
bor negotiations.
The literature on product management implies the
existence of boundary spanning and notes that the
product manager integrates planning for a product linethrough interfacing with functional departments. Luck
and Nowak (1965), for example, refer to the product
manager's role as "gather[ing] ideas from internal and
external sources" (p. 144), while Ames (1970) rec­
ognizes that "the product manager acts as a focal point
for screening all product improvement ideas that flow
from the consumer, the trade, and the field selling or­
ganization" (p.8-24). Venkatesh and Wilemon (1976)
investigated the types of interpersonal power a prod­
uct manager can command in boundary relationships
with internal departments. The literature affIrms that
a product manager needs a network of internal and
external linkages that are established through bound­
ary spanning.
Problem Statement
and Model Analysis
This study examines the relationships of several key
behavioral variables related to the product manager's
boundary role. The working model in Figure 2 pre­
sents a causal model of relevant but unconnectedstrands
in the literature. The selected variables were refined
to reflect the unique characteristics of the product
manager's role and to provide actionable implications
for product managers. Although the model does not
provide a complete explanation of the forces operating
on the product manager, it summarizes and integrates
most of what is known about the relationships among
environmental uncertainty, boundary spanning, role
perceptions, personal outcomes, and certain modera­
tors.
Basically, the model suggests that high degrees of
FIGURE 1
Illustration oftheBoundary Concept
EXTERNAL BOUNDARY
ENVIRONMENT ------,
Competition
Consumers
Other
Organizations
ConsultantsFlow of information
intothefirm via
Product Manager's
boundary spanning
!
RetailersFIRM
Product
ManagerFlow of Information~w ithinfirm
INTERNAL
BOUNDARIES
ABoundary Theory Investigation oftheProduct Manager's Role/ 27FIGURE 2
A Causal Model oftheVariables intheStudy
Environmental Uncertainty_Boundary Spanning-..Role Pressures----Personal Outcome States
Degree of Environmental
Uncertainty Experienced
by the Product Manager
• Perceived
-Objective
Moderating Variables
eRole Autonomy
-Need forAffiliation
eTolerance of Ambi~ity
eEducation
-Job Experience
-New IfS.Established
Product Responsibility
perceived and objective environmental uncertainty may
lead to high levels of boundary spanning and role con­
flict and ambiguity for the product manager. High lev­
els of boundary spanning in tum create role conflict
and ambiguity, which lead to lower satisfaction, high
tension, and perception of diminished performance for
the product manager. In this model, environmental
uncertainty is an exogeneous variable, while the re­
maining variables are endogenous. Moderating vari­
ables, however, may serve to reduce the outcome states
resulting from role conflict and ambiguity as por­
trayed in the model.
Path analysis tests the relationships in the model
simultaneously, while bivariate correlations and
ANOVA examine specific linkages. Finally, the man­
agerial implications of the findings are explored.
Variables and Hypotheses
Variables in this study fall into five categories: en­vironmental uncertainty, boundary spanning, role per­
ceptions, personal outcome states, and moderating
variables. Although the focus of this study is to ex­
plore relationships, previous research suggests a num­ber of prior hypotheses. A discussion of each set of
relationships (linkages) implied by the model con­
cludes with the hypothesis to be tested.
Environmental Uncertainty, Boundary
Spanning,
and Role Perceptions
The concept of environmental uncertainty is funda­
mental to an understanding of the product manager's
boundary spanning activities. Uncertainty involves the
clarity of information, the nature ofcausal relation­
ships, and the time span for feedback (Duncan 1972,
28 / Journal ofMarketing, Winter 1985Lawrence and Lorsch 1967). Emery and Trist (1965)
and Terreberry (1968) view uncertainty as turbulence,
change, and the nature of interconnectedness.
According to Galbraith (1977), as uncertainty in­
creases, so does the amount of information processing
by decision makers. Thompson (1967) noted that un­
certainty "appears to be [a] fundamental problem for
complex organizations and coping with uncertainty as
the essence of the administrative problem" (p. 159).
In the same vein, Thompson suggested that boundary
spanning is contingent upon the degree to which the
external environment is homogeneous or heteroge­
neous, stable or uncertain. These ideas suggest that a
product manager's response to uncertainty is to en­
gage in more information gathering and integrating
throughboundary spanning (Boulton et al. 1982, Brown
1966, Conrath 1967).
Inan uncertain market, rapid unpredictable changes
occur, such as new technologies, increasing compet­
itive sophistication, commodity prices, competitive
entries, changes in government regulations, inflation,
polarization of consumers to either high or low prices,
industry oversupply, media costs, reduced margins,increased trade deal activity, and declining lead time
necessary for decision making. All these uncertainties
threaten the product manager's products.
Alternatively, a stable market poses fewer, more
predictable threats. In general, a simpler stable market
makes for easier maintenance of market share. Con­
sequently, a product manager's ability to cope with
an unpredictable market is part of
his/her ability to
communicate with other departments. Unlike a man­
ager in a functional organization, a product manager
can respond quickly to a rapidly changing market,
thereby achieving greater effectiveness. This study
points to the need for information gathering, analysis,
and integration through effective boundary spanning
by the product manager as a response to environmen­
tal uncertainty. A product manager uses boundary
spanning to collect more information, opinions, and
perspectives, thereby reducing the uncertainty or at
least understanding it better. Conversely, environ­
mental certainty creates less need for information ormarket monitoring. In view of these arguments, the
following hypothesis is proposed:
HI: There is a positive relationship between
environmental uncertainty (perceived and
objective) and boundary spanning.
The degree of uncertainty also contributes to a
product manager's expectations of how other depart­
ments should cooperate (i.e., role conflict) and how
he/she will be evaluated (i.e., role ambiguity). Pre­
vious research addressed role difficulties in decisionmakingin a turbulent environment (Benson 1975, Kahn
et al. 1964, Korman 1971, Roos and Starke 1981, Weedand Mitchell 1980). Since no one has examined the
linkages between environmental uncertainty and role
pressures, this hypothesis posits that:
Hz:There is a positive relationship between
environmental uncertainty (perceived and
objective) and (a) role conflict, and (b)
role ambiguity.
Boundary Spanning and Role Perceptions of
Conflict and Ambiguity
The context of the product manager's role-the ac­
tivities required and the way they should be per­
formed-is defined largely by the expectations and
demands of other people. Some are fellow employees,
including other product managers, his/her supervisor,
advertising managers, and production personnel. Oth­
ers occupy external positions such as salespeople,
consultants, advertising agencies, wholesalers, and
material suppliers. Consequently, the product man­
ager encounters diverse interactions with others, both
internal and external to the firm. The manager's suc­
cesses or failures are apparent to others.
Role conflict is generally defined as the incom­
patibility of expectations associated with a role and
includes several types, such as intrasender, intersen­
der, role overload, and person role conflict (Kahn et
al. 1964). Although studies have assessed the impact
of boundary spanning on role conflict, none has fo­
cused specifically upon product managers. Other studies
suggest that boundary spanning may have a negative
impact onindividuals by generating role conflict (Kahn
et al. 1964, Organ 1971, Pruden and Reese 1972, Wall
and Adams 1974).
Role ambiguity refers to the lack of clarity re­
garding what a person is required to do on a job and
the subsequent performance evaluation. Research on
other types of personnel has shown an association be­
tween role ambiguity and boundary spanning (Keller
and Holland 1975, Keller and Szilagyi 1976).
These studies suggest the following hypotheses:
H3:There is a positive relationship between
the product manager's boundary span­
ning and role conflict.
~:There is a positive relationship between
the product manager's boundary span­
ning and role ambiguity.
When role conflict occurs, the product manager ex­
periences negative reactions due to an incompatibility
of expectations and demands which cannot be simul­
taneously satisfied. Anxiety may arise, and the prod­
uct manager may conclude that no matter how effec­
tive the performance, someone will be unhappy. As
one product manager stated, "I feel like I'min a pres-sure cooker at times, trying to juggle all the different
departments' expectations."
Kahn et al. (1964) were among the first to suggest
that role conflict is a cause of job related tension, dis­
satisfaction, and lower levels of trust, and may affect
liking and respect for role senders. Research by or­
ganizational theorists over the last 15 years tend to
confirm relationships among role conflict, dissatisfac­
tion, anxiety, and performance (Miles 1976, Miles and
Perreault 1976). In particular, Miles' (1975a,b) use of
crossed lagged and dynamic correlation techniques
supports the theory that role conflict causes job ten­
sion and dissatisfaction.
A majority of studies on organizational behavior
has been on individuals other than product managers.
Several marketing studies, for example, found a neg­
ative relationship between salespersons' role conflict
and both job satisfaction and performance (Bagozzi
1978; Churchill, Ford, and Walker 1974, 1976; Sher­
idan and Slocum 1974). Consequently, this relation­
ship would apply to product managers, given their job
pressures.
Thus the following hypotheses:
H5:There is an inverse relationship between
role conflict and perceived performance.
The greater the perceived role conflict,
the lower the perceived jobperformance.
H6:There is an inverse relationship between
role conflict and job satisfaction. The
greater the perceived role conflict, thelower the job satisfaction.
H
7:There is a positive relationship between
role conflict and job tension. The greater
the perceived role conflict, the greater the
job tension.
Role Ambiguity and Personal Outcome States
A product manager suffers role ambiguity when there
is insufficient information to do the job adequately,
when it is unclear what peers expect, and when per­
formance evaluation methods are ambiguous. The lit­
erature on role ambiguity in both organizational be­
havior and marketing suggest that this factor positively
relates to feelings of tension, futility, dissatisfaction,
employee turnover, and negative attitudes towards role
senders (House and Rizzo 1972; Keller 1975; Miles
1976; Rizzo, House, and Lirtzman 1970). A product
manager who experiences a high degree of role am­
biguity, therefore, would suffer from tension, dissat­
isfaction, and reduced performance. In light of pre­
vious research and these arguments, the following
hypotheses are proposed:
Hg:There is an inverse relationship between
role ambiguity and perceived perfor-
ABoundary Theory Investigation oftheProduct Manager's Role/ 29mance. The greater the perceived role
ambiguity, the lower the perceived job
performance.
H9:There is an inverse relationship between
role ambiguity and job satisfaction. The
greater the perceived role ambiguity, the
lower the job satisfaction.
HlO:There is a positive relationship between
role ambiguity and job tension. The
greater the perceived role ambiguity, thegreater the job tension.
Moderating Variables
As illustrated in Figure 2, moderating variables may
influence the relationship between role conflict, am­
biguity, and personal outcome states (i.e., job satis­
faction, performance, and job tension). The following
moderating variables were examined: role autonomy,
need for affiliation, tolerance of ambiguity, educa­
tion, job experience, and new versus established prod­
uct responsibility. Previous studies established the im­
portance of these variables in moderating adverse psy­
chological reactions (Friis and Knox 1972, Ivancev­
ich and Donnelly 1974, Lyons 1971).
Method
The Sample
The hypotheses were tested with data obtained from
questionnaires mailed to 449 product managers in
cqnsumer package goods industries, as 85% of them
have product managers. Drawn from the Fortune 500,
sampled industries included food, proprietary drugs,
and cosmetics; soaps, cleansers, and allied products;
soft drinks; tobacco; paper; and liquor-the classifi­
cations in Buell's (1975) study.
A total of 278 product managers was selected from
theStandard Directory ofAdvertising and from a spe­
cial 1979 issue of Advertising Age listing senior ex­
ecutives among the top 100 advertisers ("Advertis­
ing" 1979). An additional 171 subjects were obtained
by contacting 293 senior executives by mail to obtain
the names of product managers who would participate
in the study. The total sample size, therefore, was 449.
Prior to the data collection, interviews with group
product managers and product managers led to the de­
sign, selection, and modification of the study's in­
struments. The questionnaires were pretested on prod­
uct managers and marketing managers in the Syracuse,
New York, area, producing alpha coefficients in ex­
cess of .60 on all research instruments.
Questionnaires were mailed to the sample, with a
cover letter explaining the research and with a prom­
ise of anonymity. To reduce evaluation apprehension
and other forms of reactivity, product managers were
3D/Journal ofMarketing, Winter 1985asked not to sign the questionnaire. A second mailing
tononrespondents produced a fmal return rate of 55%,
or 224 completed questionnaires, ofwhich 54 were
unusable.' A nonrespondent check showed that nei­
ther specific industries or product categories were un­
derrepresented. The final sample for analysis totalled
170.
Environmental Uncertainty
Two measures were used to gauge both perceived and
objective uncertainty. Since some aspects of uncer­
tainty might work through awareness and a perception
process (Dill 1957/58; Downy, Hellriegel, and Slo­
cum 1975; Huber, O'Connell, and Cummings 1975;
Leblebici and Salancik 1981), the perceived measure
assessed the product manager's evaluation of the en­
vironment; the objective measure, in contrast, asked
product managers to state objective conditions of the
environment.
There are, as yet, no definitive answers to appro­
priateness of a subjective versus objective measure of
certainty. Anderson and Paine (1975) say: "It is gen­
erally accepted that the perceptions of environmental
and internal characteristics (rather than objective char­acteristics of the environment) are the important prop­
erties to
consider. . ." (p. 831). Snow and Darran
(1975), however, argue that:
Perceptual measures are appropriate when the inves­
tigation is attempting to determine how an organi­
zation (its managers) views the behavior of the en­
vironment, because any response subsequently
developed will be consistent with the perceptions.
However, this approach is less appropriate when the
investigation is trying to describe the nature of the
environment; in these cases, it is preferable to have
both perceptual and objective measures (p. 279).
The perceptual measure with 15 interval-scaled
items was adapted from a scale developed by Duncan
(1972) who identified the main dimensions of uncer­
tainty in decision making. A study done by Downy,
Hellriegel, and Slocum (1975) reported an alpha coef­
ficient of .67; therefore, the Duncan uncertainty scale
"appears to be methodologically adequate for basic
research" (p. 626). This study's final instrument ben­
efited from Spekman' s (1979) uncertainty instrument
which was based on Duncan's scale.
The objective method to quantify environmental
uncertainty used six structured items: sales and price
volatility of the product class, intensity of brand com­
petition, brand switching, advertising activity, delay
in feedback of product line decision after implemen­
tation, and market share fluctuations. These dimen­
sions were identified as major causes of uncertainty
for product managers.
'Questionnaires that were incompletely answered or completed by
personnel other than product managers were classified as unusable.Boundary Spanning
Boundary spanning, defined as communication be­
yond a product manager's department, was measured
by refining an instrument developed by Aiken and Hage
(1972) and used by Leifer (1975). The final instru­
ment evolved from the role diversity instrument de­
veloped by Snoek (1966), a boundary spanning in­
strument used by Keller and Holland (1975), and the
dimensions relating to boundary spanning as identi­
fied by Miles (1974).
Aggregate boundary spanning was measured with
the following dimensions (these components are ex­
amined separately in the analysis):
•internal boundary spanning: internal verbal and
written communication.
• external boundary spanning: external verbal and
written communication, e.g., customers, sup­
pliers, trade, consultants.
• formal boundary spanning: formal meetings and
formal written communication occurring, e.g.,
reports or data from others.
• informal boundary spanning: informal face-to­
face or telephone conversations or informal
written communication, e.g., informal notes,
memos, and the like.
•selected aspects: includes travel and coordinat-
ing activities.
Product managers reported the frequencies of these
boundary activities on continuous scales excluding
strictly social contacts.
Role Pressures
Role conflict, defined as the degree of incongruity or
incompatibility of expectations associated with a role,
was measured by a lO-item Likert scale. The specific
types of role conflict measured were:
• intrasender: incompatible expectations from a
single role sender.
• intersender: expectations of a role sender in­
compatible with those of another sender.
• person role: incompatibility between the expec­
tations of a product manager and the expecta­
tions otherwise associated with a role.
• role overload: a product manager's responsibil­
ities exceed the time and resources available for
accomplishment.
Role ambiguity, defined as inconsistencies about
job responsibilities and performance evaluation, was
measured with a six-item Likert scale. Both of these
scales were developed and validated by Rizzo, House,
and Lirtzman (1970). Several researchers reported high
construct validity and other psychometric propertiesof these scales which prove to be sound (Schuler, AI­
dag, and Brief 1977).
Personal Outcome States
Job satisfaction was measured with five Likert scale
items. Product managers indicated their evaluations
about promotion opportunities, chances to demon­
strate individual ability and initiative, satisfactions with
the position compared to other positions, whether hel
she would recommend the position to others, and
overall job satisfaction. This type of scale was suc­
cessfully used in a number ofother settings (Beehr,
Walsh, and Taber 1976; Quinn and Shepard 1974).
Job tension was measured by 11 items employing
Likert scales, incorporating measures of work-related
worry, relief when leaving work, items from the Man­
ifest Anxiety Scale developed by Taylor (1953), and
dimensions from a study by House and Rizzo (1972).
Perceived performance was measured with two self­
rating items concerning overall performance and co­
ordinating activities for the product line. A lO-point
scale was used with endpoints of"just satisfactory"
and "clear excellence." Self-rating measures ofper­
formance have been found to have less leniency, less
restriction of range, and less error than the purport­
edly more objective measures of superior ratings
(Heneman 1974). Moreover, self-ratings have been
found to correlate strongly with more objective mea­
sures of performance (Pym and Auld 1967). This
measure also proved to be related to actual jobper­
formance of industrial salesmen (Pruden and Reese
1972).
Moderating Variables
Role autonomy is the degree to which the job provides
opportunities for a product manager to exercise free­
dom of choice on the job. Six Likert scaled items de­
veloped by Quinn and Shepard (1974) measured this
construct.
Tolerance of ambiguity is the ability to react pos­
itively to ambiguous situations. It was measured by a
subset of seven Likert scaled items from Budner's in­
strument (1962), and found to be reliable and valid.
Need for affiliation is the desire to be with others and
was measured using seven Likert scaled items (Friis
and Knox 1972). Job experience was measured along
three experience dimensions: as a product manager,
tenure with the present company, and present product
responsibility.
Reliability ofthe Scales
This study's instruments were used successfully by a
number of other researchers. Itis important to note
that except for objective uncertainty, these variables
are essentially perceptual and, therefore, subject to a
respondent's cognitive filtering process. Objective in-
ABoundary Theory Investigation oftheProduct Manager's Role/ 31TABLE 1
Scales, Items per Scale, Means, Standard Deviations, and Reliability Cofficients
Scale Number of Items Mean Standard Deviation Reliability Coefficient
.80
.60
.52.84.67
.48
.74
.71
.64
.73
.77
.52
.83
.75
.86
.54b4.4
9.6
2.1
4.9
3.53.98.5
2.6
3.8
2.3
2.3
4.75.95.3
45.3
35.2
15.8
29.3
16.811.8
38.6
7.2
14.9
7.7
8.7
15.6
22.2
36.3
14.9641.1
28.4
84.4
57.7
19.9
43.6
23.9
15.1
5
11
210
2
4
2
2
69
7
118
4
4
4
4
3Environmental uncertainty
perceived
objective
Boundary spanning
internal
external
informal
formal
others
Role perceptions
role conflict
intrasender
intersenderperson rolerole overload
roleambiguity
Personal outcome states
job satisfactionjob related tension
perceived performance
Moderating variables
roleautonomy 6 28.4
tolerance of ambiguity 6 14.4
need for affiliation 7 27.6
"This does not add to 19 since some of the subscales overlap.
~his is an intercorrelation coefficient since alpha cannot be computed for two items.
struments (if they exist at all) were unavailable. The
internal consistency of the variables were evaluated
with Cronbach alpha coefficients, which are sum­
maries of the internal homogeneity of a set of vari­
ables.
Table 1 presents these reliabilitymeasures and other
scale information for the sample. Because reliabilities
exceeding .50 are generally viewed as sufficient for
research purposes (Nunnally 1967), all scales used in
this study can be considered reliable.
Method of Analysis
Three forms of analysis were used. First Pearson
product moment correlation coefficients tested the
biserial linkages in the model and the different di­
mensions of boundary spanning and role conflict. This
analysis is an incomplete test of the model, however,
because correlations do not show each variable's rel­
ative contributions. The second, path analysis, ex­amined the model simultaneously. To test the model
fully it was necessary to reduce the number of bound­
ary spanning and role conflict dimensions to simple
constructs, since path analysis with 15 variables would
be overly complicated. Similarly, the moderating
variables were removed from the path analysis; in­
stead, ANOVA examined the moderating variables.
To determine the effects of the moderating vari­
ables on the hypothesized relationships, the moder-ating and independent variables were dichotomized into
low and high groups at the midpoints. For example,
the midpoint of role autonomy separated product man­
agers into high or low role autonomy groups. The re­
sultant high and low groups for each variable were
used as the treatments for an ANOVA examination of
the interaction effects. Absence of interaction indi­
cated that the variable was not a moderator variable
in the proposed relationship. Miles (1974) used a sim­iliar approach in examining moderating variables.
Linkage assessments were not based upon the cri­
terion of statistical significance, since this is not an
accepted method of determining causal significance
(Duncan 1971). A path coefficient must show a mag­
nitude of .05 or greater to be considered causally sig­
nificant (Land 1969).
Ifany path coefficient was found
to be nonsignificant, the path was deleted and the sys­
tem evaluated again. The basic test for the adequacy
of a causal model is to compare the original correla­
tion matrix with the reproduced correlation matrix
(Kerlinger and Pedhauser 1973). In almost every case
in which the reproduced correlation coefficient was
compared to the original one, the discrepancy was less
than .01; this suggests that the models adequately ex­
plained the relationships among the variables.
In testing the hypothesized model, which specifies
direct and indirect linkages with path analysis, some
standard assumptions were made. First, the relation­
ships between the variables are assumed to be linear.
32 / Journal ofMarketing, Winter 1985ResultsTABLE 2
Relationships between Environmental
Uncertainty and Measures of
Boundary Spanning
Examination of scatter plots of the residuals indicated
the residuals were randomly dispersed and that the re­
lationships examined in the study were most likely
linear. Moreover, the fact that the scatter plots indi­
cated no serious problem with "outliers" suggested that
the model has no misspecification problems. Itmust
be recognized that the results are limited to the extent
that some variables are omitted from the model spec­
ification in this study. Second, it is assumed that the
residuals of a given endogenous variable are not cor­
related with other system variables nor other vari­
ables. Third, the causal system posited by the model
is viewed as recursive (i.e., there is no reciprocal
causation (Wright 1960)). Lastly, the variables are as­
sumed to be measured on interval scales. To the ex­
tent that the scales are ordinal, the results may be
slightly biased, although multiple regression is still the
recommended procedure (Bohrnstedt and Carten 1971).
Correlation Analysis
Table 2 contains the correlations between a product
manager's environmental uncertainty (perceived and
objective) and boundary spanning. Although per­
ceivedenvironmental uncertainty is weakly associated
with the dimensions of boundary spanning, objective
uncertainty is not correlated with boundary spanning.
Hence HI receives support only for perceived uncer­
tainty.
The correlations between environmental uncer­
tainty and role pressures are presented in Table 3. The
correlations are significant only for perceived uncer­
tainty, while only objective uncertainty is related to
intersender conflict. The results, therefore, support H 2
that uncertainty is associated with role conflict and
ambiguity only for perceived uncertainty.
Table 4 shows that the correlations between the
dimensions of role conflict and measures of boundary
Spanning are all statistically significant, thus uphold-.2S" .07
.26" .06
.25" .16c
.17b-.03
.1Sb-.04
.23" .OSTABLE 3
Environmental Uncertainty and Role Pressures
Environmental Uncertainty
Perceived Objective Role Pressures
Role conflict
person-role conflict
intersender conflict
intrasender conflict
role-overload conflict
Role ambiguity
"p~0.001.
"p~0.01.
'p~.05.ing H 3•Italso shows that role ambiguity is not as­
sociated with boundary spanning except for internal
organizational boundary spanning; hence, H 4cannot
be supported. Table 5 presents the correlations be­
tween role pressures and personal outcome states. In
nearly every case, role conflict including its dimen­
sions and role ambiguity is adversely associated with
job satisfaction, job related tension, and perceived
performance. Hence hypotheses H,to H IOare upheld.
Results of the Path Analysis
Figure 3 presents the path coefficients when perceived
environmental uncertainty is the only exogenous vari­
able. The results indicate that environmental uncer­
tainty links strongly to role conflict (p =.251) and
role ambiguity (p =.237), upholding H 2,while the
connection between perceived uncertainty and bound­
ary spanning is low (p =.114). Hence, HI (perceived
uncertainty leads to increased boundary spanning) isupheld, but weakly.
As hypothesized in H
3,boundary spanning was
found to be related to role conflict (p=.181). Since
the path coefficient between boundary spanning and
role ambiguity is less than .05, H 4was rejected.
The hypotheses (H, to H IO)that role conflict and
ambiguity lead to adverse psychological reaction (of
tension, dissatisfaction, and reduced perceived per­
formance) are also upheld. The connection between
perceived performance and role conflict, however, has
a path coefficient of -.066, and the path coefficient
between tension and role ambiguity registered a .052
path coefficient; both are low and near the .05 cutoff
suggested by Land (1969).
While most of the hypotheses were upheld, un­
expected findings occurred in one of the models. In
Figure 3 the strong relationship between job satis­
faction and perceived environmental uncertainty re­
quired an additional path in the model. This linkage
(p=.178) suggests that perceived environmental un­
certainty is causally related to an increase in job sat­
isfaction. In addition, a linkage was found between
job satisfaction and boundary spanning (p=.061),.03 .04.10" -.04.11" -.02
.10" -.03
.10" .00Environmental
Uncertainty
Perceived ObjectiveMeasure of Boundary
Spanning
Aggregate boundary spanning
informal boundary spanning
formal boundary spanning
internal organizational
boundary spanning
external organizational
boundary spanning
.p~.10.
ABoundary Theory Investigation oftheProduct Manager's Role/ 33TABLE 4
Relationships between Measures of Boundary Spanning and Role Conflict and Role Ambiguity
Role Perceptions
Measures of Boundary SpanningRole
ConflictPerson-role
conflictIntersender Intrasender Role-overload
conflict conflict conflictRole
Ambiguity
Aggregate boundary spanning
informal boundary spanning
formal boundary spanning
internal organizational boundary
spanning
external organizational boundary
spanning
'p~0.001.
"p~0.01.
cp~0.05..2S"
.14c
.24"
.22"
.00.30" .22"
.17b.12c
.22" .24b
.23".11
.05
.01
.10
.04.00
.10
.05
-.04
TABLE 5
Relationships between Role Conflict and Role
Ambiguity and Job Satisfactionimplying that boundary spanning lowers job satisfac­
tion.
Figure4 presents the path coefficients for the models
when objective uncertainty is used as the exogenous
variable. The results of these models are almost
equivalent to the models with perceived uncertainty,
with one major difference; objective uncertainty is not
associated with boundary spanning. Hence, HI is not
upheld for objective uncertainty. Moreover, the link­
ages between objective uncertainty and role pressures
of conflict and ambiguity are rather low compared to
the models in Figure 3 for perceived uncertainty;
nonetheless, H 2is supported for objective uncertainty.
H3is supported given that the path coefficient be­
tween boundary spanning and role conflict is .283. H 4
was not supported, since the path coefficient between
boundary spanning and role ambiguity was less than
.05. Last, the hypotheses concerning role pressures
and personal outcome states (H, to H lO)are accepted,
since the paths between both role conflict and ambi­
guity and tension, satisfaction, and perceived perfor­
mance are above .05. As in the perceived uncertainty
models, the paths between role ambiguity and tension
(p=.052) and between role conflict and perceived
performance (p = - .066) are rather low, implying a
Role Perceptions
Role conflict
person-role conflict
intersender conflict
intrasender conflict
role overload conflict
Role ambiguity
•p<0.001.
"p<0.01.
'p<0.05.Job Job Perceived
Satis- Related Pertor-
faction Tension mance
-.24" .2S" -.1Sb
-.25" .1Sb-.OS
-.20" .24" -.17c
-.24" .24" -.17c
-.01 .17c-.OS
-.2S" .15c-.34"weak connection. Just as in the analysis for perceived
uncertainty, boundary spanning was negatively asso­
ciated with job satisfaction (p = - .051). Unexpect­
edly, objective environmental uncertainty was posi­
tively linked to job tension (p =.098).
Moderating Variables: ANOVA
The findings on the moderating variables in Table 6
show mixed results. Role autonomy was found to
FIGURE 3
Perceived Environmental Uncertainty Models
STRUCTURAL EQUATIONS
X,=B21.X,.
X3=B3,X,+B3,.X,.
X.=B.,.X,•
Xs=B53X 3+B54X.+Bs,X, +Bs,.X,.
X6=B63X 3+B64X.
X7=B73X 3+B7.X.
34 / Journal ofMarketing, Winter 1985FIGURE 4
Objective Environmental Uncertainty Models
P31b=.074
Role
Ambiguity
X4
P6lb=.098
STRUCTURAL EQUATIONS
X3=B32X2+B3,bX'b
X4=B4, bX' b
Xs=B53X 3+B54X 4+BS2X2
Xa=B63X 3+B64X 4+Ba'bX'b
X7=B73X 3+B74X4
moderate only the role ambiguity-satisfaction rela­
tionship. Since role autonomy gives the product man­
ager latitude in decision making, it seems that this au­
tonomy may maintain his/her satisfaction when role
ambiguity is present.
Need for affiliation had a definite moderating in­
fluence; it lowered the role conflict-perceived per­
formance relationship, increased the role ambiguity­
job related tension relationship, and lowered the role
ambiguity-perceived performance relationship. Since
need for affiliation implies that the product manager
prefers tobewith others, the manager may expect some
role conflict in dealing with them. However, a higher
need for affiliation may provide greater tolerance for
this conflict, while increasing job tension from role
ambiguity. Tolerance of ambiguity had only one mod­
erating effect on the role conflict-job related tension
relationship by reducing tension in this relationship.
Education was effective in reducing the role con­
flict-job satisfaction relationship and role ambiguity­
jobtension relationship. Education may give the product
manager greater confidence and expertise in dealing
with role conflict and ambiguity. Consequently, theserole perceptions have less impact upon educated prod­
uct managers.
Experience was shown to have a moderating in­
fluence on some of the relationships. For example,
experience as a product manager increased the role
conflict-job tension relationship and lowered the role
ambiguity-perceived performance relationship. Ex­
perience with the present company as a product man­
ager had no moderating influence on the relationships
examined. However, experience with the present
product as a product manager increased the role con­
flict-job tension and the role ambiguity-job tension
relationships. Therefore, certain experiences seem toheighten the adverse reactions of the product manager
to role conflict. Experience implies that the productmanager may have developed more personal relation­
ships with others and as a result, may react more per­
sonally to the conflicting expectations of others and
may experience more negative personal outcomes. Newversus established product responsibility had no mod­
erating influence.
Limitations
Due to the cross-sectional data, the time sequence of
the relationships among the variables could not be
clearly assessed. The use of product managers from
many companies at a single time period may have ledto sampling artifacts and to the exclusion of temporal
dynamics of the system. The results, therefore, should
not be viewed as proof of the causal model but rather
as evidence supporting many of the relationships in
the a priori causal scheme. A longitudinal design is
necessary to test temporal suppositions, although a
cross-sectional investigation serves as an exploratory
step for establishing face validity of hypotheses to
warrant future longitudinal studies.
The measures were obtained at the same time by
similar scaling techniques. Method variance, there­
fore, may have inflated some relationships. Rather than
using reactive instruments, more objective measures
of conflict, ambiguity, and performance would add an
important dimension to this study and to such re­
search. Such an improvement would provide a better
basis for management prescriptions and from a meth­
odological perspective, would reduce potential bias
from method variance.
Discussion
Despite these limitations, the study has significant
managerial and research implications. The four key
contribution areas that emerge are:
• complexity of environmental uncertainty
• possible deficiencies in the product manage­
ment system
ABoundary Theory Investigation oftheProduct Manager's Role/ 35TABLE6
Summary Table of the ANOVA Tests on the Moderating Variables
FStatistic for
Interaction Effect (df =1/166)
Role Conflict-Satisfaction Relationship
Role autonomy
Need for affiliation
Tolerance of ambiguity
Education
Experience as a product manager
Experience with present company as a product manager
Experience with present product as a product manager
New versus established product responsibility
Role Conflict-Job Related Tension Relationship
Role autonomy
Need for affiliation
Tolerance of ambiguity
Education
Experience as a product manager
Experience with present company as a product manager
Experience with present product as a product manager
New versus established product responsibility
Role Conflict-Perceived Performance Relationship
Role autonomy
Need for affiliation
Tolerance of ambiguity
EducationExperience as a product manager
Experience
with present company as a product manager
Experience with present product as a product manager
New versus established product responsibility
Role Ambiguity-Satisfaction Relationship
Role autonomy
Need for affiliation
Tolerance of ambiguity
Education
Experience as a product manager
Experience with present company as a product manager
Experience with present product as a product manager
New versus esablished product responsibility
Role Ambiguity-Job Related Tension Relationship
Role autonomy
Need for affiliation
Tolerance of ambiguity
EducationExperience as a product manager
Experience
with present company as a product manager
Experience with present product as a product manager
New versus established product responsibility
Role Ambiguity-Perceived Performance Relationship
Role autonomy
Need for affiliation
Tolerance of ambiguity
EducationExperience as a product manager
Experience
with present company as a product manager
Experience with present product as a product manager
New versus established product responsibility
"p:50.01.
"p:5.05.
'p:5.001.
36 / Journal ofMarketing, Winter 1985.144
.63
.004
6.043(increased satisfaction)
.25
.72
.15.08
.92
.50
4.74b(decreased tension)
.18
7.42c(increased tension)
.72
6.503(increased tension)
.39
.06
7.02c(increased performance)
.41
.05
.22
1.01
.37
.04
9.38C(increased satisfaction)
.27
.13
.24
.42
1.06
.04
.32
.28
5.833(increased tension)
2.60
7.25c(lowered tension)
.05
.41
6.20c(increased tension)
.89
.31
3.83b(increased performance)
.02
.03
4.85b(increased performance)
.15
.34
.26•harmful effects ofrole conflict and ambiguity
• the value ofpath analysis
The results show that perceived environmental un­
certainty is weakly related to a product manager's
boundary spanning, while objective uncertainty was
notrelated. There areseveral possible explanations.
Forexample, oneproduct manager reported that com­
munication activities depended on the type ofuncer­
tainty and whether it was new or a customary aspect
of the job. Agroup product manager suggested that
uncertainty is not a major impulse forincreased com­
munication. Instead, aproduct manager has a given
propensity tocommunicate (i.e., boundary spanning)
regardless ofenvironmental uncertainty. Some prod­
uctmanagers communicate more than others, even in
a static environment. One group product manager stated
that "ifaproduct manager spends more than half of
the day in his office, he's notcollecting enough in­
formation about hisproduct." This manager encour­
ages his product managers tointeract asmuch aspos­
sible with external (e.g., thetrade, customers) and
internal (e.g. finance, production, R&D) sources.
Secondly, a weak association between environ­
mental uncertainty andboundary spanning may signal
deficiencies in the product management system. In
particular, research by Rise and Kelly (1978)
strengthens the observation that product managers lack
sufficient external sources ofinformation. In effect they
argue that product managers are not engaging in ad­
equate levels ofexternal boundary spanning. Re­
search by Tushman (1979) applicable toproduct man­
agement suggests that high performing project teams
relied more on boundary spanning individuals to at­
tend to informational needs when environmental un­
certainty was high. Aldrich andHerker (1977) suggest
that "an organization's ability toadapt toenviron­
mental contingencies depends inpart on the expertise
of the boundary role incumbent inselecting, trans­
mitting, and interpreting information originating in the
environment" (p.229).
Third, theresults underscore thenotion that per­
ceived environmental uncertainty is responsible for role
conflict and ambiguity asboundary spanning. Much
has been written on the effects ofthese role pressures
on an individual's sense ofwell-being. These role
pressures were found to be associated with adverse
personal outcomes such as lower perceived perfor­
mance, lower jobsatisfaction, and increased tension.
These findings confirm research that found similar as­
sociations for other types of personnel (Van Sell, Brief,
andSchuler 1981).
Finally, these results demonstrate thevalue ofpath
analysis in studying marketing systems. Correlation isa useful point ofdeparture but does not reveal how
thevariables aresimultaneously related. Path analysis
provides a view ofthevariables as a system ofrela­
tionships.
Implications
Behavioral Consequences ofRole Pressures
In some cases, tensions from role conflict and ambi­
guity may not adversely affect aproduct manager's
performance. In fact, moderate tension may be an en­
ergizer resulting inincreased motivation (Kahn et al.
1964). High levels ofstress, however, may produce
effects detrimental to both the product manager and
the firm. Kahn et al. (1964) also say that extreme forms
ofrole conflict andambiguity affect physical andpsy­
chological well-being. This suggests that these forces
should be kept at manageable levels. Since the prod­
uctmanager interacts with others, role conflict isin­
evitable. Therefore, the issue is not to eliminate role
conflict and ambiguity but to reduce them to man­
ageable levels (Ivancevich and Matteson 1980, Kets
de Vries 1979).
Methods toMitigate Role Pressures
Several group product managers suggested that better
understanding of the company's objectives would help
allay role conflict and ambiguity. It is also important
that the vice president ofmarketing communicate
company objectives toproduct managers. Some prod­
uctmanagers believe they must maximize abrand's
sales, even though company objectives do not always
state this. Consequently aproduct manager may be
driven bypersonal goals to be promoted sothat "a
product manager's ego might get in the way ofreal­
ity ," according to one group product manager. Often­
times novice product managers expect their jobs to be
challenging and exciting, yet this is the exception, since
the role involves many programmed activities.
Kahn et al. (1964) suggest methods toreduce role
conflict and ambiguity including (1)changes in the
firm's organizational structure, (2) development ofnew
criteria forselection and placement ofpersonnel, (3)
increasing theindividual's tolerance andcoping abil­
ities, and (4) strengthening theinterpersonal bonds
among organizational members. The burden forusing
these and other methods todiminish thenegative ef­
fects ofrole conflict and ambiguity rests on a com­
pany's senior management. The present study has
shown thatdifferent types ofrole conflict (i.e., person
role conflict, intersender conflict, intrasender conflict,
and role overload conflict) areassociated with adverse
personal outcome states. Various methods must be used
ABoundary Theory Investigation oftheProduct Manager's Role/ 37to manage the different types of conflict faced by
product managers. For example, if a product manager
experiences intersender conflict, more and better
communication with senior management seems nec­
essary. In written or oral communication, product
managers should be informed of changes in company
policies and, importantly, why these changes are being
made.
The setting of brand objectives also helps lessen
role conflict and ambiguity. Clearcut objectives for
product managers are crucial. Senior managers re­
ported that these goals should be set mutually, not by
fiat. Such a dialogue helps clarify a product manag­
er'srole.
A formal review process for measuring a product
manager's performance in meeting these objectives may
also reduce role ambiguity. For example, one group
product manager suggested that a product manager's
performance be reviewed every six months. Although
these reviews need not be recorded, they serve as
"pragmatic reviews in and of themselves." At a min­
imum, frequent discussions between group product
managers and product managers would provide freer
exchange of differing views.
Senior management could reduce role conflict re­
sulting from interdepartmental relations. If senior
management is sensitive to potential conflict between
managers and other departments, they can clarify the
role a product manager is to perform in decision mak­
ing. This would reduce the likelihood of intersender
conflict for a product manager. Another way to lower
this form of role conflict is a formal process of con­
flict resolution to maintain understanding between the
boundary interests of product managers and other de­
partments.
Senior management can mitigate potential role
conflict and ambiguity during recruitment and train-
REFERENCES
Adams, J. Stacey (1976), "The Structure and Dynamics of
Behavior in Organizational Boundary Roles," inHandbook
ofOrganizational and Industrial Psychology, M. Dunnette,
ed., Chicago: Rand-McNally.
"Advertising and Marketing Reports on 100 Leading National
Advertisers" (1979), Advertising Age, 50(September 6),
1-160.
Aiken, Michael and Jerald Hage (1972), "Organizational Per­
meability, Boundary Spanners, and Organizational Struc­
ture," paper presented at the American Sociological As­
sociation Conference, New Orleans.
Aldrich, Howard and Diane Herker (1977), "Boundary Span­
ning Roles and Organizational Structure," Academy of
38 / Journal ofMarketing, Winter 1985ing. The challenge is not only to minimize role con­
flict and ambiguity inherent in the product manage­
ment system but to identify those product managers
most capable of dealing with these difficulties. Anal­
ysis of the moderating variables, for example, showed
that a high affiliation need is beneficial. Product man­
agement training could expose novices to simulated
pressures through role playing and case studies.
Summary
This study not only reinforces existing knowledge about
individuals who span organizational boundaries but
provides a different approach in examining the prod­
uct management system. Many more issues, however,
need to be studied. For example, it would be useful
to know how instrumental boundary spanning is in the
innovation process. Because the product manager aids
in the dissemination of information, he/she may be
facilitating transfer of new ideas and technology across
boundaries, thus stimulating the innovation process.
It is also possible that the product manager functions
as a gatekeeper of information in conducting bound­
ary spanning. Other avenues for research include the
means by which the product manager can monitor the
environment, the information processing mechanisms
used, and how the successful product manager copes
with stress and conflict.
Since the product management system has scored
significant gains in administering complex product
lines, this research illuminates several behavioral as­
pects of the system. Environmental change and tur­
bulence are likely to accelerate in the future; thus, ad­
ditional studies that examine the adaptation of various
product line administration systems to changing en­
vironmental forces will be needed. This study is a step
in that direction.
Management Review, 2 (April), 217-230.
Ames, Charles B. (1970), "The Consumer Product Manager,"
inHandbook ofModern Marketing, V. P. Buell, ed., New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Anderson, C. and F. Paine (1975), "Managerial Perceptions
of Strategic Behavior," Academy ofManagement Journal,
18 (December), 811-823.
Bagozzi, Richard P. (1978), "Sales Force Performance and
Satisfaction as a Function of Individual Difference, Inter­
personal, and Situational Factors," Journal ofMarketing
Research, 15 (November), 517-531.
Beehr, Terry A., Jeffrey T. Walsh, and Thomas D. Taber
(1976), "Relationship of Stress to Individually and Orga-nizationally Valued States: Higher Order Needs as a Mod­
erator," Journal ofApplied Psychology, 61 (February), 41­
47.
Benson, H. (1975), The Relaxation Response, New York:
William Morrow.
Bohmstedt, G. W. and T. M. Carten (1971), "Robustness in
Regression Analysis," inSociological Methodology, H.L.
Coster, ed., San Francisco: Jossey, Bass, 118-146.
Boulton, William R., William M. Lindsay, Stephen G. Frank­
lin, and Leslie Rue (1982), "Strategic Planning: Determin­
ing the Impact of Environmental Characteristics and Un­
certainty, " Academy of Management Journal, 25
(September), 500-509.
Brown, W. B. (1966), "Systems Boundaries and Information
Flow," Academy ofManagement Journal, 13(June), 318­
327.
Budner, Stanley (1962), "Intolerance of Ambiguity as a Per­
sonality Variable," Journal ofPersonality, 30 (March), 29­
50.
Buell, Victor P. (1975), "The Changing Role of the Product
Manager in Consumer Goods Companies," Journal ofMar­
keting, 39(July), 3-11.
Churchill, Gilbert A., Neil M. Ford, and Orville C. Walker
(1974), "Measuring the Job Satisfaction of Industrial Sales­
men," Journal ofMarketing Research, 11 (August), 254­
260.---- (1976), "Organizational Climate and Job Satisfac­
tion in the Sales Force," Journal ofMarketing Research,
13 (November), 323-332.
Clewett, Richard M. and Stanley F. Stasch (1975), "Shifting
Role of the Product Manager," Harvard Business Review,
53(January-February), 65-73.
Conrath, David W. (1967), "Organizational Decision Making
Behavior under Varying Conditions of Uncertainty," Man­
agement Science, 13 (April), B487-B500.
Dill, William R. (1957/58), "Environment as an Influence on
Managerial Autonomy," Administrative Science Quarterly,
2 (March), 409-443.
Downey, H. Kirk, Ron Hellriegal, and John Slocum (1975),
"The Effects of Individual Differences on Managers' Per­
ceptions of Environmental Uncertainty," Proceedings of the
35th meeting of the Academy of Management, 200-202.
Duncan, Otis D. (1971), "Path Analysis: Sociological Ex­
amples," in Causal Models in the Social Sciences, H. M.
Blalock, Jr.,ed., New York: MacMillan, 115-138.
Duncan, Robert B. (1972), "Characteristics of Organizational
Environments and Perceived Environmental Uncertainty,"
Administrative Science Quarterly, 17 (September), 313-327.
Emery, F. E. and E. L.Trist (1965), "The Causal Texture of
Organizational Environments," Human Relations, 18 (Jan­
uary), 21-32.
Friis, R. and A. A.Knox (1972), "A Validity Study of Scales
to Measure Need Achievement, Need Affiliation, Impul­
siveness, and Intellectuality," Educational andPsycholog­
icalMeasurement, 32 (Spring), 147-154.
Galbraith, Jay (1977), Organizational Design, Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley.
Gemmill, Gary and David Wilemon (1972), "The Product
Manager as an Influence Agent," Journal ofMarketing, 36
(January), 26-30.
Heneman, G. (1974), "Comparisons of Self and Superior Rat­
ings of Managerial Performance," Journal ofApplied Psy­
chology, 59 (October), 638-642.
Rise, Richard T. and J. Patrick Kelly (1978), "Product Man­
agement on Trial," Journal ofMarketing, 42 (October), 28­
33.House, Robert and John Rizzo (1972), "Role Conflict and
Ambiguity as Critical Variables in a Model of Organiza­
tional Behavior," Organizational Behavior and Human
Performance, 7 (April), 467-505.
Huber, George, P., Michael J. O'Connell, and Larry Cum­
mings (1975), "Perceived Environmental Uncertainty: Ef­
fects of Information and Structure," Academy ofManage­
ment Journal, 18(December), 725-740.
Ivancevich, J. M. and J. H. Donnelly, Jr. (1974), "A Study
of Role Clarity and Need for Clarity in Three Occupational
Groups," Academy ofManagement Journal, 17(March),
28-36.--- and M. T. Matteson (1980), Stress and Work, Glen­
view, IL: Scott, Foresman.
Kahn, Robert L.,D. M. Wolfe, R. P. Quinn, J. D. Snock,
and R. A. Rosenthal (1964), Organizational Stress, New
York: Wiley.
Keller, Robert T. (1975), "Role Conflict and Ambiguity: Cor­
relates with Job Satisfaction and Values," Personnel Psy­
chology, 28 (Spring), 57-64.---and Winford E. Holland (1975), "Boundary Span­
ning Roles in a Research and Development Organization:
An Empirical Investigation," Academy ofManagement
Journal, 18(June), 338-393.--- and Andrew Szilagyi (1976), "Employee Reactions
to Leader Reward Behavior," Academy ofManagement
Journal, 19 (December), 619-627.
Kerlinger, F. N. and E. J. Pedhauser (1973), Multiple Regres­
sion in Behavioral Research, New York: Holt.
Kets de Vries, Manfred (1979), "Organizational Stress: A Call
for Management Action," Sloan Management Review, 21
(no. 1), 3-14.
Korman, Abraham K. (1971), "Environmental Ambiguity and
Locus of Control as Interactive Influences on Satisfaction, "
Journal ofApplied Psychology, 55 (no. 4), 339-312.
Land, K. C. (1969), "Principles of Path Analysis," inSoci­
ological Methodology, E. Borgatta and G. Bohmstedt, eds.,
San Francisco: Jossey, Bass, 15-27.
Lawrence, Paul and Jay Lorsch (1967), "Differentiation and
Integration in Complex Organizations," Administrative Sci­
ence Quarterly, 12(June), 1-47.
Leblebici, Huseyin and Gerald R. Salancik (1981), "Effects
of Environmental Uncertainty on Information and Decision
Processes in Banks," Administrative Science Quarterly, 26
(no. 4), 578-596.
Leifer, Richard Paul (1975), "An Analysis of the Character­
istics and Functioning of Interorganizational Boundary
Spanning Personnel," Ph.D. dissertation, Madison: Uni­
versity of Wisconsin.--- and Andre Delbecq (1978), "Organization/Envi­
ronment Interchange: A Model of Boundary Spanning Ac­
tivity," Academy ofManagement Review, 3(January), 40­
50.
Luck, D. J. and Theodore Nowak (1965), "A Product Man­
agement-Vision Unfulfilled," Harvard Business Review, 43
(May-June), 143-150.
Lyons, T. (1971), "Role Clarity, Need for Clarity, Satisfac­
tion, Tension, and Withdrawal," Organizational Behavior
and Human Performance, 6(January), 99-110.
Miles, Robert H. (1974), "Role Conflict and Ambiguity in
Boundary and Internal Roles: A Field Study Using Role Set
Analysis and Panel Design," Ph.D. dissertation, Chapel Hill:
University of North Carolina.---- (1975a), Role Requirements as Sources ofStress in
R&D Organizations, proceedings of the 35th meeting of the
Academy of Management, 191-193.
ABoundary Theory Investigation oftheProduct Manager's Role/ 39---(1975b), "An Empirical Test of Causal Inference
between Role Perceptions of Conflict and Ambiguity and
Various Personal Outcomes," Journal ofApplied Psychol­
ogy, 60 (August), 334-339.--- (1976), "A Comparison of the Relative Impacts of
Role Perceptions of Ambiguity and Conflict by Role,"
Academy ofManagement Journal, 19 (no. 1), 25-35.---and William D. Perreault, Jr. (1976), "Organiza­
tional Role Conflict: Its Antecedents and Consequences,"
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 17
(October), 19-44.
Nunnally, Jum C. (1967), Psychometric Theory, New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Organ, Dennis W. (1971), "Some Variables Affecting Bound­
ary Role Behavior," Sociometry, 34,524-537.
Pruden, Henry O. and R. Reese (1972), "Interorganizational
Role-Set Relations and the Performance and Satisfaction of
Industrial Salesmen," Administrative Science Quarterly, 17
(December), 601-609.
Pym, D. L.A. and H.D. Auld (1965), "The Self-Rating as
a Measure of Employee Satisfactoriness," Occupational
Psychology, 39(January), 103-113.
Quinn, R. P. and L.J. Shepard (1974), "The 1972-1973 Quality
of Employment Survey: Descriptive Statistics with Com­
parison Data from the 1969-1970 Survey of Working Con­
ditions," Ann Arbor, MI: The Institute for Social Research.
Rizzo, John, Robert House, and Sidney Lirtzman (1970), "Role
Conflict and Ambiguity in Complex Organizations," Ad­
ministrative Science Quarterly, 15(June), 150-163.
Roos, Leslie, Jr. and Frederick Starke (1981), "Organizational
Roles," in Handbook ofOrganizational Design, P. C. Ny­
strom and W. H. Starbuck, eds., New York: Oxford Press.
Schuler, Randall S.,Ramon J. Aldag, and Arthur P. Brief
(1977), "Role Conflict and Ambiguity: A Scale Analysis,"
OrganizationalBehavior and Human Performance, 16,111­
128.
Sheridan, J. E. and J. Slocum (1974), "The Direction of the
Causal Relationship between Job Satisfaction and Work
Performance," Organizational Behavior and Human Per­
formance, 13 (October), 159-172.
Snoek, J. Diedrick (1966), "Role Strain in Diversified Role
40 / Journal ofMarketing, Winter 1985Sets," American Journal ofSociology, 72(January), 363­
372.
Snow, C. C. and D. C. Darran (1975), "Organizational Ad­
aptation to the Environment: A Review," inProceedings
oftheAnnual Meeting oftheAmerican Institute for Deci­
sion Sciences, M. Hopfe and H. Schneider, eds., Cincin­
nati, OH: The Institute, 278-280.
Spekman, Robert E. (1979), "Influence and Information: An
Exploratory Investigation of Boundary Role Person's Basis
of Power," Academy ofManagement Journal, 22 (March),
104-117.
Taylor, J. A. (1953), "A Personality Scale of Manifest Anx­
iety," Journal ofAbnormal Social Psychology, 48 (April),
285-290.
Terreberry, S. (1968), "The Evolution of Organizational En­
vironments," Administrative Science Quarterly, 12 (March),
590-613.
Thompson, James D. (1967), Organizations inAction, New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Tushman, Michael L.(1979), "Managing Communication
Networks in R&D Laboratories," Sloan Management Re­
view, 20 (no. 2), 37-49.
Van Sell, Mary, Arthur P. Brief, and Randall S. Schuler (1981),
"Role Conflict and Role Ambiguity: Integration of the Lit­
erature and Directions for Future Research," Human Re­
lations, 34(January), 43-71.
Venkatesh, Alladi and David L.Wilemon (1976), "Interper­
sonal Influence in Product Management," Journal ofMar­
keting, 40 (October), 33-40.
Wall, James A. and J. Stacy Adams (1974), "Some Variables
Affecting Constituent's Evaluations of and Behavior To­
ward a Boundary Role Occupant," Organizational Behav­
ior and Human Performance, 11(June), 390-408.
Weed, Stanley E. and Terence R. Mitchell (1980), "The Role
of Environmental and Behavioral Uncertainty as a Mediator
of Situation-Performance Relationships," Academy ofMan­
agement Journal, 23 (March), 38-60.
Wright, Sewall (1960), "Path Coefficients and Path Regres­
sions: Alternative or Complementary Concepts?," Biomet­
rics, 16(June), 189-202.