variables, all variables were measured 
on a Likert 5-point scale, with 1 indicating “fully disagree” and 5 
indicating “fully agree.”
“Enterprise sustainable performance” 
questionnaire
The ESP Questionnaire by Habib et al. (2020) was used, which 
includes 3 dimensions of economic performance, environmental 
performance and social performance, with 15 questions, such as 
“Your company reduces energy costs,” “Your company reduces 
waste (water and/or solid) emissions,” all of which ask about the 
status of the ESP. The internal consistency coefficient of the 
questionnaire, Cronbach’s α, was 0.926. Among them, Cronbach’s 
α for economic performance is 0.876, Cronbach’s α for 
environmental performance is 0.872, and Cronbach’s α for social 
performance is 0.882.
“Green entrepreneurship orientation” 
questionnaire
The GEO questionnaire developed by Xia (2019) was used, 
which includes four dimensions, green innovation orientation, 
green initiative orientation, environmental orientation, and social 
orientation, with 12 questions. Questions such as “Your company’s 
green transformation of existing products or production lines are 
relatively strong” were set to ask managers’ opinions on the GEO 
of enterprises. The internal consistency coefficient of the 
questionnaire, Cronbach’s α, was 0.921.
“Boundary-spanning search” questionnaire
The BSS questionnaire developed by O'Cass et al. (2014) 
was used, including two dimensions of prospective BSS and 
following BSS, with eight questions. Questions such as 
“Identify new opportunities in new markets and new customer 
groups ahead of competitors” and “Follow competitors to 
improve the quality of existing products” were set. The 
internal consistency coefficient of the questionnaire, 
Cronbach’s α, was 0.746.
“Environmental dynamism” questionnaire
The ED questionnaire developed by Miller (1983) was used to 
measure technological dynamics, demand uncertainty, and 
environmental variability, respectively. Five questions were set, 
su