variables, environmental dynamism (ED) has 
become an important situational factor influencing the strategic 
decisions of top enterprise managers. Influenced by situational 
factors, enterprises perceive that changes in technology, market 
and demand dynamics affect their behavioral choices when 
making strategic decisions (Wang et al., 2015a). To adapt to such 
ED, enterprises search for available and unique resources beyond 
organizational or technological boundaries and convert such 
resources into resources that can create value for the enterprise, 
achieve technological breakthroughs, and accumulate sustainable 
competitive advantages. This shows that ED can influence GEO 
for ESP improvement at different stages.
According to the foregoing analysis, this study argues that ESP 
is the result of behavior that organically combines the development 
of the enterprise itself with value creation and pursues the triad of 
economic, environmental and social sustainability. Therefore, it is 
obvious that GEO plays an important role in the process of triadic 
sustainable acquisition performance. At the same time, in the 
environmental era, the determination of GEO by enterprise 
decision-makers needs to be  supported by the organization’s 
ability to match BSS, and in the context of the ED of technology, 
market and demand, enterprise GEO drives BSS, which in turn 
affects economic, environmental and social triadic sustainable 
performance. Therefore, integrating the mediating role of BSS and 
the moderating role of ED, this study constructs the model of the 
acquisition process of enterprise triadic sustainable performance 
from GEO, and examines the influence paths and relationship 
patterns of GEO on enterprise triadic sustainable performance in 
the context of ED. Meanwhile, we select Chinese manufacturing 
SMEs as the research sample for empirical testing.
The remaining of the study is organized as follows. In the 
second section, this study presents the theoretical model and 
research hypotheses. In the third section, it describes the study 
design, including data collection, variables, and data processing. 
In the fourth section, the results of the analysis are reported, 
including common method bias tests, reliability and validity tests, 
descriptive statistics and correlations, and hypothesis testing. 
Finally, conclusions, theoretical implications and practical 
insights, and study limitations are discussed.
Theoretical background and 
hypotheses
Theoretical background
According to the research problems of this study, this study 
integrates the findings related to organizational search theory and 
dynamic capability theory to analyze the function mechanism and 
influence model of the relationship between GEO and ESP.
Firstly, the strategic development view of organizational 
search theory. Organizational search theory states that based on 
knowledge and technology search cost considerations, enterprises 
prefer local search early on to build competit